Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing the vagus nerve. The are discussing the vagus nerve. The are discussing the vagus nerve. The vagus nerve, or what neuroanatomists vagus nerve, or what neuroanatomists vagus nerve, or what neuroanatomists call cranial nerve 10, is an extremely call cranial nerve 10, is an extremely call cranial nerve 10, is an extremely interesting nerve because when we hear interesting nerve because when we hear interesting nerve because when we hear the word nerve, we often think of a the word nerve, we often think of a the word nerve, we often think of a small, you know, connection between one small, you know, connection between one small, you know, connection between one thing and another, the wires of the thing and another, the wires of the thing and another, the wires of the nerve, which of course we call axons. If nerve, which of course we call axons. If nerve, which of course we call axons. If you didn't know that, now you know, you didn't know that, now you know, you didn't know that, now you know, they're called axons. But actually, the they're called axons. But actually, the they're called axons. But actually, the cranial nerve is an extensive pathway. cranial nerve is an extensive pathway. cranial nerve is an extensive pathway. It's a whole set of connections that It's a whole set of connections that It's a whole set of connections that link the brain and body. In fact, in link the brain and body. In fact, in link the brain and body. In fact, in many respects, it looks kind of like its many respects, it looks kind of like its many respects, it looks kind of like its own nervous system within the own nervous system within the own nervous system within the traditional nervous system of the brain traditional nervous system of the brain traditional nervous system of the brain and the spinal cord, the connections and the spinal cord, the connections and the spinal cord, the connections between spinal cord and muscle. The between spinal cord and muscle. The between spinal cord and muscle. The vagus nerve is so vast. It spreads out vagus nerve is so vast. It spreads out vagus nerve is so vast. It spreads out through so much of the body, and as through so much of the body, and as through so much of the body, and as you'll learn today, it's connected to so you'll learn today, it's connected to so you'll learn today, it's connected to so many interesting different brain areas many interesting different brain areas many interesting different brain areas and has so many interesting different and has so many interesting different and has so many interesting different functions that it deserves, well, an functions that it deserves, well, an functions that it deserves, well, an entire episode of this podcast. The entire episode of this podcast. The entire episode of this podcast. The other great thing about the vagus nerve other great thing about the vagus nerve other great thing about the vagus nerve is it is highly actionable, meaning what is it is highly actionable, meaning what is it is highly actionable, meaning what you will learn today, if you already you will learn today, if you already you will learn today, if you already know something about the vagus nerve, is know something about the vagus nerve, is know something about the vagus nerve, is going to change what you know and going to change what you know and going to change what you know and believe about the vagus nerve. What you believe about the vagus nerve. What you believe about the vagus nerve. What you hear today will also, if you don't know hear today will also, if you don't know hear today will also, if you don't know or you're not familiar with the vagus or you're not familiar with the vagus or you're not familiar with the vagus nerve, is going to educate you on the nerve, is going to educate you on the nerve, is going to educate you on the latest about the vagus nerve. We've latest about the vagus nerve. We've latest about the vagus nerve. We've learned a lot about the vagus nerve and learned a lot about the vagus nerve and learned a lot about the vagus nerve and ways to control the vagus nerve in the ways to control the vagus nerve in the ways to control the vagus nerve in the last few years. And finally, and perhaps last few years. And finally, and perhaps last few years. And finally, and perhaps most importantly, the information that most importantly, the information that most importantly, the information that you're going to learn today includes you're going to learn today includes you're going to learn today includes actionable tools that will, for actionable tools that will, for actionable tools that will, for instance, allow you to make yourself instance, allow you to make yourself instance, allow you to make yourself more alert when you want to without the more alert when you want to without the more alert when you want to without the use of pharmacology. It will allow you use of pharmacology. It will allow you use of pharmacology. It will allow you to calm yourself down quickly when you to calm yourself down quickly when you to calm yourself down quickly when you want to, on demand and quickly, without want to, on demand and quickly, without want to, on demand and quickly, without the use of pharmacology or devices. And the use of pharmacology or devices. And the use of pharmacology or devices. And it will also allow you to alter your it will also allow you to alter your it will also allow you to alter your mood for the better and indeed to mood for the better and indeed to mood for the better and indeed to improve your ability to learn. The vagus improve your ability to learn. The vagus improve your ability to learn. The vagus nerve is that important. It's involved nerve is that important. It's involved nerve is that important. It's involved in that many different things. And the in that many different things. And the in that many different things. And the pathways of the vagus nerve, as I pathways of the vagus nerve, as I pathways of the vagus nerve, as I mentioned, have been charted in more mentioned, have been charted in more mentioned, have been charted in more detail in recent years. And the ways detail in recent years. And the ways detail in recent years. And the ways that we can get into the vagus nerve and that we can get into the vagus nerve and that we can get into the vagus nerve and stimulate its actions in specific ways stimulate its actions in specific ways stimulate its actions in specific ways to achieve those endpoints of improved to achieve those endpoints of improved to achieve those endpoints of improved mood, deeper relaxation, fast mood, deeper relaxation, fast mood, deeper relaxation, fast relaxation, elevated levels of relaxation, elevated levels of relaxation, elevated levels of alertness, and on and on are now very alertness, and on and on are now very alertness, and on and on are now very well understood. So, as you can probably well understood. So, as you can probably well understood. So, as you can probably tell, I'm extremely excited about tell, I'm extremely excited about tell, I'm extremely excited about today's episode because the vagus nerve today's episode because the vagus nerve today's episode because the vagus nerve is just one of the most fascinating is just one of the most fascinating is just one of the most fascinating aspects to our nervous system. You have aspects to our nervous system. You have aspects to our nervous system. You have one, I have one. So, let's figure out one, I have one. So, let's figure out one, I have one. So, let's figure out how they work and how to put it to work how they work and how to put it to work how they work and how to put it to work for the better. Before we begin, I'd for the better. Before we begin, I'd for the better. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include sponsors. Our first sponsor is element. sponsors. Our first sponsor is element. sponsors. Our first sponsor is element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has Element is an electrolyte drink that has Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you everything you need and nothing you everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, don't. That means the electrolytes, don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 oz of water when I first wake up in the oz of water when I first wake up in the oz of water when I first wake up in the morning, and I drink that basically morning, and I drink that basically morning, and I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also drink element dissolved in water during drink element dissolved in water during drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great-tasting flavors. I love the great-tasting flavors. I love the great-tasting flavors. I love the raspberry, I love the citrus flavor. raspberry, I love the citrus flavor. raspberry, I love the citrus flavor. Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition lemonade flavor that's absolutely lemonade flavor that's absolutely lemonade flavor that's absolutely delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklmn.com/ spelled drinklmn.com/ spelled drinklmn.com/ huberman to claim a free Element sample huberman to claim a free Element sample huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with a purchase of any Element pack with a purchase of any Element pack with a purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's drink mix. Again, that's drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's to claim a free sample pack. Today's to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by Joovv. episode is also brought to us by Joovv. episode is also brought to us by Joovv. Joovv makes medical-grade red light Joovv makes medical-grade red light Joovv makes medical-grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near-infrared sunlight, red light and near-infrared sunlight, red light and near-infrared light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health, aspects of cellular and organ health, aspects of cellular and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. What sets Joovv lights apart and why What sets Joovv lights apart and why What sets Joovv lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and wavelengths of red light and wavelengths of red light and near-infrared light in combination to near-infrared light in combination to near-infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellular trigger the optimal cellular trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv whole body panel about three to four whole body panel about three to four whole body panel about three to four times a week, and I use the Joovv times a week, and I use the Joovv times a week, and I use the Joovv handheld light both at home and when I handheld light both at home and when I handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to try Joovv, you can go If you'd like to try Joovv, you can go If you'd like to try Joovv, you can go to joovv.com/huberman. Joovv is offering an exclusive discount Joovv is offering an exclusive discount Joovv is offering an exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off Joovv products. Again, that's $400 off Joovv products. Again, that's $400 off Joovv products. Again, that's joovv.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. Okay, let's get to get up to $400 off. Okay, let's get to get up to $400 off. Okay, let's get familiar with the vagus nerve. The vagus familiar with the vagus nerve. The vagus familiar with the vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is cranial nerve 10. The vagus nerve is cranial nerve 10. The vagus nerve is cranial nerve 10. The vagus nerve is very different than the other nerve is very different than the other nerve is very different than the other cranial nerves because whereas it does cranial nerves because whereas it does cranial nerves because whereas it does have connections with areas on the face, have connections with areas on the face, have connections with areas on the face, head, and neck and deep to those areas, head, and neck and deep to those areas, head, and neck and deep to those areas, too, so throat, etc. It also has too, so throat, etc. It also has too, so throat, etc. It also has connections, or I should say it receives connections, or I should say it receives connections, or I should say it receives and provides connections to areas within and provides connections to areas within and provides connections to areas within the body. In fact, it has connections the body. In fact, it has connections the body. In fact, it has connections with the head area, the neck area, the with the head area, the neck area, the with the head area, the neck area, the chest area, the abdomen, and even a bit chest area, the abdomen, and even a bit chest area, the abdomen, and even a bit lower into the lower intestines. So, the lower into the lower intestines. So, the lower into the lower intestines. So, the vagus nerve is super extensive in terms vagus nerve is super extensive in terms vagus nerve is super extensive in terms of its outputs and its inputs. And I'll of its outputs and its inputs. And I'll of its outputs and its inputs. And I'll explain what I mean by outputs and explain what I mean by outputs and explain what I mean by outputs and inputs in just a moment. But, what's inputs in just a moment. But, what's inputs in just a moment. But, what's very useful to understand and visualize very useful to understand and visualize very useful to understand and visualize in your mind a bit anytime we're talking in your mind a bit anytime we're talking in your mind a bit anytime we're talking about the vagus nerve is we're talking about the vagus nerve is we're talking about the vagus nerve is we're talking about a nerve of many, many different about a nerve of many, many different about a nerve of many, many different pathways that both receives and provides pathways that both receives and provides pathways that both receives and provides information from essentially all areas information from essentially all areas information from essentially all areas of the body down to the base of your of the body down to the base of your of the body down to the base of your pelvis. And that stands in stark pelvis. And that stands in stark pelvis. And that stands in stark contrast from the other cranial nerves, contrast from the other cranial nerves, contrast from the other cranial nerves, which tend to receive information from which tend to receive information from which tend to receive information from restricted areas of the body, most restricted areas of the body, most restricted areas of the body, most typically the head and neck area, and typically the head and neck area, and typically the head and neck area, and that tend to provide connections to the that tend to provide connections to the that tend to provide connections to the head and neck area. The word vagus head and neck area. The word vagus head and neck area. The word vagus actually translates more or less to actually translates more or less to actually translates more or less to vagabond, which means wandering. So, vagabond, which means wandering. So, vagabond, which means wandering. So, early neuroanatomists saw that this early neuroanatomists saw that this early neuroanatomists saw that this nerve, cranial nerve 10, had connections nerve, cranial nerve 10, had connections nerve, cranial nerve 10, had connections to large areas of the body and head and to large areas of the body and head and to large areas of the body and head and neck and received inputs from lots of neck and received inputs from lots of neck and received inputs from lots of areas of the body and decided to call it areas of the body and decided to call it areas of the body and decided to call it essentially the vagabond nerve or the essentially the vagabond nerve or the essentially the vagabond nerve or the vagus nerve. Now, even though the word vagus nerve. Now, even though the word vagus nerve. Now, even though the word vagabond means essentially wandering, vagabond means essentially wandering, vagabond means essentially wandering, and the word wandering kind of suggests and the word wandering kind of suggests and the word wandering kind of suggests random, there is nothing random about random, there is nothing random about random, there is nothing random about the wiring of the vagus nerve. The vagus the wiring of the vagus nerve. The vagus the wiring of the vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is incredibly precise in terms of nerve is incredibly precise in terms of nerve is incredibly precise in terms of where it receives information from and where it receives information from and where it receives information from and where it provides information to. Now, I where it provides information to. Now, I where it provides information to. Now, I want to be very clear what I mean about want to be very clear what I mean about want to be very clear what I mean about information. Okay, if you're a information. Okay, if you're a information. Okay, if you're a biologist, you'll probably understand biologist, you'll probably understand biologist, you'll probably understand some of this. If you're not, and I have some of this. If you're not, and I have some of this. If you're not, and I have to assume most of you are not, it's to assume most of you are not, it's to assume most of you are not, it's still very important that you still very important that you still very important that you understand, and it's very easy to understand, and it's very easy to understand, and it's very easy to understand, that your nervous system, understand, that your nervous system, understand, that your nervous system, your brain, spinal cord, and of course your brain, spinal cord, and of course your brain, spinal cord, and of course your nervous system includes all these your nervous system includes all these your nervous system includes all these cranial nerves, including the vagus cranial nerves, including the vagus cranial nerves, including the vagus nerve, are carrying different types of nerve, are carrying different types of nerve, are carrying different types of information along different pathways. information along different pathways. information along different pathways. Different neurons or different nerve Different neurons or different nerve Different neurons or different nerve cells within the vagus nerve, for cells within the vagus nerve, for cells within the vagus nerve, for instance, are receiving or giving different types are receiving or giving different types are receiving or giving different types of information for different purposes. of information for different purposes. of information for different purposes. For instance, For instance, For instance, there is sensory information carried by there is sensory information carried by there is sensory information carried by neurons, nerve cells in your nervous neurons, nerve cells in your nervous neurons, nerve cells in your nervous system. Sensory information is the kind of Sensory information is the kind of Sensory information is the kind of information that, for instance, converts information that, for instance, converts information that, for instance, converts light into electrical signals at the light into electrical signals at the light into electrical signals at the level of your eyes. Then your eyes are level of your eyes. Then your eyes are level of your eyes. Then your eyes are providing information to the brain about providing information to the brain about providing information to the brain about what's out in the visual world. That's what's out in the visual world. That's what's out in the visual world. That's sensory information. sensory information. sensory information. Same could be said for sound waves. Same could be said for sound waves. Same could be said for sound waves. That's sensory information that your That's sensory information that your That's sensory information that your auditory system converts to basically auditory system converts to basically auditory system converts to basically your understanding of speech, and sound, your understanding of speech, and sound, your understanding of speech, and sound, and music, et cetera. and music, et cetera. and music, et cetera. Other neurons control motor functions, Other neurons control motor functions, Other neurons control motor functions, literally the movement of your limbs by literally the movement of your limbs by literally the movement of your limbs by controlling contraction of your muscles, controlling contraction of your muscles, controlling contraction of your muscles, or the movement of your lips, or the or the movement of your lips, or the or the movement of your lips, or the closing or opening of your airways, for or opening of your airways, for or opening of your airways, for instance. So, instance. So, instance. So, motor information, motor information, motor information, of course, can be seen on the surface of course, can be seen on the surface of course, can be seen on the surface of the body. I'm moving my hands now. I'm the body. I'm moving my hands now. I'm the body. I'm moving my hands now. I'm moving my mouth. You don't even need to moving my mouth. You don't even need to moving my mouth. You don't even need to see me do that to know that I'm doing see me do that to know that I'm doing see me do that to know that I'm doing that. But within our body, we have organs that But within our body, we have organs that But within our body, we have organs that also need motor control. For instance, also need motor control. For instance, also need motor control. For instance, our gut. Our gut is not just a passive our gut. Our gut is not just a passive our gut. Our gut is not just a passive tube through which food moves. The gut tube through which food moves. The gut tube through which food moves. The gut is contracting and relaxing. It's moving is contracting and relaxing. It's moving is contracting and relaxing. It's moving food through from one end to the other, food through from one end to the other, food through from one end to the other, okay? We have our pancreas. We have our okay? We have our pancreas. We have our okay? We have our pancreas. We have our liver. We have our spleen. And you might liver. We have our spleen. And you might liver. We have our spleen. And you might think, "Oh, well, those are sort of think, "Oh, well, those are sort of think, "Oh, well, those are sort of vegetative organs. They just kind of sit vegetative organs. They just kind of sit vegetative organs. They just kind of sit there. Maybe the cells do stuff, but there. Maybe the cells do stuff, but there. Maybe the cells do stuff, but they don't move much." But actually, they don't move much." But actually, they don't move much." But actually, your spleen even has a contractile your spleen even has a contractile your spleen even has a contractile ability. So, it can contract to release ability. So, it can contract to release ability. So, it can contract to release red blood cells or immune cells into red blood cells or immune cells into red blood cells or immune cells into circulation, and on, and so forth. circulation, and on, and so forth. circulation, and on, and so forth. Different organs, including your Different organs, including your Different organs, including your muscles, but other organs as well, need muscles, but other organs as well, need muscles, but other organs as well, need instructions as to when they should instructions as to when they should instructions as to when they should move, when they should contract, when move, when they should contract, when move, when they should contract, when they should relax. So, we have sensory they should relax. So, we have sensory they should relax. So, we have sensory information that's carried by information that's carried by information that's carried by essentially one set of neurons in our essentially one set of neurons in our essentially one set of neurons in our nervous system. So, carrying light nervous system. So, carrying light nervous system. So, carrying light information or sound information or as information or sound information or as information or sound information or as you'll see in a few minutes, chemical you'll see in a few minutes, chemical you'll see in a few minutes, chemical information about the acidity of the information about the acidity of the information about the acidity of the gut, for instance. gut, for instance. gut, for instance. And we have neurons that are considered And we have neurons that are considered And we have neurons that are considered motor neurons. They control the motor neurons. They control the motor neurons. They control the contraction of muscles or the contraction of muscles or the contraction of muscles or the contraction of these different organs or contraction of these different organs or contraction of these different organs or the encouragement for different aspects the encouragement for different aspects the encouragement for different aspects of the digestive tract to contract or of the digestive tract to contract or of the digestive tract to contract or relax to move food along. Okay? So, we relax to move food along. Okay? So, we relax to move food along. Okay? So, we got sensory neurons and we have motor got sensory neurons and we have motor got sensory neurons and we have motor neurons. And then there are a lot of neurons. And then there are a lot of neurons. And then there are a lot of other neurons as well that we call other neurons as well that we call other neurons as well that we call modulatory neurons. They kind of adjust modulatory neurons. They kind of adjust modulatory neurons. They kind of adjust the balance between the sensory the balance between the sensory the balance between the sensory information and motor information. We information and motor information. We information and motor information. We aren't going to talk so much today about aren't going to talk so much today about aren't going to talk so much today about modulatory neurons, but they are an modulatory neurons, but they are an modulatory neurons, but they are an important third category of neuron in important third category of neuron in important third category of neuron in the nervous system. Now, why am I the nervous system. Now, why am I the nervous system. Now, why am I telling you all this stuff about sensory telling you all this stuff about sensory telling you all this stuff about sensory and motor? Because the vagus nerve is and motor? Because the vagus nerve is and motor? Because the vagus nerve is also unique in that it is both a sensory also unique in that it is both a sensory also unique in that it is both a sensory pathway and a motor pathway. And this is pathway and a motor pathway. And this is pathway and a motor pathway. And this is something that most discussions about something that most discussions about something that most discussions about the vagus nerve, in fact, I would say the vagus nerve, in fact, I would say the vagus nerve, in fact, I would say 99% of discussions about the vagus nerve of discussions about the vagus nerve of discussions about the vagus nerve that you see online or when you hear that you see online or when you hear that you see online or when you hear about, forgive me, in your yoga classes. about, forgive me, in your yoga classes. about, forgive me, in your yoga classes. By the way, I'm going to touch on how By the way, I'm going to touch on how By the way, I'm going to touch on how yoga and ancient yogic practices yoga and ancient yogic practices yoga and ancient yogic practices actually manage to tease apart some very actually manage to tease apart some very actually manage to tease apart some very important functions of the vagus nerve important functions of the vagus nerve important functions of the vagus nerve without knowing any of the underlying without knowing any of the underlying without knowing any of the underlying mechanisms. But it is the case that most mechanisms. But it is the case that most mechanisms. But it is the case that most of the time when you hear about the of the time when you hear about the of the time when you hear about the vagus nerve out there in the general vagus nerve out there in the general vagus nerve out there in the general world or in the media, it's about the world or in the media, it's about the world or in the media, it's about the vagus nerve being a calming pathway vagus nerve being a calming pathway vagus nerve being a calming pathway that's involved in transmitting that's involved in transmitting that's involved in transmitting information about the sensory milieu of information about the sensory milieu of information about the sensory milieu of the body, so, you know, heart rate, uh the body, so, you know, heart rate, uh the body, so, you know, heart rate, uh acidity of the gut, um you know, how acidity of the gut, um you know, how acidity of the gut, um you know, how comfortable we are in our body to our comfortable we are in our body to our comfortable we are in our body to our brain. And people will say you want to brain. And people will say you want to brain. And people will say you want to activate the vagus nerve because you activate the vagus nerve because you activate the vagus nerve because you want to calm down. Well, that is true, want to calm down. Well, that is true, want to calm down. Well, that is true, but that is just one small fraction of but that is just one small fraction of but that is just one small fraction of the functions of the vagus nerve. Why? the functions of the vagus nerve. Why? the functions of the vagus nerve. Why? Because the vagus nerve includes both Because the vagus nerve includes both Because the vagus nerve includes both sensory and motor neurons within it. And sensory and motor neurons within it. And sensory and motor neurons within it. And while it is true that a ton of sensory while it is true that a ton of sensory while it is true that a ton of sensory information is coursing up from the information is coursing up from the information is coursing up from the organs of the body into the brain organs of the body into the brain organs of the body into the brain through what we call the vagus nerve, through what we call the vagus nerve, through what we call the vagus nerve, there's also motor information coming there's also motor information coming there's also motor information coming from the brain to the body. So, if we from the brain to the body. So, if we from the brain to the body. So, if we are going to have an accurate, are going to have an accurate, are going to have an accurate, meaningful, actionable conversation meaningful, actionable conversation meaningful, actionable conversation about the vagus nerve, it's very about the vagus nerve, it's very about the vagus nerve, it's very important that you know that the vagus important that you know that the vagus important that you know that the vagus nerve contains sensory neurons as well nerve contains sensory neurons as well nerve contains sensory neurons as well as motor neurons. And I want to be clear as motor neurons. And I want to be clear as motor neurons. And I want to be clear that I'm not just telling you about that I'm not just telling you about that I'm not just telling you about sensory versus motor neurons in the sensory versus motor neurons in the sensory versus motor neurons in the vagus nerve to just overload you with vagus nerve to just overload you with vagus nerve to just overload you with nomenclature. Turns out that if you want to access the Turns out that if you want to access the Turns out that if you want to access the calming aspects of vagus nerve calming aspects of vagus nerve calming aspects of vagus nerve activation versus the energizing effects of vagus versus the energizing effects of vagus versus the energizing effects of vagus nerve activation versus the nerve activation versus the nerve activation versus the immune-enhancing effects of vagus nerve immune-enhancing effects of vagus nerve immune-enhancing effects of vagus nerve activation versus the ways that you can activation versus the ways that you can activation versus the ways that you can improve learning using vagus nerve improve learning using vagus nerve improve learning using vagus nerve activation, you need to know whether or activation, you need to know whether or activation, you need to know whether or not you're trying to activate a sensory not you're trying to activate a sensory not you're trying to activate a sensory pathway or a motor pathway within this pathway or a motor pathway within this pathway or a motor pathway within this vast set of connections that we call the vast set of connections that we call the vast set of connections that we call the vagus nerve. Okay, so I want to just vagus nerve. Okay, so I want to just vagus nerve. Okay, so I want to just briefly describe the sensory pathways briefly describe the sensory pathways briefly describe the sensory pathways within the vagus nerve. within the vagus nerve. within the vagus nerve. And by the way, if you're a yoga And by the way, if you're a yoga And by the way, if you're a yoga teacher, if you are a therapist, if you teacher, if you are a therapist, if you teacher, if you are a therapist, if you are a teacher, if you are a human being are a teacher, if you are a human being are a teacher, if you are a human being on Earth, on Earth, on Earth, this information is going to be very this information is going to be very this information is going to be very useful to you because this is the useful to you because this is the useful to you because this is the information that will allow you to information that will allow you to information that will allow you to understand why it is that when your body understand why it is that when your body understand why it is that when your body is in a certain comfortable or is in a certain comfortable or is in a certain comfortable or uncomfortable state, it has a particular uncomfortable state, it has a particular uncomfortable state, it has a particular effect on your mind and your brain to effect on your mind and your brain to effect on your mind and your brain to feel, well, in general, comfortable or feel, well, in general, comfortable or feel, well, in general, comfortable or uncomfortable. Your vagus nerve includes very Your vagus nerve includes very Your vagus nerve includes very interesting and kind of unusually shaped interesting and kind of unusually shaped interesting and kind of unusually shaped neurons. Okay? The neurons of the vagus neurons. Okay? The neurons of the vagus neurons. Okay? The neurons of the vagus nerve are not like the ones that you see nerve are not like the ones that you see nerve are not like the ones that you see in the typical picture if you were to in the typical picture if you were to in the typical picture if you were to look up neuron online. If you were to look up neuron online. If you were to look up neuron online. If you were to look up neuron online, what you would look up neuron online, what you would look up neuron online, what you would find is you'd see a picture of what's find is you'd see a picture of what's find is you'd see a picture of what's called a cell body where the nucleus, called a cell body where the nucleus, called a cell body where the nucleus, the DNA is. You'd see what are called the DNA is. You'd see what are called the DNA is. You'd see what are called dendrites, which typically are the area dendrites, which typically are the area dendrites, which typically are the area where neurons receive input. And then where neurons receive input. And then where neurons receive input. And then you'd see the wire-like extension that you'd see the wire-like extension that you'd see the wire-like extension that we call the axon we call the axon we call the axon out to the area that neuron out to the area that neuron out to the area that neuron communicates with. And then you might communicates with. And then you might communicates with. And then you might see a little picture of some little see a little picture of some little see a little picture of some little blobs or what we call vesicles being blobs or what we call vesicles being blobs or what we call vesicles being released at the end of that axon. That released at the end of that axon. That released at the end of that axon. That is not at all what vagal nerve neurons is not at all what vagal nerve neurons is not at all what vagal nerve neurons look like. Some of them do, but the vast look like. Some of them do, but the vast look like. Some of them do, but the vast majority, about 85% of the neurons in majority, about 85% of the neurons in majority, about 85% of the neurons in the vagus nerve, have a cell body with the vagus nerve, have a cell body with the vagus nerve, have a cell body with that DNA, with the nucleus in it, that DNA, with the nucleus in it, that DNA, with the nucleus in it, sitting in an area kind of near um your sitting in an area kind of near um your sitting in an area kind of near um your neck and back of your head, sort of what neck and back of your head, sort of what neck and back of your head, sort of what we call the brainstem. And it's called we call the brainstem. And it's called we call the brainstem. And it's called the nodosum ganglion. Now, the nodosum the nodosum ganglion. Now, the nodosum the nodosum ganglion. Now, the nodosum ganglion is a collection of cell bodies ganglion is a collection of cell bodies ganglion is a collection of cell bodies of neurons. So, you could think of it of neurons. So, you could think of it of neurons. So, you could think of it kind of like a cluster of grapes, kind of like a cluster of grapes, kind of like a cluster of grapes, and they do indeed have an axon and they do indeed have an axon and they do indeed have an axon extending from them, a wire that goes extending from them, a wire that goes extending from them, a wire that goes out to the body, okay? out to the body, okay? out to the body, okay? That wire looks for all the world like That wire looks for all the world like That wire looks for all the world like the axons on any other neurons, and that the axons on any other neurons, and that the axons on any other neurons, and that little axon can be very short if it little axon can be very short if it little axon can be very short if it terminates, as we say, in an area of the terminates, as we say, in an area of the terminates, as we say, in an area of the neck. It can be slightly longer if it neck. It can be slightly longer if it neck. It can be slightly longer if it terminates in the chest area, and even terminates in the chest area, and even terminates in the chest area, and even longer if it goes to what we call our longer if it goes to what we call our longer if it goes to what we call our viscera, our lungs, our pancreas, our viscera, our lungs, our pancreas, our viscera, our lungs, our pancreas, our liver, down to any number of different organs down to any number of different organs down to any number of different organs within our major abdominal body within our major abdominal body within our major abdominal body compartment. Okay, you also see an axon, compartment. Okay, you also see an axon, compartment. Okay, you also see an axon, a little wire, from a vagal sensory a little wire, from a vagal sensory a little wire, from a vagal sensory neuron out to the spleen. Now, what I neuron out to the spleen. Now, what I neuron out to the spleen. Now, what I just described, a cell body just described, a cell body just described, a cell body with an axon extending from it out to with an axon extending from it out to with an axon extending from it out to the organs of the body, different organs the organs of the body, different organs the organs of the body, different organs of the body tend to be innervated by of the body tend to be innervated by of the body tend to be innervated by different neurons. different neurons. different neurons. Not always, but in general. Not always, but in general. Not always, but in general. But here's what's different about these But here's what's different about these But here's what's different about these vagal neurons. These vagal neurons vagal neurons. These vagal neurons vagal neurons. These vagal neurons have another axon that goes from the have another axon that goes from the have another axon that goes from the cell body. So, they're what we call a cell body. So, they're what we call a cell body. So, they're what we call a bipolar neuron. They have another axon bipolar neuron. They have another axon bipolar neuron. They have another axon that extends up into the brainstem that extends up into the brainstem that extends up into the brainstem and terminates in generally one of three and terminates in generally one of three and terminates in generally one of three different what we call brain stem different what we call brain stem different what we call brain stem nuclei, which are just areas of the nuclei, which are just areas of the nuclei, which are just areas of the brain stem. So, it's very important to brain stem. So, it's very important to brain stem. So, it's very important to embed in your mind, right? Because in embed in your mind, right? Because in embed in your mind, right? Because in reality, embedded in your head and neck reality, embedded in your head and neck reality, embedded in your head and neck or in your brain and neck are these or in your brain and neck are these or in your brain and neck are these neurons which are kind of like a cluster neurons which are kind of like a cluster neurons which are kind of like a cluster of grapes that have each one is going to of grapes that have each one is going to of grapes that have each one is going to have two branches, one that goes out to have two branches, one that goes out to have two branches, one that goes out to a particular organ of the body and a particular organ of the body and a particular organ of the body and another branch that goes up into your another branch that goes up into your another branch that goes up into your brain stem. Now, this visual brain stem. Now, this visual brain stem. Now, this visual understanding, which hopefully is understanding, which hopefully is understanding, which hopefully is starting to take place in your mind, is starting to take place in your mind, is starting to take place in your mind, is extremely important to understand how extremely important to understand how extremely important to understand how 85% of the vagus nerve works. 85% of the 85% of the vagus nerve works. 85% of the 85% of the vagus nerve works. 85% of the vagus nerve works by having these vagus nerve works by having these vagus nerve works by having these neurons that have axons in, say, the neurons that have axons in, say, the neurons that have axons in, say, the spleen or around the lungs or that spleen or around the lungs or that spleen or around the lungs or that innervate the heart or that innervate the heart or that innervate the heart or that innervate any number of different organs in your any number of different organs in your any number of different organs in your body, and they collect sensory information and they collect sensory information and they collect sensory information about what's going on in each and every about what's going on in each and every about what's going on in each and every one of those organs. one of those organs. one of those organs. That information goes up the axon. That information goes up the axon. That information goes up the axon. Remember, there's a cell bodies in the Remember, there's a cell bodies in the Remember, there's a cell bodies in the nodose ganglion, and then it goes nodose ganglion, and then it goes nodose ganglion, and then it goes further up past the cell body into the further up past the cell body into the further up past the cell body into the brain stem. Okay, so when people talk brain stem. Okay, so when people talk brain stem. Okay, so when people talk about the vagus nerve, cranial nerve 10, about the vagus nerve, cranial nerve 10, about the vagus nerve, cranial nerve 10, as being a sensory pathway, it is mostly as being a sensory pathway, it is mostly as being a sensory pathway, it is mostly a sensory pathway. It's collecting a sensory pathway. It's collecting a sensory pathway. It's collecting information through these axons. Why is information through these axons. Why is information through these axons. Why is that weird? Well, it's not weird, but that weird? Well, it's not weird, but that weird? Well, it's not weird, but it's different than the way we normally it's different than the way we normally it's different than the way we normally talk about neurons where the axon is the talk about neurons where the axon is the talk about neurons where the axon is the output end, right? Where it's dumping output end, right? Where it's dumping output end, right? Where it's dumping stuff onto the next neuron to make stuff onto the next neuron to make stuff onto the next neuron to make things happen. things happen. things happen. The neurons in the nodose ganglion of The neurons in the nodose ganglion of The neurons in the nodose ganglion of the vagus nerve, I know that's a lot of the vagus nerve, I know that's a lot of the vagus nerve, I know that's a lot of language, but these neurons that send an language, but these neurons that send an language, but these neurons that send an axon branch out to the organs of the axon branch out to the organs of the axon branch out to the organs of the body are collecting information about body are collecting information about body are collecting information about what's happening, what sensory what's happening, what sensory what's happening, what sensory information is occurring out at those information is occurring out at those information is occurring out at those organs. And that information goes up organs. And that information goes up organs. And that information goes up those wires, past the cell body, and those wires, past the cell body, and those wires, past the cell body, and into the brain stem, and then that's into the brain stem, and then that's into the brain stem, and then that's communicated to the brain. communicated to the brain. communicated to the brain. So, basically, we can think of 85% of So, basically, we can think of 85% of So, basically, we can think of 85% of the vagus nerve, this huge superhighway the vagus nerve, this huge superhighway the vagus nerve, this huge superhighway from the body to the brain as being from the body to the brain as being from the body to the brain as being sensory. And when we talk about sensory, it's And when we talk about sensory, it's And when we talk about sensory, it's important that you understand that two important that you understand that two important that you understand that two types of sensory information are coming types of sensory information are coming types of sensory information are coming in through these wires, through these in through these wires, through these in through these wires, through these axons, and that are delivered to the axons, and that are delivered to the axons, and that are delivered to the brain. And in response to that sensory brain. And in response to that sensory brain. And in response to that sensory information, as you'll soon learn, your information, as you'll soon learn, your information, as you'll soon learn, your brain will change its levels of brain will change its levels of brain will change its levels of alertness. Sometimes it gets more alert, alertness. Sometimes it gets more alert, alertness. Sometimes it gets more alert, sometimes it gets calmer. Sometimes it sometimes it gets calmer. Sometimes it sometimes it gets calmer. Sometimes it primes you to learn better. Sometimes it primes you to learn better. Sometimes it primes you to learn better. Sometimes it will turn on a fever. I do literally will turn on a fever. I do literally will turn on a fever. I do literally heat up your entire body based on what heat up your entire body based on what heat up your entire body based on what those axons are sensing out in the those axons are sensing out in the those axons are sensing out in the periphery. The periphery, of course, being the The periphery, of course, being the The periphery, of course, being the organs and tissues of your body outside organs and tissues of your body outside organs and tissues of your body outside your brain and spinal cord. So, I your brain and spinal cord. So, I your brain and spinal cord. So, I realize that's a bit of neuroanatomy for realize that's a bit of neuroanatomy for realize that's a bit of neuroanatomy for those of you that aren't familiar with those of you that aren't familiar with those of you that aren't familiar with neuroanatomy, it might seem like an neuroanatomy, it might seem like an neuroanatomy, it might seem like an overwhelming amount of neuroanatomy, but overwhelming amount of neuroanatomy, but overwhelming amount of neuroanatomy, but it's extremely important to have that it's extremely important to have that it's extremely important to have that idea in your mind of sensory information idea in your mind of sensory information idea in your mind of sensory information flowing up into the brain from your flowing up into the brain from your flowing up into the brain from your organs because anatomically speaking and functionally anatomically speaking and functionally anatomically speaking and functionally speaking, it runs exactly opposite to speaking, it runs exactly opposite to speaking, it runs exactly opposite to how we typically see neurons when how we typically see neurons when how we typically see neurons when they're drawn in diagrams for us and how they're drawn in diagrams for us and how they're drawn in diagrams for us and how we talk about neurons as just putting we talk about neurons as just putting we talk about neurons as just putting stuff out at the level of the axon at stuff out at the level of the axon at stuff out at the level of the axon at the end of those wires. Information's the end of those wires. Information's the end of those wires. Information's coming up those wires in the case of the coming up those wires in the case of the coming up those wires in the case of the vagus. Okay, so whereas for the visual vagus. Okay, so whereas for the visual vagus. Okay, so whereas for the visual system or the auditory system or for the system or the auditory system or for the system or the auditory system or for the smell system or the taste system, smell system or the taste system, smell system or the taste system, typically we have one type of sensory typically we have one type of sensory typically we have one type of sensory information coming in. So, for instance, information coming in. So, for instance, information coming in. So, for instance, in the visual system, light photons of in the visual system, light photons of in the visual system, light photons of energy are converted into electrical energy are converted into electrical energy are converted into electrical signals that the rest of the visual signals that the rest of the visual signals that the rest of the visual system unpacks to give you visual system unpacks to give you visual system unpacks to give you visual perceptions, to control your circadian perceptions, to control your circadian perceptions, to control your circadian rhythms, or in the case of the auditory rhythms, or in the case of the auditory rhythms, or in the case of the auditory system, you have sound waves which are system, you have sound waves which are system, you have sound waves which are transduced by this beautiful mechanism transduced by this beautiful mechanism transduced by this beautiful mechanism of your inner ear that then gets of your inner ear that then gets of your inner ear that then gets converted into your understanding of converted into your understanding of converted into your understanding of speech or music, etc. speech or music, etc. speech or music, etc. In the case of the vagus nerve, In the case of the vagus nerve, In the case of the vagus nerve, the sensory information coming from your the sensory information coming from your the sensory information coming from your organs, from your lungs, from your gut. organs, from your lungs, from your gut. organs, from your lungs, from your gut. And by the way, your gut, when I say And by the way, your gut, when I say And by the way, your gut, when I say that, I don't just mean your stomach. I that, I don't just mean your stomach. I that, I don't just mean your stomach. I also mean the large and small intestine also mean the large and small intestine also mean the large and small intestine and all the stuff above your stomach as and all the stuff above your stomach as and all the stuff above your stomach as well. The sensory information that's coming The sensory information that's coming The sensory information that's coming from the body includes both chemical from the body includes both chemical from the body includes both chemical information and mechanical information. Now, the and mechanical information. Now, the and mechanical information. Now, the mechanical information is pretty mechanical information is pretty mechanical information is pretty straightforward to understand. If your straightforward to understand. If your straightforward to understand. If your gut is full of food or air or water and gut is full of food or air or water and gut is full of food or air or water and it's very distended, you can feel that. it's very distended, you can feel that. it's very distended, you can feel that. The reason you can feel that is because The reason you can feel that is because The reason you can feel that is because you have mechanoreceptors you have mechanoreceptors you have mechanoreceptors that sense stretch in the lining of the that sense stretch in the lining of the that sense stretch in the lining of the gut and send that information by way of and send that information by way of and send that information by way of those axons up those axons up those axons up to and past the nodos ganglion. There's to and past the nodos ganglion. There's to and past the nodos ganglion. There's some processing of that information in some processing of that information in some processing of that information in the nodos ganglion, but then it goes up the nodos ganglion, but then it goes up the nodos ganglion, but then it goes up and into your brain stem. Okay? Now, and into your brain stem. Okay? Now, and into your brain stem. Okay? Now, also within the gut, you have chemical also within the gut, you have chemical also within the gut, you have chemical information. There's information about, information. There's information about, information. There's information about, for instance, and we'll talk more about for instance, and we'll talk more about for instance, and we'll talk more about this later, how much serotonin is in the this later, how much serotonin is in the this later, how much serotonin is in the gut. You may have heard that 90% of the gut. You may have heard that 90% of the gut. You may have heard that 90% of the serotonin in your body is manufactured serotonin in your body is manufactured serotonin in your body is manufactured in the gut. And indeed, it's in the gut. And indeed, it's in the gut. And indeed, it's manufactured in your gut. It plays an manufactured in your gut. It plays an manufactured in your gut. It plays an important role in gut motility and gut important role in gut motility and gut important role in gut motility and gut health. The serotonin in your gut is distinct The serotonin in your gut is distinct The serotonin in your gut is distinct from the serotonin released in your from the serotonin released in your from the serotonin released in your brain. Later, we'll talk about how the brain. Later, we'll talk about how the brain. Later, we'll talk about how the levels of serotonin in your gut are levels of serotonin in your gut are levels of serotonin in your gut are conveyed to the brain by way of, you conveyed to the brain by way of, you conveyed to the brain by way of, you guessed it, the vagus nerve. And your guessed it, the vagus nerve. And your guessed it, the vagus nerve. And your brain, in turn, makes different levels brain, in turn, makes different levels brain, in turn, makes different levels of serotonin to impact your mood. Super of serotonin to impact your mood. Super of serotonin to impact your mood. Super interesting, super important pathway, interesting, super important pathway, interesting, super important pathway, has relevance for depression and just has relevance for depression and just has relevance for depression and just for everyday mood and well-being. We'll for everyday mood and well-being. We'll for everyday mood and well-being. We'll talk about it. It's a highly actionable talk about it. It's a highly actionable talk about it. It's a highly actionable pathway. Super cool. pathway. Super cool. pathway. Super cool. So, you have mechanical information and So, you have mechanical information and So, you have mechanical information and you have chemical information coming you have chemical information coming you have chemical information coming from, for instance, your gut up through from, for instance, your gut up through from, for instance, your gut up through these sensory In the technical these sensory In the technical these sensory In the technical nomenclature, it's called afferents. nomenclature, it's called afferents. nomenclature, it's called afferents. Afferents is a technical language. Feel Afferents is a technical language. Feel Afferents is a technical language. Feel free to ignore this, but for those of free to ignore this, but for those of free to ignore this, but for those of you that want to know, you have you that want to know, you have you that want to know, you have aficionados already know this, that aficionados already know this, that aficionados already know this, that afferents are the inputs to a structure. afferents are the inputs to a structure. afferents are the inputs to a structure. Efferents are the inputs from a Efferents are the inputs from a Efferents are the inputs from a structure. But, structure. But, structure. But, what we've got in the case of the gut is what we've got in the case of the gut is what we've got in the case of the gut is mechanical and chemical information mechanical and chemical information mechanical and chemical information being sensed by different neurons with being sensed by different neurons with being sensed by different neurons with different receptors that pay attention different receptors that pay attention different receptors that pay attention to different things. Meaning, those to different things. Meaning, those to different things. Meaning, those receptors are activated by either receptors are activated by either receptors are activated by either mechanical stretch or by the presence or mechanical stretch or by the presence or mechanical stretch or by the presence or absence of particular chemicals in the absence of particular chemicals in the absence of particular chemicals in the gut, how acidic the gut is, and that how acidic the gut is, and that how acidic the gut is, and that information goes up, processed a bit in information goes up, processed a bit in information goes up, processed a bit in the nodose ganglion, and then relayed up the nodose ganglion, and then relayed up the nodose ganglion, and then relayed up to the brain stem. And we'll talk in a to the brain stem. And we'll talk in a to the brain stem. And we'll talk in a moment about what happens to that moment about what happens to that moment about what happens to that information after it lands in the brain information after it lands in the brain information after it lands in the brain stem. Now, chemical and mechanical information Now, chemical and mechanical information Now, chemical and mechanical information is also being conveyed from other is also being conveyed from other is also being conveyed from other structures in the body. You can probably structures in the body. You can probably structures in the body. You can probably imagine what some of these are, and we imagine what some of these are, and we imagine what some of these are, and we don't have to go through each and every don't have to go through each and every don't have to go through each and every one, but as one additional example to one, but as one additional example to one, but as one additional example to the gut, I'll just use for instance the gut, I'll just use for instance the gut, I'll just use for instance the lungs. When your lungs expand lungs. When your lungs expand lungs. When your lungs expand and contract as you breathe, and contract as you breathe, and contract as you breathe, that information is relayed up through that information is relayed up through that information is relayed up through and past the nodose ganglion and up into and past the nodose ganglion and up into and past the nodose ganglion and up into the brain stem. And as you can imagine, the brain stem. And as you can imagine, the brain stem. And as you can imagine, your lungs, because you're inhaling your lungs, because you're inhaling your lungs, because you're inhaling oxygen and you're also offloading carbon oxygen and you're also offloading carbon oxygen and you're also offloading carbon dioxide, your lungs are expanding and dioxide, your lungs are expanding and dioxide, your lungs are expanding and contracting, your lungs are also contracting, your lungs are also contracting, your lungs are also communicating mechanical and chemical communicating mechanical and chemical communicating mechanical and chemical oxygen carbon dioxide ratio information oxygen carbon dioxide ratio information oxygen carbon dioxide ratio information up to the brain. Now, if we wanted to, up to the brain. Now, if we wanted to, up to the brain. Now, if we wanted to, we could explore and discuss every we could explore and discuss every we could explore and discuss every single organ of your body that gets axon single organ of your body that gets axon single organ of your body that gets axon input from the vagus nerve and therefore input from the vagus nerve and therefore input from the vagus nerve and therefore can carry sensory information up the can carry sensory information up the can carry sensory information up the vagus. And again, there's going to be And again, there's going to be And again, there's going to be information about the chemical information about the chemical information about the chemical environment and the mechanical status of environment and the mechanical status of environment and the mechanical status of each of those organs carried up to your each of those organs carried up to your each of those organs carried up to your brain stem. We're not going to do that brain stem. We're not going to do that brain stem. We're not going to do that now for sake of time, now for sake of time, now for sake of time, but it's very important that you now but it's very important that you now but it's very important that you now take a step back and you realize, "Hmm, take a step back and you realize, "Hmm, take a step back and you realize, "Hmm, I understand what sensory information I understand what sensory information I understand what sensory information is. I understand that it's different is. I understand that it's different is. I understand that it's different than motor information. It's carried by than motor information. It's carried by than motor information. It's carried by different neurons in the nervous system. different neurons in the nervous system. different neurons in the nervous system. The vagus nerve has both sensory and The vagus nerve has both sensory and The vagus nerve has both sensory and motor neurons. The sensory neurons are motor neurons. The sensory neurons are motor neurons. The sensory neurons are collecting information from all these collecting information from all these collecting information from all these bodily organs. And by the way, those bodily organs. And by the way, those bodily organs. And by the way, those bodily organs don't just stop at the bodily organs don't just stop at the bodily organs don't just stop at the level of the lungs. It includes the level of the lungs. It includes the level of the lungs. It includes the heart. It includes some stuff that's heart. It includes some stuff that's heart. It includes some stuff that's happening in the neck. Um some of the happening in the neck. Um some of the happening in the neck. Um some of the muscles that are controlling the muscles that are controlling the muscles that are controlling the constriction of the airways. We'll get constriction of the airways. We'll get constriction of the airways. We'll get into this a little bit more in a few into this a little bit more in a few into this a little bit more in a few minutes, but minutes, but minutes, but you now also know that when we talk you now also know that when we talk you now also know that when we talk about collecting sensory information about collecting sensory information about collecting sensory information from the body and sending it to the from the body and sending it to the from the body and sending it to the brain by these vagal pathways, that the types by these vagal pathways, that the types by these vagal pathways, that the types of sensory information include both of sensory information include both of sensory information include both chemical and mechanical information. And chemical and mechanical information. And chemical and mechanical information. And the reason that's important is not just the reason that's important is not just the reason that's important is not just academic and intellectual, it's not just academic and intellectual, it's not just academic and intellectual, it's not just to fill the airspace with nomenclature, to fill the airspace with nomenclature, to fill the airspace with nomenclature, it's because if you're going to think it's because if you're going to think it's because if you're going to think about ways to change the activity of the about ways to change the activity of the about ways to change the activity of the vagus system. The ways to, for instance, vagus system. The ways to, for instance, vagus system. The ways to, for instance, calm down or the ways to improve your calm down or the ways to improve your calm down or the ways to improve your immune system function or to improve immune system function or to improve immune system function or to improve your mood in the short and long term, your mood in the short and long term, your mood in the short and long term, you need to ask yourself, am I going to you need to ask yourself, am I going to you need to ask yourself, am I going to do that through a mechanical change or do that through a mechanical change or do that through a mechanical change or am I going to do that by making a change am I going to do that by making a change am I going to do that by making a change to the chemical milieu of a given organ to the chemical milieu of a given organ to the chemical milieu of a given organ or set of organs? So, to drive the point or set of organs? So, to drive the point or set of organs? So, to drive the point I just made home, let's take an example I just made home, let's take an example I just made home, let's take an example that we see a lot out there, which is that we see a lot out there, which is that we see a lot out there, which is that if you want to increase the that if you want to increase the that if you want to increase the activity of your vagus nerve, you want activity of your vagus nerve, you want activity of your vagus nerve, you want to calm down. Why am I saying calm down? to calm down. Why am I saying calm down? to calm down. Why am I saying calm down? I neglected to say earlier that, by the I neglected to say earlier that, by the I neglected to say earlier that, by the way, every medical student and pre-med way, every medical student and pre-med way, every medical student and pre-med student should know, student should know, student should know, which is that cranial nerve 10, the which is that cranial nerve 10, the which is that cranial nerve 10, the vagus nerve, is classified as a vagus nerve, is classified as a vagus nerve, is classified as a parasympathetic nerve. Parasympathetic parasympathetic nerve. Parasympathetic parasympathetic nerve. Parasympathetic refers to one branch of the so-called refers to one branch of the so-called refers to one branch of the so-called autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system controls your levels of nervous system controls your levels of nervous system controls your levels of alertness and your levels of calm. It alertness and your levels of calm. It alertness and your levels of calm. It has two major branches. One branch is has two major branches. One branch is has two major branches. One branch is called the sympathetic nervous system, called the sympathetic nervous system, called the sympathetic nervous system, has nothing to do with emotional has nothing to do with emotional has nothing to do with emotional sympathy. The sympathetic nervous system sympathy. The sympathetic nervous system sympathy. The sympathetic nervous system is generally responsible for increasing is generally responsible for increasing is generally responsible for increasing our levels of alertness. Everything from our levels of alertness. Everything from our levels of alertness. Everything from being alert like I am now, being alert like I am now, being alert like I am now, all the way up to full-blown panic all the way up to full-blown panic all the way up to full-blown panic attack, which fortunately I'm not right attack, which fortunately I'm not right attack, which fortunately I'm not right now. The parasympathetic nervous system is The parasympathetic nervous system is The parasympathetic nervous system is often referred to as the rest and digest often referred to as the rest and digest often referred to as the rest and digest system, and indeed it has roles in rest system, and indeed it has roles in rest system, and indeed it has roles in rest and digestion, but it controls a lot and digestion, but it controls a lot and digestion, but it controls a lot more than just that. The parasympathetic more than just that. The parasympathetic more than just that. The parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system branch of the autonomic nervous system branch of the autonomic nervous system controls, for instance, controls, for instance, controls, for instance, digestion, it controls our ability to digestion, it controls our ability to digestion, it controls our ability to fall asleep at night. If the fall asleep at night. If the fall asleep at night. If the parasympathetic nervous system is overly parasympathetic nervous system is overly parasympathetic nervous system is overly activated, it can make us sleepy when we activated, it can make us sleepy when we activated, it can make us sleepy when we don't want to be sleepy. It can make us don't want to be sleepy. It can make us don't want to be sleepy. It can make us pass out when we don't want to pass out. pass out when we don't want to pass out. pass out when we don't want to pass out. It can be responsible for putting people It can be responsible for putting people It can be responsible for putting people into a state of coma. So, it's not good into a state of coma. So, it's not good into a state of coma. So, it's not good to think about the sympathetic nervous to think about the sympathetic nervous to think about the sympathetic nervous system simply as fight or flight, how system simply as fight or flight, how system simply as fight or flight, how it's often referred to, because it's often referred to, because it's often referred to, because it's also responsible for generating healthy, also responsible for generating healthy, also responsible for generating healthy, wakeful, non-anxious, non-stressed wakeful, non-anxious, non-stressed wakeful, non-anxious, non-stressed levels of alertness, as well as levels of alertness, as well as levels of alertness, as well as stressed-out, panic states. And the stressed-out, panic states. And the stressed-out, panic states. And the parasympathetic nervous system is parasympathetic nervous system is parasympathetic nervous system is responsible for putting us into a calm responsible for putting us into a calm responsible for putting us into a calm and relaxed state or a deep sleep state and relaxed state or a deep sleep state and relaxed state or a deep sleep state or a coma state if it were to be or a coma state if it were to be or a coma state if it were to be hyperactivated. The autonomic nervous hyperactivated. The autonomic nervous hyperactivated. The autonomic nervous system is a seesaw where the levels of system is a seesaw where the levels of system is a seesaw where the levels of alertness and calm that we experience at alertness and calm that we experience at alertness and calm that we experience at any one moment reflect the relative any one moment reflect the relative any one moment reflect the relative balance of sympathetic nervous system balance of sympathetic nervous system balance of sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system activity. They're serving a push-pull activity. They're serving a push-pull activity. They're serving a push-pull with one another. Increase the with one another. Increase the with one another. Increase the parasympathetic nervous system activity parasympathetic nervous system activity parasympathetic nervous system activity a little bit, you get a bit calmer. a little bit, you get a bit calmer. a little bit, you get a bit calmer. Increase the sympathetic nervous system Increase the sympathetic nervous system Increase the sympathetic nervous system activity a little bit, you get a bit activity a little bit, you get a bit activity a little bit, you get a bit more alert. But, they're always both more alert. But, they're always both more alert. But, they're always both active. The vagus nerve is classified as active. The vagus nerve is classified as active. The vagus nerve is classified as a parasympathetic nerve. However, it's a parasympathetic nerve. However, it's a parasympathetic nerve. However, it's a bit of a misnomer because, as you'll bit of a misnomer because, as you'll bit of a misnomer because, as you'll soon realize, there are pathways within soon realize, there are pathways within soon realize, there are pathways within the vagus nerve that, were you to the vagus nerve that, were you to the vagus nerve that, were you to activate these pathways within the vagus activate these pathways within the vagus activate these pathways within the vagus nerve, you would become more alert, not nerve, you would become more alert, not nerve, you would become more alert, not less alert. This is one of the things less alert. This is one of the things less alert. This is one of the things that I'm hoping to dispel through the that I'm hoping to dispel through the that I'm hoping to dispel through the course of this episode, which is this course of this episode, which is this course of this episode, which is this very common myth out there. It's almost very common myth out there. It's almost very common myth out there. It's almost pervasive that when you activate the pervasive that when you activate the pervasive that when you activate the vagus nerve, you're going to calm down. vagus nerve, you're going to calm down. vagus nerve, you're going to calm down. It is simply not true. Okay? There are It is simply not true. Okay? There are It is simply not true. Okay? There are instances where that is true. There are instances where that is true. There are instances where that is true. There are instances where the opposite is true, instances where the opposite is true, instances where the opposite is true, depending on which branch of the vagus depending on which branch of the vagus depending on which branch of the vagus nerve you happen to activate or nerve you happen to activate or nerve you happen to activate or suppress. One example, however, where activating a One example, however, where activating a One example, however, where activating a particular branch of the vagus nerve particular branch of the vagus nerve particular branch of the vagus nerve does indeed lead to more relaxation is does indeed lead to more relaxation is does indeed lead to more relaxation is the branch of the vagus nerve that, the branch of the vagus nerve that, the branch of the vagus nerve that, again, is sensory. Okay? So, it's taking again, is sensory. Okay? So, it's taking again, is sensory. Okay? So, it's taking information about mechanical phenomenon, information about mechanical phenomenon, information about mechanical phenomenon, in this case, pressure in this case, pressure in this case, pressure or touch, and it's sending that or touch, and it's sending that or touch, and it's sending that information down into the brain stem information down into the brain stem information down into the brain stem areas that are going to interpret that areas that are going to interpret that areas that are going to interpret that information. This branch of the vagus nerve that is This branch of the vagus nerve that is This branch of the vagus nerve that is carrying sensory information doesn't carrying sensory information doesn't carrying sensory information doesn't come from the viscera or the neck, it come from the viscera or the neck, it come from the viscera or the neck, it comes from the head, and it's the branch comes from the head, and it's the branch comes from the head, and it's the branch of the vagus nerve that essentially goes of the vagus nerve that essentially goes of the vagus nerve that essentially goes behind the ear and in some of the uh behind the ear and in some of the uh behind the ear and in some of the uh deeper components of the ear. Remember deeper components of the ear. Remember deeper components of the ear. Remember they tell you don't put anything they tell you don't put anything they tell you don't put anything into your ear that's uh you know, uh into your ear that's uh you know, uh into your ear that's uh you know, uh smaller than your elbow. Um well, I'm uh smaller than your elbow. Um well, I'm uh smaller than your elbow. Um well, I'm uh breaking that rule right now and I'm breaking that rule right now and I'm breaking that rule right now and I'm putting my index finger into my ear and putting my index finger into my ear and putting my index finger into my ear and kind of rubbing in a circular way that kind of rubbing in a circular way that kind of rubbing in a circular way that kind of the area right outside um the kind of the area right outside um the kind of the area right outside um the hole of the ear. There's a branch of the hole of the ear. There's a branch of the hole of the ear. There's a branch of the vagus nerve there. There's also, as I vagus nerve there. There's also, as I vagus nerve there. There's also, as I mentioned, a branch of the vagus nerve mentioned, a branch of the vagus nerve mentioned, a branch of the vagus nerve behind the ear. And were you to rub behind the ear. And were you to rub behind the ear. And were you to rub behind the ear just gently or, you know, behind the ear just gently or, you know, behind the ear just gently or, you know, with a little bit of pressure, indeed with a little bit of pressure, indeed with a little bit of pressure, indeed you're going to activate that branch of you're going to activate that branch of you're going to activate that branch of the vagus nerve. That branch of the vagus nerve. That branch of the vagus nerve. That branch of the vagus nerve is carrying sensory vagus nerve is carrying sensory vagus nerve is carrying sensory information, so that mechanical pressure information, so that mechanical pressure information, so that mechanical pressure is being conveyed into the brain stem, is being conveyed into the brain stem, is being conveyed into the brain stem, and indeed that pathway and indeed that pathway and indeed that pathway satisfies all the criteria of being a satisfies all the criteria of being a satisfies all the criteria of being a parasympathetic or calming-inducing parasympathetic or calming-inducing parasympathetic or calming-inducing pathway. Now, you can find all over the pathway. Now, you can find all over the pathway. Now, you can find all over the internet that, you know, rubbing behind internet that, you know, rubbing behind internet that, you know, rubbing behind the ears is really going to calm us down the ears is really going to calm us down the ears is really going to calm us down and really bring our level of overall and really bring our level of overall and really bring our level of overall autonomic arousal way, way down. In autonomic arousal way, way down. In autonomic arousal way, way down. In reality, it doesn't bring our overall reality, it doesn't bring our overall reality, it doesn't bring our overall level of autonomic arousal way, way level of autonomic arousal way, way level of autonomic arousal way, way down. It brings our level of autonomic down. It brings our level of autonomic down. It brings our level of autonomic arousal down a bit, depending on how arousal down a bit, depending on how arousal down a bit, depending on how active our sympathetic nervous system active our sympathetic nervous system active our sympathetic nervous system happens to be. Why do I tell you this? happens to be. Why do I tell you this? happens to be. Why do I tell you this? Well, I'm not trying to rain on any Well, I'm not trying to rain on any Well, I'm not trying to rain on any parties out there, but the truth is, if parties out there, but the truth is, if parties out there, but the truth is, if you're super stressed, if you're in a you're super stressed, if you're in a you're super stressed, if you're in a panic attack, rubbing behind your ears panic attack, rubbing behind your ears panic attack, rubbing behind your ears might help a little bit, but it's not might help a little bit, but it's not might help a little bit, but it's not going to suddenly bring you into a state going to suddenly bring you into a state going to suddenly bring you into a state of calm. Soon we're going to talk about of calm. Soon we're going to talk about of calm. Soon we're going to talk about things that can bring you into a state things that can bring you into a state things that can bring you into a state of calm very fast, and I will explain of calm very fast, and I will explain of calm very fast, and I will explain exactly how they work and why they work exactly how they work and why they work exactly how they work and why they work so quickly and why they are so robust. I so quickly and why they are so robust. I so quickly and why they are so robust. I don't want to be disparaging of the area don't want to be disparaging of the area don't want to be disparaging of the area behind the ear or the area within their behind the ear or the area within their behind the ear or the area within their ear. Some people really like their ears ear. Some people really like their ears ear. Some people really like their ears rubbed. I certainly like the area behind rubbed. I certainly like the area behind rubbed. I certainly like the area behind my ears rubbed, like I'm doing now or my ears rubbed, like I'm doing now or my ears rubbed, like I'm doing now or the areas within my ears gently rubbed. the areas within my ears gently rubbed. the areas within my ears gently rubbed. Who doesn't like that? And indeed it's Who doesn't like that? And indeed it's Who doesn't like that? And indeed it's calming. But it's one minor branch of calming. But it's one minor branch of calming. But it's one minor branch of the vagus nerve carrying sensory the vagus nerve carrying sensory the vagus nerve carrying sensory information. It's not going to suddenly information. It's not going to suddenly information. It's not going to suddenly shift your autonomic nervous system. shift your autonomic nervous system. shift your autonomic nervous system. It's not going to suddenly tilt that It's not going to suddenly tilt that It's not going to suddenly tilt that seesaw into parasympathetic dominance as seesaw into parasympathetic dominance as seesaw into parasympathetic dominance as it were. To do that, you need to it were. To do that, you need to it were. To do that, you need to leverage some of the other leverage some of the other leverage some of the other more robust branches of the vagus nerve. more robust branches of the vagus nerve. more robust branches of the vagus nerve. And I'll teach you how to do that in And I'll teach you how to do that in And I'll teach you how to do that in just a moment here. just a moment here. just a moment here. The point is that the vagus nerve does The point is that the vagus nerve does The point is that the vagus nerve does carry sort of classic parasympathetic carry sort of classic parasympathetic carry sort of classic parasympathetic information. If you're asked on an exam, information. If you're asked on an exam, information. If you're asked on an exam, students, med students, I don't want to students, med students, I don't want to students, med students, I don't want to be responsible for you getting this be responsible for you getting this be responsible for you getting this wrong. I'd love to be responsible for wrong. I'd love to be responsible for wrong. I'd love to be responsible for you getting it right. I teach you getting it right. I teach you getting it right. I teach neuroanatomy to medical students. If neuroanatomy to medical students. If neuroanatomy to medical students. If you're asked, is you're asked, is you're asked, is cranial nerve 10, the vagus nerve, cranial nerve 10, the vagus nerve, cranial nerve 10, the vagus nerve, parasympathetic or sympathetic? You parasympathetic or sympathetic? You parasympathetic or sympathetic? You should answer parasympathetic. If you're should answer parasympathetic. If you're should answer parasympathetic. If you're asked if it's sensory or motor, you asked if it's sensory or motor, you asked if it's sensory or motor, you should say it's mixed. It's both. So should say it's mixed. It's both. So should say it's mixed. It's both. So it's mixed parasympathetic. However, for it's mixed parasympathetic. However, for it's mixed parasympathetic. However, for everybody out there, med student or not, everybody out there, med student or not, everybody out there, med student or not, just understand that when you activate just understand that when you activate just understand that when you activate certain branches of the vagus nerve, certain branches of the vagus nerve, certain branches of the vagus nerve, you're either going to get an elevation you're either going to get an elevation you're either going to get an elevation in alertness, that is an increase in alertness, that is an increase in alertness, that is an increase in sympathetic nervous system activity, or sympathetic nervous system activity, or sympathetic nervous system activity, or a decrease in alertness, that is an a decrease in alertness, that is an a decrease in alertness, that is an elevation in parasympathetic activity, elevation in parasympathetic activity, elevation in parasympathetic activity, depending on which branch you activate, depending on which branch you activate, depending on which branch you activate, and the context matters. So, and the context matters. So, and the context matters. So, if you want to relax, you can rub behind if you want to relax, you can rub behind if you want to relax, you can rub behind your ears, you can rub inside your ears. your ears, you can rub inside your ears. your ears, you can rub inside your ears. If you have permission, you can do that If you have permission, you can do that If you have permission, you can do that to the person next to you to the person next to you to the person next to you if they like it. if they like it. if they like it. But it's not the case that activating any it's not the case that activating any it's not the case that activating any branch of the vagus nerve is going to branch of the vagus nerve is going to branch of the vagus nerve is going to calm us down. That's simply not the calm us down. That's simply not the calm us down. That's simply not the case. And in a moment, I'll tell you case. And in a moment, I'll tell you case. And in a moment, I'll tell you why. I'd like to take a quick break and why. I'd like to take a quick break and why. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic AG1 is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic AG1 is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and drink that also includes prebiotics and drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in research science for almost three research science for almost three research science for almost three decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. I find been taking it every day since. I find been taking it every day since. I find it improves all aspects of my health, my it improves all aspects of my health, my it improves all aspects of my health, my energy, my focus, and I simply feel much energy, my focus, and I simply feel much energy, my focus, and I simply feel much better when I take it. AG1 uses the better when I take it. AG1 uses the better when I take it. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right highest quality ingredients in the right highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're constantly combinations, and they're constantly combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas without improving their formulas without improving their formulas without increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just launched their latest formula upgrade. launched their latest formula upgrade. launched their latest formula upgrade. This next-gen formula is based on This next-gen formula is based on This next-gen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects of exciting new research on the effects of exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome, and it probiotics on the gut microbiome, and it probiotics on the gut microbiome, and it now includes several clinically studied now includes several clinically studied now includes several clinically studied probiotic strains shown to support both probiotic strains shown to support both probiotic strains shown to support both digestive health and immune system digestive health and immune system digestive health and immune system health, as well as to improve bowel health, as well as to improve bowel health, as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. regularity and to reduce bloating. regularity and to reduce bloating. Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just one supplement, what that supplement one supplement, what that supplement one supplement, what that supplement would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a free 1-month supply of omega-3 fish oil free 1-month supply of omega-3 fish oil free 1-month supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status and much more. Again, that's and much more. Again, that's and much more. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman to get a free 1-month supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-month supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-month supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. episode is also brought to us by Roka. episode is also brought to us by Roka. I'm excited to share that Roka and I I'm excited to share that Roka and I I'm excited to share that Roka and I recently teamed up to create a new pair recently teamed up to create a new pair recently teamed up to create a new pair of red lens glasses. These red lens of red lens glasses. These red lens of red lens glasses. These red lens glasses are meant to be worn in the glasses are meant to be worn in the glasses are meant to be worn in the evening after the sun goes down. They evening after the sun goes down. They evening after the sun goes down. They filter out short-wavelength light that filter out short-wavelength light that filter out short-wavelength light that comes from screens and from LED lights, comes from screens and from LED lights, comes from screens and from LED lights, which are the most common indoor which are the most common indoor which are the most common indoor lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize Roka red lens glasses are not Roka red lens glasses are not Roka red lens glasses are not traditional blue blockers. They do traditional blue blockers. They do traditional blue blockers. They do filter out blue light, but they filter out blue light, but they filter out blue light, but they filter out a lot more than just blue light. In out a lot more than just blue light. In out a lot more than just blue light. In fact, they filter out the full range of fact, they filter out the full range of fact, they filter out the full range of short-wavelength light that suppresses short-wavelength light that suppresses short-wavelength light that suppresses the hormone melatonin. By the way, you the hormone melatonin. By the way, you the hormone melatonin. By the way, you want melatonin high in the evening and want melatonin high in the evening and want melatonin high in the evening and at night, makes it easy to fall and stay at night, makes it easy to fall and stay at night, makes it easy to fall and stay asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and at night. These Roka red lens glasses at night. These Roka red lens glasses at night. These Roka red lens glasses ensure normal healthy increases in ensure normal healthy increases in ensure normal healthy increases in melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing so, these Roka red lens glasses really so, these Roka red lens glasses really so, these Roka red lens glasses really help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your transition to sleep. Roka red lens transition to sleep. Roka red lens transition to sleep. Roka red lens glasses also look great. They have a ton glasses also look great. They have a ton glasses also look great. They have a ton of different frames to select from and of different frames to select from and of different frames to select from and you can wear them out to dinner or you can wear them out to dinner or you can wear them out to dinner or concerts and you can still see things. I concerts and you can still see things. I concerts and you can still see things. I don't recommend you wear them while don't recommend you wear them while don't recommend you wear them while driving just for safety purposes, but if driving just for safety purposes, but if driving just for safety purposes, but if you're out to dinner, you're at a you're out to dinner, you're at a you're out to dinner, you're at a concert, you're at a friend's house, or concert, you're at a friend's house, or concert, you're at a friend's house, or you're just at home, pop those Roka red you're just at home, pop those Roka red you're just at home, pop those Roka red lens glasses on and you'll really notice lens glasses on and you'll really notice lens glasses on and you'll really notice the difference in terms of your levels the difference in terms of your levels the difference in terms of your levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I of calm and all the sleep stuff I of calm and all the sleep stuff I mentioned earlier. So, it really is mentioned earlier. So, it really is mentioned earlier. So, it really is possible to support your biology, be possible to support your biology, be possible to support your biology, be scientific about it, and remain social scientific about it, and remain social scientific about it, and remain social at the same time, if you like. If you'd at the same time, if you like. If you'd at the same time, if you like. If you'd like to try Roka, go to roka.com. That's like to try Roka, go to roka.com. That's like to try Roka, go to roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% and enter the code Huberman to save 20% and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's off your first order. Again, that's off your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at roka.com and enter the code Huberman at roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Okay, so we've talked about checkout. Okay, so we've talked about checkout. Okay, so we've talked about all the sensory information coming in all the sensory information coming in all the sensory information coming in from behind the ear, from deep in the from behind the ear, from deep in the from behind the ear, from deep in the ear, from the body, ear, from the body, ear, from the body, coursing up past nodose ganglion into coursing up past nodose ganglion into coursing up past nodose ganglion into the brainstem. the brainstem. the brainstem. I told you earlier and it's still true I told you earlier and it's still true I told you earlier and it's still true now that 85% of the vagus nerve pathways now that 85% of the vagus nerve pathways now that 85% of the vagus nerve pathways are sensory in nature, carrying chemical are sensory in nature, carrying chemical are sensory in nature, carrying chemical and mechanical information. So, what and mechanical information. So, what and mechanical information. So, what about this other 15% of the vagus nerve about this other 15% of the vagus nerve about this other 15% of the vagus nerve that is not carrying sensory information that is not carrying sensory information that is not carrying sensory information from the body, from the head into these from the body, from the head into these from the body, from the head into these brainstem nuclei? brainstem nuclei? brainstem nuclei? By the way, when I say brainstem nuclei, By the way, when I say brainstem nuclei, By the way, when I say brainstem nuclei, I don't mean I don't mean I don't mean nuclei in the context of one neuron. nuclei in the context of one neuron. nuclei in the context of one neuron. This can be a little bit confusing, but This can be a little bit confusing, but This can be a little bit confusing, but when we hear about the nucleus of a when we hear about the nucleus of a when we hear about the nucleus of a neuron, we mean the area that generally neuron, we mean the area that generally neuron, we mean the area that generally contains the DNA and we're contains the DNA and we're contains the DNA and we're distinguishing it from the axon and the distinguishing it from the axon and the distinguishing it from the axon and the other parts. When we hear about a other parts. When we hear about a other parts. When we hear about a nucleus in the brain, nucleus in the brain, nucleus in the brain, these neuroanatomists should have been these neuroanatomists should have been these neuroanatomists should have been more creative, but when we're hearing more creative, but when we're hearing more creative, but when we're hearing about a nucleus in the brain, about a nucleus in the brain, about a nucleus in the brain, it means a collection of different it means a collection of different it means a collection of different neurons. So, a big group of neurons. So, a big group of neurons. So, a big group of neurons. So, when I say brainstem nuclei, I mean So, when I say brainstem nuclei, I mean So, when I say brainstem nuclei, I mean a lot of neurons, thousands of neurons a lot of neurons, thousands of neurons a lot of neurons, thousands of neurons in little clumps there that we call in little clumps there that we call in little clumps there that we call nuclei. So, the vagus nerve includes different the vagus nerve includes different the vagus nerve includes different nuclei, different collections of nuclei, different collections of nuclei, different collections of neurons. And these neurons have what we call And these neurons have what we call And these neurons have what we call efferents, outputs efferents, outputs efferents, outputs to, as you might have guessed, the body. to, as you might have guessed, the body. to, as you might have guessed, the body. Back to the various organs of the body. Back to the various organs of the body. Back to the various organs of the body. They also have connections to things They also have connections to things They also have connections to things within the head and face area, but for within the head and face area, but for within the head and face area, but for the time being, I'm mostly going to talk the time being, I'm mostly going to talk the time being, I'm mostly going to talk about the motor outputs of the vagus about the motor outputs of the vagus about the motor outputs of the vagus nerve that come from these brainstem nerve that come from these brainstem nerve that come from these brainstem nuclei. So, these motor outputs nuclei. So, these motor outputs nuclei. So, these motor outputs are not themselves paying attention to are not themselves paying attention to are not themselves paying attention to mechanical or chemical information. They mechanical or chemical information. They mechanical or chemical information. They are going to control the organs of the are going to control the organs of the are going to control the organs of the body. This is extremely important if you want This is extremely important if you want This is extremely important if you want to be able to understand and leverage to be able to understand and leverage to be able to understand and leverage your vagus nerve for health and your vagus nerve for health and your vagus nerve for health and well-being, mental health, physical well-being, mental health, physical well-being, mental health, physical health, performance, and even for health, performance, and even for health, performance, and even for accelerated learning. I guess that would accelerated learning. I guess that would accelerated learning. I guess that would fall under performance. Or for recovery fall under performance. Or for recovery fall under performance. Or for recovery from different diseases. There are from different diseases. There are from different diseases. There are really nice papers starting to emerge really nice papers starting to emerge really nice papers starting to emerge that if you can selectively activate that if you can selectively activate that if you can selectively activate these motor pathways, you can accelerate these motor pathways, you can accelerate these motor pathways, you can accelerate and increase the recovery from stroke. and increase the recovery from stroke. and increase the recovery from stroke. So, this is of serious significance. So, this is of serious significance. So, this is of serious significance. But for those of us that fortunately But for those of us that fortunately But for those of us that fortunately don't have strokes, it's still of don't have strokes, it's still of don't have strokes, it's still of serious significance. And in fact, right serious significance. And in fact, right serious significance. And in fact, right now I'm going to tell you about an now I'm going to tell you about an now I'm going to tell you about an actionable tool whereby you can leverage actionable tool whereby you can leverage actionable tool whereby you can leverage one of these motor pathways to a very one of these motor pathways to a very one of these motor pathways to a very specific endpoint anytime you want. So, specific endpoint anytime you want. So, specific endpoint anytime you want. So, let's talk about how you can leverage let's talk about how you can leverage let's talk about how you can leverage these motor pathways of the vagus in these motor pathways of the vagus in these motor pathways of the vagus in order to what's called auto-regulate. order to what's called auto-regulate. order to what's called auto-regulate. Auto-regulation is not just a fancy word Auto-regulation is not just a fancy word Auto-regulation is not just a fancy word for calming down. We are going to talk for calming down. We are going to talk for calming down. We are going to talk about calming down, but auto-regulation about calming down, but auto-regulation about calming down, but auto-regulation is the way in which your vagus nerve is the way in which your vagus nerve is the way in which your vagus nerve makes sure that seesaw of makes sure that seesaw of makes sure that seesaw of sympathetic nervous system to sympathetic nervous system to sympathetic nervous system to parasympathetic nervous system balance parasympathetic nervous system balance parasympathetic nervous system balance doesn't get tilted too far to the side doesn't get tilted too far to the side doesn't get tilted too far to the side of sympathetic nervous system of sympathetic nervous system of sympathetic nervous system activation. That your levels of activation. That your levels of activation. That your levels of alertness, your heart rate, your alertness, your heart rate, your alertness, your heart rate, your breathing rate, etc. don't get too high. breathing rate, etc. don't get too high. breathing rate, etc. don't get too high. And the reason it's called And the reason it's called And the reason it's called auto-regulation and not just calming auto-regulation and not just calming auto-regulation and not just calming down is that auto-regulation is down is that auto-regulation is down is that auto-regulation is something that's always happening in the something that's always happening in the something that's always happening in the background as you're going about your background as you're going about your background as you're going about your daily activities. In fact, it's also daily activities. In fact, it's also daily activities. In fact, it's also happening while you sleep. In fact, now happening while you sleep. In fact, now happening while you sleep. In fact, now we're going to talk about things that we're going to talk about things that we're going to talk about things that you can do deliberately to indeed calm you can do deliberately to indeed calm you can do deliberately to indeed calm down, but to also increase the amount of down, but to also increase the amount of down, but to also increase the amount of auto-regulation that occurs during your auto-regulation that occurs during your auto-regulation that occurs during your entire day when you're not focusing on entire day when you're not focusing on entire day when you're not focusing on doing these particular protocols, as doing these particular protocols, as doing these particular protocols, as well as during sleep, and that will well as during sleep, and that will well as during sleep, and that will result in elevated what's called HRV or result in elevated what's called HRV or result in elevated what's called HRV or heart rate variability. Now, I realize heart rate variability. Now, I realize heart rate variability. Now, I realize that's a tall order, but what we're that's a tall order, but what we're that's a tall order, but what we're going to do is we're going to step going to do is we're going to step going to do is we're going to step through this first by focusing on the through this first by focusing on the through this first by focusing on the protocol, and then now that you're protocol, and then now that you're protocol, and then now that you're familiar with all the business about familiar with all the business about familiar with all the business about sensory and motor and parasympathetic da sensory and motor and parasympathetic da sensory and motor and parasympathetic da Now that you have all that science da Now that you have all that science da Now that you have all that science and nomenclature in mind, it will all and nomenclature in mind, it will all and nomenclature in mind, it will all make perfect sense as I describe this make perfect sense as I describe this make perfect sense as I describe this protocol for auto-regulation and protocol for auto-regulation and protocol for auto-regulation and improving HRV and all the protocols that improving HRV and all the protocols that improving HRV and all the protocols that follow. Okay, so embedded in your brain follow. Okay, so embedded in your brain follow. Okay, so embedded in your brain and in your vagal nerve pathways and in your vagal nerve pathways and in your vagal nerve pathways and in your body you have an incredible and in your body you have an incredible and in your body you have an incredible neural circuit. This neural circuit is neural circuit. This neural circuit is neural circuit. This neural circuit is one that you are born with and it's one that you are born with and it's one that you are born with and it's one that you will have your entire life. that you will have your entire life. that you will have your entire life. This is also a pathway that you want to This is also a pathway that you want to This is also a pathway that you want to keep tuned up. That is that you'll want keep tuned up. That is that you'll want keep tuned up. That is that you'll want to make sure is activated on a pretty to make sure is activated on a pretty to make sure is activated on a pretty frequent basis. Super easy to do as frequent basis. Super easy to do as frequent basis. Super easy to do as you'll soon see. you'll soon see. you'll soon see. So that the pathway does not So that the pathway does not So that the pathway does not deteriorate. This is a pathway that originates in an This is a pathway that originates in an This is a pathway that originates in an area of your brain called the area of your brain called the area of your brain called the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Now, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Now, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Now, the dorsolateral cortex dorsolateral cortex dorsolateral cortex by the way, it's the left dorsolateral by the way, it's the left dorsolateral by the way, it's the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in particular sort of prefrontal cortex in particular sort of prefrontal cortex in particular sort of on the left upper part of the front of on the left upper part of the front of on the left upper part of the front of your skull. If you were to go deep to your skull. If you were to go deep to your skull. If you were to go deep to that area, you would be on the left that area, you would be on the left that area, you would be on the left dorsal top lateral side dorsal top lateral side dorsal top lateral side prefrontal cortex kind of toward the prefrontal cortex kind of toward the prefrontal cortex kind of toward the front, right behind your forehead. Okay, front, right behind your forehead. Okay, front, right behind your forehead. Okay, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex sits deep dorsolateral prefrontal cortex sits deep dorsolateral prefrontal cortex sits deep to that area. to that area. to that area. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has outputs to a couple of other brain areas outputs to a couple of other brain areas outputs to a couple of other brain areas called the cingulate, called the insula. called the cingulate, called the insula. called the cingulate, called the insula. You don't have to worry about those You don't have to worry about those You don't have to worry about those names unless you're really interested in names unless you're really interested in names unless you're really interested in them. Those areas have communication them. Those areas have communication them. Those areas have communication with one of the brainstem nuclei, one of with one of the brainstem nuclei, one of with one of the brainstem nuclei, one of those brainstem areas that gets input those brainstem areas that gets input those brainstem areas that gets input from the sensory pathways from the body, from the sensory pathways from the body, from the sensory pathways from the body, from the head the head the head of the vagus of the vagus of the vagus and that also contains neurons that have and that also contains neurons that have and that also contains neurons that have motor output to particular areas of your motor output to particular areas of your motor output to particular areas of your body. And that brain area, and you're body. And that brain area, and you're body. And that brain area, and you're going to love this, is called nucleus going to love this, is called nucleus going to love this, is called nucleus ambiguus. I kid you not, it's called ambiguus. I kid you not, it's called ambiguus. I kid you not, it's called nucleus ambiguus. Nucleus ambiguus nucleus ambiguus. Nucleus ambiguus nucleus ambiguus. Nucleus ambiguus contains some neurons that project down contains some neurons that project down contains some neurons that project down to what's called the sinoatrial node of to what's called the sinoatrial node of to what's called the sinoatrial node of the heart. the heart. the heart. And those neurons are responsible for And those neurons are responsible for And those neurons are responsible for deceleration of heart rate. deceleration of heart rate. deceleration of heart rate. And it turns out that you can And it turns out that you can And it turns out that you can selectively activate those neurons in no selectively activate those neurons in no selectively activate those neurons in no small part because they receive input, small part because they receive input, small part because they receive input, albeit several synapses away, from the albeit several synapses away, from the albeit several synapses away, from the left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex. left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex. left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex. Because the prefrontal cortex is Because the prefrontal cortex is Because the prefrontal cortex is involved in deliberate action, in involved in deliberate action, in involved in deliberate action, in planning and execution of action. It planning and execution of action. It planning and execution of action. It doesn't do it alone, it does it through doesn't do it alone, it does it through doesn't do it alone, it does it through communication with some other brain communication with some other brain communication with some other brain structures, but if you for instance structures, but if you for instance structures, but if you for instance decide that you're going to activate decide that you're going to activate decide that you're going to activate this deceleration pathway, you can do this deceleration pathway, you can do this deceleration pathway, you can do it. The beautiful thing is these neurons it. The beautiful thing is these neurons it. The beautiful thing is these neurons that also control deceleration of heart that also control deceleration of heart that also control deceleration of heart rate are active in the background, rate are active in the background, rate are active in the background, they're under autonomic control, but you they're under autonomic control, but you they're under autonomic control, but you can take control of them. When does that can take control of them. When does that can take control of them. When does that happen? Well, for instance, in sleep, if happen? Well, for instance, in sleep, if happen? Well, for instance, in sleep, if your heart rate starts to increase, your heart rate starts to increase, your heart rate starts to increase, these decelerating neurons, which are these decelerating neurons, which are these decelerating neurons, which are neurons of the vagus nerve, they're neurons of the vagus nerve, they're neurons of the vagus nerve, they're motor output neurons, they release motor output neurons, they release motor output neurons, they release acetylcholine, and they act on the acetylcholine, and they act on the acetylcholine, and they act on the sinoatrial node, which is a node within sinoatrial node, which is a node within sinoatrial node, which is a node within the heart that controls heart rate, to the heart that controls heart rate, to the heart that controls heart rate, to slow your heart rate down. Okay? This is slow your heart rate down. Okay? This is slow your heart rate down. Okay? This is the way in which your heart rate never the way in which your heart rate never the way in which your heart rate never gets too high. The seesaw that is the gets too high. The seesaw that is the gets too high. The seesaw that is the autonomic nervous system autonomic nervous system autonomic nervous system is kind of weighted to the sympathetic is kind of weighted to the sympathetic is kind of weighted to the sympathetic nervous system side. A simple example of nervous system side. A simple example of nervous system side. A simple example of this is if you have to stay awake, this is if you have to stay awake, this is if you have to stay awake, you can probably do it. At some point you can probably do it. At some point you can probably do it. At some point you'll fall asleep. But, if you really you'll fall asleep. But, if you really you'll fall asleep. But, if you really want to fall asleep, it's harder to make want to fall asleep, it's harder to make want to fall asleep, it's harder to make yourself fall asleep. The sympathetic yourself fall asleep. The sympathetic yourself fall asleep. The sympathetic nervous system is one that we can more nervous system is one that we can more nervous system is one that we can more easily leverage in order to push through easily leverage in order to push through easily leverage in order to push through things, deadlines, stay up to take care things, deadlines, stay up to take care things, deadlines, stay up to take care of a sick relative, you know, push of a sick relative, you know, push of a sick relative, you know, push ourselves to migrate out from a ourselves to migrate out from a ourselves to migrate out from a dangerous place or away from a famine, dangerous place or away from a famine, dangerous place or away from a famine, another example of a dangerous place, I another example of a dangerous place, I another example of a dangerous place, I guess. The idea here is that the guess. The idea here is that the guess. The idea here is that the sympathetic nervous system has kind of a sympathetic nervous system has kind of a sympathetic nervous system has kind of a bias towards activity. And in fact, your bias towards activity. And in fact, your bias towards activity. And in fact, your heart rate is driven by the sympathetic heart rate is driven by the sympathetic heart rate is driven by the sympathetic nervous system, and that heart rate nervous system, and that heart rate nervous system, and that heart rate would continue to accelerate unless would continue to accelerate unless would continue to accelerate unless there was this deceleration pathway that there was this deceleration pathway that there was this deceleration pathway that every once in a while would pump the every once in a while would pump the every once in a while would pump the brake on heart rate. And that's what brake on heart rate. And that's what brake on heart rate. And that's what this vagal pathway from nucleus ambiguus this vagal pathway from nucleus ambiguus this vagal pathway from nucleus ambiguus down to the sinoatrial node is doing. down to the sinoatrial node is doing. down to the sinoatrial node is doing. And by the way, this deceleration of And by the way, this deceleration of And by the way, this deceleration of heart rate that goes from the vagus heart rate that goes from the vagus heart rate that goes from the vagus motor pathway to the sinoatrial node is motor pathway to the sinoatrial node is motor pathway to the sinoatrial node is the basis of what's called HRV or heart the basis of what's called HRV or heart the basis of what's called HRV or heart rate variability. We hear a lot nowadays rate variability. We hear a lot nowadays rate variability. We hear a lot nowadays about heart rate variability. For those about heart rate variability. For those about heart rate variability. For those of you that have heard of it, and for of you that have heard of it, and for of you that have heard of it, and for those of you that haven't, having a those of you that haven't, having a those of you that haven't, having a higher HRV or heart rate variability is higher HRV or heart rate variability is higher HRV or heart rate variability is a good thing, right? Normally, if you a good thing, right? Normally, if you a good thing, right? Normally, if you hear something like heart rate hear something like heart rate hear something like heart rate variability, sounds like a bad thing. variability, sounds like a bad thing. variability, sounds like a bad thing. Turns out it's a great thing. Heart rate Turns out it's a great thing. Heart rate Turns out it's a great thing. Heart rate variability is essentially the distance variability is essentially the distance variability is essentially the distance or the time, rather, between beats of or the time, rather, between beats of or the time, rather, between beats of the heart. So, you might think that it's the heart. So, you might think that it's the heart. So, you might think that it's great to have a really consistent heart great to have a really consistent heart great to have a really consistent heart rate. Boom. rate. Boom. rate. Boom. Or actually, in reality, it's more like Or actually, in reality, it's more like Or actually, in reality, it's more like boom boom. And I'm missing some of the boom boom. And I'm missing some of the boom boom. And I'm missing some of the uh beats within the waveform, but you uh beats within the waveform, but you uh beats within the waveform, but you get the idea. But actually, it's well get the idea. But actually, it's well get the idea. But actually, it's well known to be correlated with a number of known to be correlated with a number of known to be correlated with a number of positive health outcomes, including positive health outcomes, including positive health outcomes, including things related to brain and body and things related to brain and body and things related to brain and body and longevity and performance to have high longevity and performance to have high longevity and performance to have high heart rate variability. Heart rate heart rate variability. Heart rate heart rate variability. Heart rate variability is going to lead to a variability is going to lead to a variability is going to lead to a pattern of heartbeats that is more like pattern of heartbeats that is more like pattern of heartbeats that is more like boom boom. Now, you might say, "That's boom. Now, you might say, "That's boom. Now, you might say, "That's arrhythmia." Ah, but there are cases of arrhythmia." Ah, but there are cases of arrhythmia." Ah, but there are cases of arrhythmia that are good, and there are arrhythmia that are good, and there are arrhythmia that are good, and there are cases of arrhythmia that are bad. Higher cases of arrhythmia that are bad. Higher cases of arrhythmia that are bad. Higher HRV in general is a good thing. You want HRV in general is a good thing. You want HRV in general is a good thing. You want it during sleep, and you want it during it during sleep, and you want it during it during sleep, and you want it during wakeful states. In sleep, heart rate wakeful states. In sleep, heart rate wakeful states. In sleep, heart rate variability comes about because this variability comes about because this variability comes about because this vagal pathway from nucleus ambiguus, so vagal pathway from nucleus ambiguus, so vagal pathway from nucleus ambiguus, so the cell bodies, the nuclei, the cell bodies, the nuclei, the cell bodies, the nuclei, literally the DNA within those nuclei of literally the DNA within those nuclei of literally the DNA within those nuclei of those neurons reside in nucleus those neurons reside in nucleus those neurons reside in nucleus ambiguus, and they project to the ambiguus, and they project to the ambiguus, and they project to the sinoatrial node, and every once in a sinoatrial node, and every once in a sinoatrial node, and every once in a while they'll just pump the brake on while they'll just pump the brake on while they'll just pump the brake on heart rate and slow heart rate down, and heart rate and slow heart rate down, and heart rate and slow heart rate down, and then they'll come off that brake. Slow then they'll come off that brake. Slow then they'll come off that brake. Slow down, come off heart rate. And here's down, come off heart rate. And here's down, come off heart rate. And here's the really beautiful part, and the way the really beautiful part, and the way the really beautiful part, and the way that you get actionable leverage over that you get actionable leverage over that you get actionable leverage over the system. the system. the system. The control by the vagus nerve of the The control by the vagus nerve of the The control by the vagus nerve of the sinoatrial node and heart rate sinoatrial node and heart rate sinoatrial node and heart rate is coordinated with your breathing. is coordinated with your breathing. is coordinated with your breathing. Now, as I tell you this, it'll make Now, as I tell you this, it'll make Now, as I tell you this, it'll make perfect sense, but I just want you to perfect sense, but I just want you to perfect sense, but I just want you to step back from it a second and realize step back from it a second and realize step back from it a second and realize that these systems of the body are so that these systems of the body are so that these systems of the body are so elegantly coordinated. And here's how it elegantly coordinated. And here's how it elegantly coordinated. And here's how it works with respect to heart rate and works with respect to heart rate and works with respect to heart rate and breathing. When you inhale air, of breathing. When you inhale air, of breathing. When you inhale air, of course, your lungs ex- pand. You have a course, your lungs ex- pand. You have a course, your lungs ex- pand. You have a muscle that sits below your lungs called muscle that sits below your lungs called muscle that sits below your lungs called the diaphragm. As you inhale air, of the diaphragm. As you inhale air, of the diaphragm. As you inhale air, of course, that diaphragm moves down. Now, course, that diaphragm moves down. Now, course, that diaphragm moves down. Now, as your diaphragm moves down and your as your diaphragm moves down and your as your diaphragm moves down and your lungs expand, lungs expand, lungs expand, your heart literally has a bit more your heart literally has a bit more your heart literally has a bit more space in the thoracic cavity space in the thoracic cavity space in the thoracic cavity to expand. Okay, it's not going to swell to expand. Okay, it's not going to swell to expand. Okay, it's not going to swell massively, but it's going to expand. massively, but it's going to expand. massively, but it's going to expand. Now, as a consequence of that expansion, Now, as a consequence of that expansion, Now, as a consequence of that expansion, the blood that's moving through your the blood that's moving through your the blood that's moving through your heart is going to move a little bit more heart is going to move a little bit more heart is going to move a little bit more slowly per unit volume. That is sensed slowly per unit volume. That is sensed slowly per unit volume. That is sensed by a particular group of neurons in your by a particular group of neurons in your by a particular group of neurons in your heart, and that sends a signal to your and that sends a signal to your and that sends a signal to your sympathetic nervous system to speed your sympathetic nervous system to speed your sympathetic nervous system to speed your heart rate up. heart rate up. heart rate up. Put differently, inhaling speeds your Put differently, inhaling speeds your Put differently, inhaling speeds your heart rate up. heart rate up. heart rate up. Now, the converse is also true. When you Now, the converse is also true. When you Now, the converse is also true. When you exhale, your lungs deflate, your exhale, your lungs deflate, your exhale, your lungs deflate, your diaphragm moves up, and as a diaphragm moves up, and as a diaphragm moves up, and as a consequence, there's slightly less space consequence, there's slightly less space consequence, there's slightly less space for the heart. So, the heart shrinks a for the heart. So, the heart shrinks a for the heart. So, the heart shrinks a little bit. Not a ton, but it shrinks a little bit. Not a ton, but it shrinks a little bit. Not a ton, but it shrinks a little bit. And it's enough such that little bit. And it's enough such that little bit. And it's enough such that whatever blood is in the heart whatever blood is in the heart whatever blood is in the heart moves through more quickly per unit moves through more quickly per unit moves through more quickly per unit volume. That faster movement is sensed volume. That faster movement is sensed volume. That faster movement is sensed by neurons within the heart, sends a by neurons within the heart, sends a by neurons within the heart, sends a signal to the brain, and the brain signal to the brain, and the brain signal to the brain, and the brain activates those neurons within nucleus activates those neurons within nucleus activates those neurons within nucleus ambiguous, and very quickly sends a ambiguous, and very quickly sends a ambiguous, and very quickly sends a signal to the sinoatrial node to slow signal to the sinoatrial node to slow signal to the sinoatrial node to slow your heart rate down. your heart rate down. your heart rate down. Put differently, exhales slow your heart Put differently, exhales slow your heart Put differently, exhales slow your heart rate down, and they do so by way of rate down, and they do so by way of rate down, and they do so by way of vagal control over the sinoatrial node. vagal control over the sinoatrial node. vagal control over the sinoatrial node. This is the deceleration pathway over This is the deceleration pathway over This is the deceleration pathway over heart rate. So, as I mentioned, this is heart rate. So, as I mentioned, this is heart rate. So, as I mentioned, this is happening all the time during sleep. You happening all the time during sleep. You happening all the time during sleep. You don't have to be consciously aware for don't have to be consciously aware for don't have to be consciously aware for this to happen. It's a fortunate this to happen. It's a fortunate this to happen. It's a fortunate consequence of nature that the neurons consequence of nature that the neurons consequence of nature that the neurons within your brainstem that control within your brainstem that control within your brainstem that control breathing and the neurons within your breathing and the neurons within your breathing and the neurons within your brainstem that control heart rate and brainstem that control heart rate and brainstem that control heart rate and the other neurons within the heart the other neurons within the heart the other neurons within the heart itself that control heart rate, the itself that control heart rate, the itself that control heart rate, the pacemaker cells, all can function pacemaker cells, all can function pacemaker cells, all can function without you having to think about it. without you having to think about it. without you having to think about it. That's a wonderful thing for obvious That's a wonderful thing for obvious That's a wonderful thing for obvious reasons. It's also the case that because reasons. It's also the case that because reasons. It's also the case that because we have this input from the left we have this input from the left we have this input from the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex down dorsolateral prefrontal cortex down dorsolateral prefrontal cortex down through a couple of other structures through a couple of other structures through a couple of other structures like the cingulate and the insula, and like the cingulate and the insula, and like the cingulate and the insula, and that converge on nucleus ambiguous, if that converge on nucleus ambiguous, if that converge on nucleus ambiguous, if you decide to slow your heart rate down, you decide to slow your heart rate down, you decide to slow your heart rate down, you can do it. And you do so by doing a you can do it. And you do so by doing a you can do it. And you do so by doing a deliberate exhale and or by increasing deliberate exhale and or by increasing deliberate exhale and or by increasing the intensity or the duration of your the intensity or the duration of your the intensity or the duration of your exhale. So, you can do that right now. exhale. So, you can do that right now. exhale. So, you can do that right now. If you want to slow your heart rate If you want to slow your heart rate If you want to slow your heart rate down, that is if you want to increase down, that is if you want to increase down, that is if you want to increase parasympathetic nervous system activity parasympathetic nervous system activity parasympathetic nervous system activity and you want to calm down fast, you can and you want to calm down fast, you can and you want to calm down fast, you can literally just Exhales slow your heart rate down, and Exhales slow your heart rate down, and Exhales slow your heart rate down, and exhales tilt that seesaw that is the exhales tilt that seesaw that is the exhales tilt that seesaw that is the autonomic nervous system more toward the autonomic nervous system more toward the autonomic nervous system more toward the parasympathetic side. parasympathetic side. parasympathetic side. Now, I've talked before on this podcast Now, I've talked before on this podcast Now, I've talked before on this podcast and all over social media about the and all over social media about the and all over social media about the so-called physiological sigh, a so-called physiological sigh, a so-called physiological sigh, a naturally occurring form of breathing naturally occurring form of breathing naturally occurring form of breathing that occurs in sleep and that we can that occurs in sleep and that we can that occurs in sleep and that we can deliberately do anytime we want to calm deliberately do anytime we want to calm deliberately do anytime we want to calm down fast. And the physiological side down fast. And the physiological side down fast. And the physiological side consists of, as many of you know, two consists of, as many of you know, two consists of, as many of you know, two inhales through the nose followed by a inhales through the nose followed by a inhales through the nose followed by a long to lungs empty exhale through the long to lungs empty exhale through the long to lungs empty exhale through the mouth. Typically, the first inhale is mouth. Typically, the first inhale is mouth. Typically, the first inhale is longer. Again, it's done through the longer. Again, it's done through the longer. Again, it's done through the nose. The second inhale is shorter, kind nose. The second inhale is shorter, kind nose. The second inhale is shorter, kind of a sharp inhale to make sure you of a sharp inhale to make sure you of a sharp inhale to make sure you maximally inflate all the little sacs maximally inflate all the little sacs maximally inflate all the little sacs within your lungs. And then the exhale within your lungs. And then the exhale within your lungs. And then the exhale is a long, slow exhale is a long, slow exhale is a long, slow exhale that dumps all your air. that dumps all your air. that dumps all your air. I'll just demonstrate the physiological I'll just demonstrate the physiological I'll just demonstrate the physiological sigh for you for those of you that sigh for you for those of you that sigh for you for those of you that haven't seen it. haven't seen it. haven't seen it. You again You again You again big inhale through the nose, second big inhale through the nose, second big inhale through the nose, second sharp inhale through the nose to make sharp inhale through the nose to make sharp inhale through the nose to make sure you maximally inflate the lungs, sure you maximally inflate the lungs, sure you maximally inflate the lungs, and then long exhale to lungs empty. It and then long exhale to lungs empty. It and then long exhale to lungs empty. It goes like this. Okay, lungs are empty. Okay, lungs are empty. Okay, lungs are empty. That is indeed the fastest way to That is indeed the fastest way to That is indeed the fastest way to activate the parasympathetic nervous activate the parasympathetic nervous activate the parasympathetic nervous system and to tilt that seesaw from system and to tilt that seesaw from system and to tilt that seesaw from levels of high sympathetic nervous levels of high sympathetic nervous levels of high sympathetic nervous system activation to lower levels of system activation to lower levels of system activation to lower levels of sympathetic nervous system activation. sympathetic nervous system activation. sympathetic nervous system activation. In fact, I immediately feel calmer. In fact, I immediately feel calmer. In fact, I immediately feel calmer. Maybe you can even hear it in my voice. Maybe you can even hear it in my voice. Maybe you can even hear it in my voice. So, when you do a physiological effect, So, when you do a physiological effect, So, when you do a physiological effect, you're getting both a chemical signal you're getting both a chemical signal you're getting both a chemical signal into the brain, that is the adjustment into the brain, that is the adjustment into the brain, that is the adjustment of that carbon dioxide oxygen ratio. of that carbon dioxide oxygen ratio. of that carbon dioxide oxygen ratio. It's mainly due to the offloading of It's mainly due to the offloading of It's mainly due to the offloading of carbon dioxide. carbon dioxide. carbon dioxide. That lower level of carbon dioxide is That lower level of carbon dioxide is That lower level of carbon dioxide is registered by the brain very quickly and registered by the brain very quickly and registered by the brain very quickly and leads to an increase in calm. The leads to an increase in calm. The leads to an increase in calm. The deceleration of heart rate, driven by deceleration of heart rate, driven by deceleration of heart rate, driven by the exhale, is also registered by the exhale, is also registered by the exhale, is also registered by the brain very quickly, leads to an increase brain very quickly, leads to an increase brain very quickly, leads to an increase in calm. When you just emphasize an in calm. When you just emphasize an in calm. When you just emphasize an exhale, meaning you extend it or you exhale, meaning you extend it or you exhale, meaning you extend it or you make it more intense, and you don't do make it more intense, and you don't do make it more intense, and you don't do the two inhales first, that is you don't the two inhales first, that is you don't the two inhales first, that is you don't do the physiological sigh, well, you get do the physiological sigh, well, you get do the physiological sigh, well, you get the mechanical signal, but you don't get the mechanical signal, but you don't get the mechanical signal, but you don't get the chemical signal, at least not to the chemical signal, at least not to the chemical signal, at least not to the same degree you do with the same degree you do with the same degree you do with the physiological sigh. Put simply, if you physiological sigh. Put simply, if you physiological sigh. Put simply, if you want to calm down fast, ideally, you do want to calm down fast, ideally, you do want to calm down fast, ideally, you do the physiological sigh. However, it the physiological sigh. However, it the physiological sigh. However, it turns out that one of the best ways to turns out that one of the best ways to turns out that one of the best ways to improve your HRV, both in sleep and in improve your HRV, both in sleep and in improve your HRV, both in sleep and in wakeful states, which takes a very wakeful states, which takes a very wakeful states, which takes a very minimum of effort and is rarely if ever minimum of effort and is rarely if ever minimum of effort and is rarely if ever discussed, is simply throughout the day, discussed, is simply throughout the day, discussed, is simply throughout the day, I would say 10, 15, maybe even 20 times I would say 10, 15, maybe even 20 times I would say 10, 15, maybe even 20 times per day, anytime it occurs to you to per day, anytime it occurs to you to per day, anytime it occurs to you to just deliberately extend your exhale, just deliberately extend your exhale, just deliberately extend your exhale, that is to pump the brake on your heart that is to pump the brake on your heart that is to pump the brake on your heart rate through the vagus nerve pathway rate through the vagus nerve pathway rate through the vagus nerve pathway that I've been describing, just that I've been describing, just that I've been describing, just exhale. Slow your heart rate down just exhale. Slow your heart rate down just exhale. Slow your heart rate down and then get about your normal routine. and then get about your normal routine. and then get about your normal routine. You can do that essentially anytime you You can do that essentially anytime you You can do that essentially anytime you remember to. This is literally going to remember to. This is literally going to remember to. This is literally going to increase your HRV, you now know the increase your HRV, you now know the increase your HRV, you now know the mechanism by which it does that, and get mechanism by which it does that, and get mechanism by which it does that, and get this, it will also increase your HRV in this, it will also increase your HRV in this, it will also increase your HRV in sleep at night. And the reason is this sleep at night. And the reason is this sleep at night. And the reason is this pathway that originates with the left pathway that originates with the left pathway that originates with the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and goes dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and goes dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and goes down to nucleus ambiguus and then to the down to nucleus ambiguus and then to the down to nucleus ambiguus and then to the sinoatrial node of the heart, because sinoatrial node of the heart, because sinoatrial node of the heart, because it's under conscious control, it's under conscious control, it's under conscious control, and because it's subject to what we call and because it's subject to what we call and because it's subject to what we call plasticity, to strengthening and to plasticity, to strengthening and to plasticity, to strengthening and to weakening, that is if you use it weakening, that is if you use it weakening, that is if you use it deliberately, it gets strengthened. If deliberately, it gets strengthened. If deliberately, it gets strengthened. If you don't use it deliberately, it gets you don't use it deliberately, it gets you don't use it deliberately, it gets weakened. Well, that's a great thing because it Well, that's a great thing because it Well, that's a great thing because it means that if you just simply remember means that if you just simply remember means that if you just simply remember to do some extended exhales throughout to do some extended exhales throughout to do some extended exhales throughout the day, the day, the day, you're going to strengthen this pathway you're going to strengthen this pathway you're going to strengthen this pathway such that it operates in the background such that it operates in the background such that it operates in the background through auto regulation without you ever through auto regulation without you ever through auto regulation without you ever having to think about it. Now, of course having to think about it. Now, of course having to think about it. Now, of course that effect wears off over time if you that effect wears off over time if you that effect wears off over time if you don't occasionally remember to just do don't occasionally remember to just do don't occasionally remember to just do some longer exhales, but this is a some longer exhales, but this is a some longer exhales, but this is a wonderful protocol in my opinion because wonderful protocol in my opinion because wonderful protocol in my opinion because it capitalizes on a inborn circuit, it capitalizes on a inborn circuit, it capitalizes on a inborn circuit, right? A circuit that you were born with right? A circuit that you were born with right? A circuit that you were born with that is already installed, that you can that is already installed, that you can that is already installed, that you can use at any point, it doesn't take any use at any point, it doesn't take any use at any point, it doesn't take any learning, but that if you just ping learning, but that if you just ping learning, but that if you just ping every once in a while with some extended every once in a while with some extended every once in a while with some extended exhales throughout the day, it takes exhales throughout the day, it takes exhales throughout the day, it takes essentially no time, you get the benefit essentially no time, you get the benefit essentially no time, you get the benefit of feeling a little bit calmer, slowing of feeling a little bit calmer, slowing of feeling a little bit calmer, slowing your heart rate down, and your HRV, your heart rate down, and your HRV, your heart rate down, and your HRV, which is correlated with a host of which is correlated with a host of which is correlated with a host of positive health outcomes in the short positive health outcomes in the short positive health outcomes in the short and long term, will increase. Two and long term, will increase. Two and long term, will increase. Two interesting things everyone should be interesting things everyone should be interesting things everyone should be aware of is that as we age, of course a aware of is that as we age, of course a aware of is that as we age, of course a number of things happen, memory gets number of things happen, memory gets number of things happen, memory gets slightly to much poorer. All right, slightly to much poorer. All right, slightly to much poorer. All right, there are ways to offset that. there are ways to offset that. there are ways to offset that. Heart rate variability gets much worse. Heart rate variability gets much worse. Heart rate variability gets much worse. Now, an interesting finding from Nolan Now, an interesting finding from Nolan Now, an interesting finding from Nolan Williams lab at Stanford is that if you Williams lab at Stanford is that if you Williams lab at Stanford is that if you activate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex using what's called transcranial using what's called transcranial using what's called transcranial magnetic stimulation. This is a magnetic stimulation. This is a magnetic stimulation. This is a procedure where you take a stimulator procedure where you take a stimulator procedure where you take a stimulator and you non-invasively place it on the and you non-invasively place it on the and you non-invasively place it on the skull outside and just above skull outside and just above skull outside and just above dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and you dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and you dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and you stimulate through the skull dorsolateral stimulate through the skull dorsolateral stimulate through the skull dorsolateral prefrontal cortex prefrontal cortex prefrontal cortex you observe as you would expect a you observe as you would expect a you observe as you would expect a deceleration of heart rate and it's deceleration of heart rate and it's deceleration of heart rate and it's known to be carried through this vagal known to be carried through this vagal known to be carried through this vagal pathway to the sinoatrial node. pathway to the sinoatrial node. pathway to the sinoatrial node. Even after the stimulation is removed Even after the stimulation is removed Even after the stimulation is removed you find that heart rate variability you find that heart rate variability you find that heart rate variability increases because this pathway has been increases because this pathway has been increases because this pathway has been stimulated into neuroplasticity. It's stimulated into neuroplasticity. It's stimulated into neuroplasticity. It's strengthened. The other way to strengthened. The other way to strengthened. The other way to strengthen this pathway is to do exactly strengthen this pathway is to do exactly strengthen this pathway is to do exactly what I just described, to deliberately what I just described, to deliberately what I just described, to deliberately engage this long exhale mechanism engage this long exhale mechanism engage this long exhale mechanism various times throughout the day. Now, various times throughout the day. Now, various times throughout the day. Now, if you miss a day, is the pathway going if you miss a day, is the pathway going if you miss a day, is the pathway going to atrophy? No. If you do it 50 times a to atrophy? No. If you do it 50 times a to atrophy? No. If you do it 50 times a day, is it going to strengthen more than day, is it going to strengthen more than day, is it going to strengthen more than if you do it one time per day? Yes. Do if you do it one time per day? Yes. Do if you do it one time per day? Yes. Do we know the exact thresholds of how many we know the exact thresholds of how many we know the exact thresholds of how many times per day you should be doing these times per day you should be doing these times per day you should be doing these deliberate exhales in order to keep this deliberate exhales in order to keep this deliberate exhales in order to keep this pathway robust? No, unfortunately, we do pathway robust? No, unfortunately, we do pathway robust? No, unfortunately, we do not. However, we do know that in human not. However, we do know that in human not. However, we do know that in human patients that suffer atrophy of the patients that suffer atrophy of the patients that suffer atrophy of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that's dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that's dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that's associated with normal aging or with associated with normal aging or with associated with normal aging or with accelerated atrophy of dorsolateral accelerated atrophy of dorsolateral accelerated atrophy of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex or lesions of prefrontal cortex or lesions of prefrontal cortex or lesions of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that tend dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that tend dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that tend to occur in older people who get strokes to occur in older people who get strokes to occur in older people who get strokes or just associated with the normal aging or just associated with the normal aging or just associated with the normal aging process, heart rate variability declines process, heart rate variability declines process, heart rate variability declines with age. And it is now thought that with age. And it is now thought that with age. And it is now thought that heart rate variability declines with heart rate variability declines with heart rate variability declines with age, of course, in part through lower age, of course, in part through lower age, of course, in part through lower levels of physical activity because levels of physical activity because levels of physical activity because there are, of course, certain forms of there are, of course, certain forms of there are, of course, certain forms of physical activity like high-intensity physical activity like high-intensity physical activity like high-intensity interval training to keep that heart interval training to keep that heart interval training to keep that heart rate variability elevated over time rate variability elevated over time rate variability elevated over time using exercise, but it's also true that using exercise, but it's also true that using exercise, but it's also true that if this pathway degenerates, you see a if this pathway degenerates, you see a if this pathway degenerates, you see a decrease in heart rate variability. If decrease in heart rate variability. If decrease in heart rate variability. If you keep this pathway engaged by you keep this pathway engaged by you keep this pathway engaged by behaviorally, deliberately doing these behaviorally, deliberately doing these behaviorally, deliberately doing these long exhales, or if you take the more long exhales, or if you take the more long exhales, or if you take the more robust approach of transcranial magnetic robust approach of transcranial magnetic robust approach of transcranial magnetic stimulation, something that most people stimulation, something that most people stimulation, something that most people unfortunately won't have the opportunity unfortunately won't have the opportunity unfortunately won't have the opportunity to do, although maybe in the future to do, although maybe in the future to do, although maybe in the future there will be commercial devices that there will be commercial devices that there will be commercial devices that will allow us to do this, will allow us to do this, will allow us to do this, you can keep heart rate variability you can keep heart rate variability you can keep heart rate variability higher as you age, which as I mentioned higher as you age, which as I mentioned higher as you age, which as I mentioned before is correlated with a number of before is correlated with a number of before is correlated with a number of different positive health outcomes. So, different positive health outcomes. So, different positive health outcomes. So, these pathways by which we can happen to these pathways by which we can happen to these pathways by which we can happen to deliberate activation of this vagal deliberate activation of this vagal deliberate activation of this vagal control over the sinoatrial node are not control over the sinoatrial node are not control over the sinoatrial node are not just incidental. They turn out to be just incidental. They turn out to be just incidental. They turn out to be central to the aging process. They turn central to the aging process. They turn central to the aging process. They turn out to be central to countering the out to be central to countering the out to be central to countering the aging process, and you now know you have aging process, and you now know you have aging process, and you now know you have some agency and control over them. some agency and control over them. some agency and control over them. So, earlier I was talking about how So, earlier I was talking about how So, earlier I was talking about how despite the fact the vagus nerve is despite the fact the vagus nerve is despite the fact the vagus nerve is classified as a parasympathetic nerve, classified as a parasympathetic nerve, classified as a parasympathetic nerve, that it also can be alerting. It can that it also can be alerting. It can that it also can be alerting. It can increase levels of sympathetic nervous increase levels of sympathetic nervous increase levels of sympathetic nervous system activity. system activity. system activity. And that runs counter to the concept of And that runs counter to the concept of And that runs counter to the concept of parasympathetic, which is always labeled parasympathetic, which is always labeled parasympathetic, which is always labeled as rest and digest. as rest and digest. as rest and digest. I'm now going to tell you a tool that I'm now going to tell you a tool that I'm now going to tell you a tool that you can use when you're feeling less you can use when you're feeling less you can use when you're feeling less than energized, less than motivated, and than energized, less than motivated, and than energized, less than motivated, and when you need to exercise and you don't when you need to exercise and you don't when you need to exercise and you don't feel like doing it. And when you want to feel like doing it. And when you want to feel like doing it. And when you want to leverage exercise as a way to improve leverage exercise as a way to improve leverage exercise as a way to improve brain function and plasticity. brain function and plasticity. brain function and plasticity. It all involves the vagus nerve, and it It all involves the vagus nerve, and it It all involves the vagus nerve, and it involves an aspect of the vagus nerve involves an aspect of the vagus nerve involves an aspect of the vagus nerve that very few people are aware of, but that very few people are aware of, but that very few people are aware of, but in my opinion is one of the coolest in my opinion is one of the coolest in my opinion is one of the coolest aspects of the vagus nerve. It's at aspects of the vagus nerve. It's at aspects of the vagus nerve. It's at least as cool as vagal control over least as cool as vagal control over least as cool as vagal control over heart rate variability and auto heart rate variability and auto heart rate variability and auto regulation. And it goes like this. regulation. And it goes like this. regulation. And it goes like this. There's a beautiful set of findings from There's a beautiful set of findings from There's a beautiful set of findings from a guy named Peter Strick at the a guy named Peter Strick at the a guy named Peter Strick at the University of Pittsburgh, who used these University of Pittsburgh, who used these University of Pittsburgh, who used these really cool methods for tracing really cool methods for tracing really cool methods for tracing connections between the brain and body connections between the brain and body connections between the brain and body to ask the question, what areas of the to ask the question, what areas of the to ask the question, what areas of the brain are communicating with our adrenal brain are communicating with our adrenal brain are communicating with our adrenal glands? Our adrenal glands are two glands? Our adrenal glands are two glands? Our adrenal glands are two glands that sit atop your two different glands that sit atop your two different glands that sit atop your two different kidneys, so one atop each kidney, kidneys, so one atop each kidney, kidneys, so one atop each kidney, and release, as the name suggests, and release, as the name suggests, and release, as the name suggests, adrenaline. Adrenaline is also called adrenaline. Adrenaline is also called adrenaline. Adrenaline is also called epinephrine. Your adrenal glands also epinephrine. Your adrenal glands also epinephrine. Your adrenal glands also release cortisol, release cortisol, release cortisol, but for sake of this discussion, let's but for sake of this discussion, let's but for sake of this discussion, let's just think about adrenaline released just think about adrenaline released just think about adrenaline released from your adrenals. from your adrenals. from your adrenals. What he found, through a bunch of What he found, through a bunch of What he found, through a bunch of experiments done in non-human primates, experiments done in non-human primates, experiments done in non-human primates, and that seemed to correspond very well and that seemed to correspond very well and that seemed to correspond very well to what we observe in humans as well, is to what we observe in humans as well, is to what we observe in humans as well, is that there are three general groups of that there are three general groups of that there are three general groups of brain areas. brain areas. brain areas. Motor activation areas, so what we call Motor activation areas, so what we call Motor activation areas, so what we call upper motor neurons. So, these are the upper motor neurons. So, these are the upper motor neurons. So, these are the neurons in the brain that control the neurons in the brain that control the neurons in the brain that control the lower motor neurons in the spinal cord lower motor neurons in the spinal cord lower motor neurons in the spinal cord that control the muscles of the body, that control the muscles of the body, that control the muscles of the body, as well as neurons within our brain that as well as neurons within our brain that as well as neurons within our brain that are involved in cognition and planning, are involved in cognition and planning, are involved in cognition and planning, and areas of the brain that are involved and areas of the brain that are involved and areas of the brain that are involved in emotion, in emotion, in emotion, that can communicate with the adrenals that can communicate with the adrenals that can communicate with the adrenals and cause them to release adrenaline. and cause them to release adrenaline. and cause them to release adrenaline. Now, that's great, but it sort of points Now, that's great, but it sort of points Now, that's great, but it sort of points to a pathway whereby, okay, to a pathway whereby, okay, to a pathway whereby, okay, you know you should exercise, you tell you know you should exercise, you tell you know you should exercise, you tell yourself you should exercise, you're yourself you should exercise, you're yourself you should exercise, you're emotional about it, and your adrenals emotional about it, and your adrenals emotional about it, and your adrenals release adrenaline, and you exercise. release adrenaline, and you exercise. release adrenaline, and you exercise. Now, that's interesting, but what's Now, that's interesting, but what's Now, that's interesting, but what's perhaps far more interesting perhaps far more interesting perhaps far more interesting is that the data from Strick Lab and is that the data from Strick Lab and is that the data from Strick Lab and other labs as well other labs as well other labs as well shows that when we move the large shows that when we move the large shows that when we move the large muscles of our body, muscles of our body, muscles of our body, the adrenals release adrenaline, the adrenals release adrenaline, the adrenals release adrenaline, epinephrine. Now, epinephrine has an activating Now, epinephrine has an activating Now, epinephrine has an activating sympathetic nervous system stimulatory sympathetic nervous system stimulatory sympathetic nervous system stimulatory effect, right? It tends to make the effect, right? It tends to make the effect, right? It tends to make the tissues of the body that are associated tissues of the body that are associated tissues of the body that are associated with movement and with so-called fight with movement and with so-called fight with movement and with so-called fight or flight, although again, fight or flight, although again, fight or flight, although again, fight or flight is kind of an extreme example. flight is kind of an extreme example. flight is kind of an extreme example. It tends to activate the organs of the It tends to activate the organs of the It tends to activate the organs of the body and make them more likely to be body and make them more likely to be body and make them more likely to be active. It increases the probability active. It increases the probability active. It increases the probability that movement will occur. that movement will occur. that movement will occur. Overall body movement. So, when we move Overall body movement. So, when we move Overall body movement. So, when we move the large muscles of our body, our legs, the large muscles of our body, our legs, the large muscles of our body, our legs, and in particular our trunk muscles, we and in particular our trunk muscles, we and in particular our trunk muscles, we release adrenaline. release adrenaline. release adrenaline. That adrenaline activates the organs of That adrenaline activates the organs of That adrenaline activates the organs of our body, and further makes it likely our body, and further makes it likely our body, and further makes it likely that we're going to move our musculature that we're going to move our musculature that we're going to move our musculature more. But get this, adrenaline epinephrine But get this, adrenaline epinephrine But get this, adrenaline epinephrine doesn't cross the blood-brain barrier. doesn't cross the blood-brain barrier. doesn't cross the blood-brain barrier. So how does it increase our level of So how does it increase our level of So how does it increase our level of alertness in our brain? Right, you don't alertness in our brain? Right, you don't alertness in our brain? Right, you don't want your body to be super active and want your body to be super active and want your body to be super active and your brain to be kind of sleepy. That's your brain to be kind of sleepy. That's your brain to be kind of sleepy. That's not good. That's not adaptive. not good. That's not adaptive. not good. That's not adaptive. Turns out that when the adrenals release Turns out that when the adrenals release Turns out that when the adrenals release adrenaline, it binds to receptors on the adrenaline, it binds to receptors on the adrenaline, it binds to receptors on the vagus nerve itself, those sensory axons vagus nerve itself, those sensory axons vagus nerve itself, those sensory axons that extend into the body. There are that extend into the body. There are that extend into the body. There are receptors on those wires, right? Not all receptors on those wires, right? Not all receptors on those wires, right? Not all the receptors are at one end or the receptors are at one end or the receptors are at one end or the other, they're also on those axons. other, they're also on those axons. other, they're also on those axons. The adrenaline binds to the receptors on The adrenaline binds to the receptors on The adrenaline binds to the receptors on those axons and the vagus nerve in turn those axons and the vagus nerve in turn those axons and the vagus nerve in turn releases glutamate, an excitatory releases glutamate, an excitatory releases glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, in a structure in the neurotransmitter, in a structure in the neurotransmitter, in a structure in the brain called the nucleus tractus brain called the nucleus tractus brain called the nucleus tractus solitarius. The neurons in what I'm just solitarius. The neurons in what I'm just solitarius. The neurons in what I'm just going to call the NTS for simplicity, going to call the NTS for simplicity, going to call the NTS for simplicity, in turn, activate neurons in a brain in turn, activate neurons in a brain in turn, activate neurons in a brain structure called the locus coeruleus. structure called the locus coeruleus. structure called the locus coeruleus. The locus coeruleus contains neurons The locus coeruleus contains neurons The locus coeruleus contains neurons that release what's called that release what's called that release what's called norepinephrine. And the neurons of locus coeruleus send And the neurons of locus coeruleus send And the neurons of locus coeruleus send their axons out very extensively across their axons out very extensively across their axons out very extensively across the brain in kind of a sprinkler the brain in kind of a sprinkler the brain in kind of a sprinkler system-like organization such that system-like organization such that system-like organization such that when you move the large musculature of when you move the large musculature of when you move the large musculature of your body, you release adrenaline. That your body, you release adrenaline. That your body, you release adrenaline. That adrenaline activates the tissues of your adrenaline activates the tissues of your adrenaline activates the tissues of your body, makes them more likely to move, body, makes them more likely to move, body, makes them more likely to move, also binds to receptors on the vagus. also binds to receptors on the vagus. also binds to receptors on the vagus. The vagus nerve in turn releases The vagus nerve in turn releases The vagus nerve in turn releases glutamate, an excitatory glutamate, an excitatory glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, in the NTS. The NTS neurotransmitter, in the NTS. The NTS neurotransmitter, in the NTS. The NTS then passes off that excitatory signal, then passes off that excitatory signal, then passes off that excitatory signal, like a bucket brigade, off to the locus like a bucket brigade, off to the locus like a bucket brigade, off to the locus coeruleus. The locus coeruleus dumps a coeruleus. The locus coeruleus dumps a coeruleus. The locus coeruleus dumps a bunch of norepinephrine into the brain bunch of norepinephrine into the brain bunch of norepinephrine into the brain and increases your levels of alertness. and increases your levels of alertness. and increases your levels of alertness. What this means is that the vagus nerve What this means is that the vagus nerve What this means is that the vagus nerve is central to the process of using is central to the process of using is central to the process of using physical activity to make your brain physical activity to make your brain physical activity to make your brain more alert. And we know that activation more alert. And we know that activation more alert. And we know that activation of locus coeruleus makes the brain areas of locus coeruleus makes the brain areas of locus coeruleus makes the brain areas that are involved in motivation and the that are involved in motivation and the that are involved in motivation and the propensity to move more propensity to move more propensity to move more higher in levels of activity. In other higher in levels of activity. In other higher in levels of activity. In other words, if you're not feeling motivated words, if you're not feeling motivated words, if you're not feeling motivated to exercise or you're not feeling alert to exercise or you're not feeling alert to exercise or you're not feeling alert enough. Movement of the body that includes Movement of the body that includes Movement of the body that includes especially the legs, the large muscles especially the legs, the large muscles especially the legs, the large muscles of the legs, so quadriceps, hamstrings, of the legs, so quadriceps, hamstrings, of the legs, so quadriceps, hamstrings, etc., as well as the trunk muscles of etc., as well as the trunk muscles of etc., as well as the trunk muscles of the body, the body, the body, stimulate this pathway in a kind of stimulate this pathway in a kind of stimulate this pathway in a kind of dominoing effect that makes the dominoing effect that makes the dominoing effect that makes the likelihood, and believe it or not, the likelihood, and believe it or not, the likelihood, and believe it or not, the desire to move desire to move desire to move much more likely. much more likely. much more likely. This I've personally found to be an This I've personally found to be an This I've personally found to be an immensely useful piece of information immensely useful piece of information immensely useful piece of information because sure, I knew that sometimes I because sure, I knew that sometimes I because sure, I knew that sometimes I would go to the gym or I'd head out on a would go to the gym or I'd head out on a would go to the gym or I'd head out on a run and I wasn't feeling motivated, run and I wasn't feeling motivated, run and I wasn't feeling motivated, or I'd sit down to do some work and I'd or I'd sit down to do some work and I'd or I'd sit down to do some work and I'd feel kind of sleepy despite the fact I'd feel kind of sleepy despite the fact I'd feel kind of sleepy despite the fact I'd slept pretty well the night before and slept pretty well the night before and slept pretty well the night before and eaten just fine and the room wasn't too eaten just fine and the room wasn't too eaten just fine and the room wasn't too warm, etc. warm, etc. warm, etc. I'd feel kind of lethargic and I was I'd feel kind of lethargic and I was I'd feel kind of lethargic and I was like, "What's going on here?" like, "What's going on here?" like, "What's going on here?" And yes, I had the experience of sometimes, yes, I had the experience of sometimes, yes, I had the experience of sometimes, you know, doing a bit of a warm-up, you know, doing a bit of a warm-up, you know, doing a bit of a warm-up, maybe some light calisthenics, maybe a maybe some light calisthenics, maybe a maybe some light calisthenics, maybe a few warm-up sets or jogging for a little few warm-up sets or jogging for a little few warm-up sets or jogging for a little while and then finding that my levels of while and then finding that my levels of while and then finding that my levels of alertness increased. But I've also had alertness increased. But I've also had alertness increased. But I've also had just as often the experience of just as often the experience of just as often the experience of not feeling that motivation for physical not feeling that motivation for physical not feeling that motivation for physical activity or for cognitive activity come activity or for cognitive activity come activity or for cognitive activity come online, especially if I wasn't extremely online, especially if I wasn't extremely online, especially if I wasn't extremely interested in that activity or that interested in that activity or that interested in that activity or that thing that I was supposed to learn. You thing that I was supposed to learn. You thing that I was supposed to learn. You know, it's very easy to be excited when know, it's very easy to be excited when know, it's very easy to be excited when we want to do the activity or we want to we want to do the activity or we want to we want to do the activity or we want to learn the thing that we're supposed to learn the thing that we're supposed to learn the thing that we're supposed to be learning at a given moment or reading be learning at a given moment or reading be learning at a given moment or reading at a given moment. This pathway is at a given moment. This pathway is at a given moment. This pathway is immensely useful to understand because immensely useful to understand because immensely useful to understand because it explains why it is that even when it explains why it is that even when it explains why it is that even when you're not feeling motivated, if you do you're not feeling motivated, if you do you're not feeling motivated, if you do some activity that yes, is preceded by a some activity that yes, is preceded by a some activity that yes, is preceded by a bit of a warm-up, so maybe I don't know, bit of a warm-up, so maybe I don't know, bit of a warm-up, so maybe I don't know, you do some light calisthenics or you go you do some light calisthenics or you go you do some light calisthenics or you go on the treadmill for a few minutes on the treadmill for a few minutes on the treadmill for a few minutes walking and then maybe a little bit walking and then maybe a little bit walking and then maybe a little bit faster, that it can increase your levels faster, that it can increase your levels faster, that it can increase your levels of alertness and motivation, but of alertness and motivation, but of alertness and motivation, but it especially explains how if you put in it especially explains how if you put in it especially explains how if you put in some effort that at the moment feels some effort that at the moment feels some effort that at the moment feels like a big exertion, like a big exertion, like a big exertion, your entire body and brain state shifts your entire body and brain state shifts your entire body and brain state shifts in a way that levels of motivation and in a way that levels of motivation and in a way that levels of motivation and energy to do more physical work or more energy to do more physical work or more energy to do more physical work or more cognitive work or both increases cognitive work or both increases cognitive work or both increases dramatically. And these are not small dramatically. And these are not small dramatically. And these are not small effects when they've been measured. In effects when they've been measured. In effects when they've been measured. In fact, for all the talk that's out there in for all the talk that's out there in for all the talk that's out there in kind of pop psychology kind of pop psychology kind of pop psychology and in kind of pop neuroscience about and in kind of pop neuroscience about and in kind of pop neuroscience about the vagus being a calming pathway, the vagus being a calming pathway, the vagus being a calming pathway, all the neurophysiologists out there, all the neurophysiologists out there, all the neurophysiologists out there, and I know there aren't very many, but and I know there aren't very many, but and I know there aren't very many, but I'm friends with a lot of I'm friends with a lot of I'm friends with a lot of neurophysiologists, they'll all tell you that if they're they'll all tell you that if they're they'll all tell you that if they're doing a surgery or they're doing some doing a surgery or they're doing some doing a surgery or they're doing some sort of brain recording sort of brain recording sort of brain recording and the animal or person that they're and the animal or person that they're and the animal or person that they're doing the brain recording from is doing the brain recording from is doing the brain recording from is starting to drop into a state of kind of starting to drop into a state of kind of starting to drop into a state of kind of deep parasympathetic activity, they're deep parasympathetic activity, they're deep parasympathetic activity, they're falling asleep or they need to be more falling asleep or they need to be more falling asleep or they need to be more alert, what do they do? They stimulate alert, what do they do? They stimulate alert, what do they do? They stimulate the vagus. They stimulate the vagus the vagus. They stimulate the vagus the vagus. They stimulate the vagus nerve in order to wake up the brain. In nerve in order to wake up the brain. In nerve in order to wake up the brain. In fact, stimulating the vagus has been fact, stimulating the vagus has been fact, stimulating the vagus has been used to save people's lives when they're used to save people's lives when they're used to save people's lives when they're drifting too far down into deeper and drifting too far down into deeper and drifting too far down into deeper and deeper planes of anesthesia. So, deeper planes of anesthesia. So, deeper planes of anesthesia. So, stimulating the vagus wakes up the stimulating the vagus wakes up the stimulating the vagus wakes up the brain. And the way to stimulate the brain. And the way to stimulate the brain. And the way to stimulate the vagus is by way of these receptors on vagus is by way of these receptors on vagus is by way of these receptors on the vagus nerve itself. And the way to the vagus nerve itself. And the way to the vagus nerve itself. And the way to do that without an electrical do that without an electrical do that without an electrical stimulator, right? Cuz we're not talking stimulator, right? Cuz we're not talking stimulator, right? Cuz we're not talking about clinical conditions here, in order about clinical conditions here, in order about clinical conditions here, in order to increase levels of motivation, to increase levels of motivation, to increase levels of motivation, alertness, and focus for physical alertness, and focus for physical alertness, and focus for physical activity or cognitive activity and activity or cognitive activity and activity or cognitive activity and learning, etc., or simply to overcome learning, etc., or simply to overcome learning, etc., or simply to overcome lethargy and brain fog, is to do some lethargy and brain fog, is to do some lethargy and brain fog, is to do some sort of physical activity that includes sort of physical activity that includes sort of physical activity that includes the large musculature of your body. the large musculature of your body. the large musculature of your body. These could be things like jumping, These could be things like jumping, These could be things like jumping, these could be things like actual these could be things like actual these could be things like actual resistance training, this could be resistance training, this could be resistance training, this could be running. This information really points to the This information really points to the This information really points to the idea of course, after a good warm-up, idea of course, after a good warm-up, idea of course, after a good warm-up, doing more sprinting type activity, more doing more sprinting type activity, more doing more sprinting type activity, more strength type activity, you know, six strength type activity, you know, six strength type activity, you know, six repetitions or less where you're getting repetitions or less where you're getting repetitions or less where you're getting close to failure, this sort of thing, to close to failure, this sort of thing, to close to failure, this sort of thing, to wake up the brain and body as opposed to wake up the brain and body as opposed to wake up the brain and body as opposed to doing long rhythmic activity that's doing long rhythmic activity that's doing long rhythmic activity that's below the threshold of what would below the threshold of what would below the threshold of what would activate a lot of adrenaline from the activate a lot of adrenaline from the activate a lot of adrenaline from the adrenals. So, the idea is to get those adrenals. So, the idea is to get those adrenals. So, the idea is to get those adrenals to release adrenaline into your adrenals to release adrenaline into your adrenals to release adrenaline into your system. It won't cross the blood-brain system. It won't cross the blood-brain system. It won't cross the blood-brain barrier, but your vagus nerve provides barrier, but your vagus nerve provides barrier, but your vagus nerve provides this beautiful link between the body and this beautiful link between the body and this beautiful link between the body and brain to match levels of excitation from brain to match levels of excitation from brain to match levels of excitation from the body to the brain, and you can the body to the brain, and you can the body to the brain, and you can leverage that. In leverage that. In leverage that. In there's also the well-described effects, there's also the well-described effects, there's also the well-described effects, and I've done an entire episode about and I've done an entire episode about and I've done an entire episode about this, of how exercise can improve brain of how exercise can improve brain of how exercise can improve brain plasticity and the ability to learn. And plasticity and the ability to learn. And plasticity and the ability to learn. And while there are a host of mechanisms while there are a host of mechanisms while there are a host of mechanisms involving long-term changes in things involving long-term changes in things involving long-term changes in things like brain-derived neurotrophic factor like brain-derived neurotrophic factor like brain-derived neurotrophic factor and increases in lactate, which might and increases in lactate, which might and increases in lactate, which might open the door to plasticity, and so on open the door to plasticity, and so on open the door to plasticity, and so on and so forth, it does seem that one of and so forth, it does seem that one of and so forth, it does seem that one of the major ways that exercise improves the major ways that exercise improves the major ways that exercise improves our brain function and our ability to our brain function and our ability to our brain function and our ability to learn is simply by increasing our levels learn is simply by increasing our levels learn is simply by increasing our levels of alertness. And I should say the word of alertness. And I should say the word of alertness. And I should say the word simply placed in there is probably a bit simply placed in there is probably a bit simply placed in there is probably a bit unfair. There is absolutely nothing unfair. There is absolutely nothing unfair. There is absolutely nothing trivial about using exercise as a way to trivial about using exercise as a way to trivial about using exercise as a way to stimulate a sort of cascade of this stimulate a sort of cascade of this stimulate a sort of cascade of this neural circuit from the adrenals up the neural circuit from the adrenals up the neural circuit from the adrenals up the vagus and into locus coeruleus in order vagus and into locus coeruleus in order vagus and into locus coeruleus in order to wake up your brain networks that are to wake up your brain networks that are to wake up your brain networks that are involved in motivation, focus, and involved in motivation, focus, and involved in motivation, focus, and learning. As we'll talk about in a few minutes, As we'll talk about in a few minutes, As we'll talk about in a few minutes, many of us, most of us, perhaps, are many of us, most of us, perhaps, are many of us, most of us, perhaps, are used to using pharmacology like caffeine used to using pharmacology like caffeine used to using pharmacology like caffeine or other stimulants in order to try and or other stimulants in order to try and or other stimulants in order to try and wake up levels of alertness in the wake up levels of alertness in the wake up levels of alertness in the brain. And I'm not being disparaging of brain. And I'm not being disparaging of brain. And I'm not being disparaging of that. I am an avid consumer of caffeine that. I am an avid consumer of caffeine that. I am an avid consumer of caffeine in the form of yerba mate or coffee. in the form of yerba mate or coffee. in the form of yerba mate or coffee. I'll occasionally I'll occasionally I'll occasionally take an alpha GPC or an L-tyrosine as take an alpha GPC or an L-tyrosine as take an alpha GPC or an L-tyrosine as well. You know, I do all those things. well. You know, I do all those things. well. You know, I do all those things. However, in my opinion, it's far more However, in my opinion, it's far more However, in my opinion, it's far more powerful to be able to leverage, that powerful to be able to leverage, that powerful to be able to leverage, that is, to activate these levels of is, to activate these levels of is, to activate these levels of alertness in your brain and body in a alertness in your brain and body in a alertness in your brain and body in a way that doesn't require any way that doesn't require any way that doesn't require any pharmacology if you don't have it pharmacology if you don't have it pharmacology if you don't have it available to you or you're trying to available to you or you're trying to available to you or you're trying to avoid pharmacology or working out late avoid pharmacology or working out late avoid pharmacology or working out late at night or you want to focus later at night or you want to focus later at night or you want to focus later at night and you don't want to be kept awake by and you don't want to be kept awake by and you don't want to be kept awake by the caffeine, or even if you consume the caffeine, or even if you consume the caffeine, or even if you consume caffeine or other stimulants, knowing caffeine or other stimulants, knowing caffeine or other stimulants, knowing the organization of these neural the organization of these neural the organization of these neural circuits from the body to the brain and circuits from the body to the brain and circuits from the body to the brain and how they match levels of alertness and how they match levels of alertness and how they match levels of alertness and leveraging them is so straightforward, leveraging them is so straightforward, leveraging them is so straightforward, but most people don't actually get to but most people don't actually get to but most people don't actually get to the point where they're doing that the point where they're doing that the point where they're doing that high-intensity work or they're doing the high-intensity work or they're doing the high-intensity work or they're doing the work that involves the large musculature work that involves the large musculature work that involves the large musculature of their body when they're feeling not of their body when they're feeling not of their body when they're feeling not motivated. In fact, they usually do the motivated. In fact, they usually do the motivated. In fact, they usually do the opposite thing. Now, sometimes you need opposite thing. Now, sometimes you need opposite thing. Now, sometimes you need rest days. This is true, right? You need rest days. This is true, right? You need rest days. This is true, right? You need to rest and recover to make progress. to rest and recover to make progress. to rest and recover to make progress. You don't want to exhaust yourself. You don't want to exhaust yourself. You don't want to exhaust yourself. You need to get sleep. You need to take care need to get sleep. You need to take care need to get sleep. You need to take care of yourself. However, the reason we're of yourself. However, the reason we're of yourself. However, the reason we're talking about this is it's a beautiful talking about this is it's a beautiful talking about this is it's a beautiful opportunity to A, explain that the vagus opportunity to A, explain that the vagus opportunity to A, explain that the vagus nerve is not just about calming down. nerve is not just about calming down. nerve is not just about calming down. It's actually actively used to wake up It's actually actively used to wake up It's actually actively used to wake up your brain when your body is active. your brain when your body is active. your brain when your body is active. When the large musculature of your body When the large musculature of your body When the large musculature of your body is active. And B, that like with auto is active. And B, that like with auto is active. And B, that like with auto regulation this stuff is under conscious control. this stuff is under conscious control. this stuff is under conscious control. Yes, if you were to be frightened Yes, if you were to be frightened Yes, if you were to be frightened immediately, this is the same pathway immediately, this is the same pathway immediately, this is the same pathway that would be reflexively activated by that would be reflexively activated by that would be reflexively activated by an intruder or by, you know, a big an intruder or by, you know, a big an intruder or by, you know, a big explosion or something of that sort, explosion or something of that sort, explosion or something of that sort, your body would wake up, release your body would wake up, release your body would wake up, release adrenaline, then that adrenaline would adrenaline, then that adrenaline would adrenaline, then that adrenaline would set up along this cascade and your mind set up along this cascade and your mind set up along this cascade and your mind would be immediately alert as well. would be immediately alert as well. would be immediately alert as well. There's some parallel mechanisms too to There's some parallel mechanisms too to There's some parallel mechanisms too to make sure that your brain and your body make sure that your brain and your body make sure that your brain and your body are alert immediately. But when you are alert immediately. But when you are alert immediately. But when you start to understand what these pathways start to understand what these pathways start to understand what these pathways are and that they are very specific and are and that they are very specific and are and that they are very specific and very powerful potent inroads into very powerful potent inroads into very powerful potent inroads into activating these circuits, it does activating these circuits, it does activating these circuits, it does indeed give you a tremendous amount of indeed give you a tremendous amount of indeed give you a tremendous amount of agency. Especially for those of you that might Especially for those of you that might Especially for those of you that might think you're not motivated to exercise think you're not motivated to exercise think you're not motivated to exercise or you're always lethargic or you have or you're always lethargic or you have or you're always lethargic or you have brain fog. There might be other reasons brain fog. There might be other reasons brain fog. There might be other reasons for that, but for many people, chances for that, but for many people, chances for that, but for many people, chances are you're not getting past that are you're not getting past that are you're not getting past that threshold whereby these circuits threshold whereby these circuits threshold whereby these circuits involving the vagus can be activated. involving the vagus can be activated. involving the vagus can be activated. And now you know how. So activate them. And now you know how. So activate them. And now you know how. So activate them. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first test with example, in one of my first test with example, in one of my first test with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. I should say, by taking detoxification. I should say, by taking detoxification. I should say, by taking a second Function test, that approach a second Function test, that approach a second Function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is worked. Comprehensive blood testing is worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There are so many vitally important. There are so many vitally important. There are so many things related to your mental and things related to your mental and things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. I just to get early access to Function. I just to get early access to Function. I just got done telling you how you can got done telling you how you can got done telling you how you can increase your levels of alertness by increase your levels of alertness by increase your levels of alertness by activating this vagal nerve pathway from activating this vagal nerve pathway from activating this vagal nerve pathway from the body to the brain and that the body to the brain and that the body to the brain and that increasing your level of alertness increasing your level of alertness increasing your level of alertness allows for more opportunity to focus and allows for more opportunity to focus and allows for more opportunity to focus and to learn. But when we say focus and to learn. But when we say focus and to learn. But when we say focus and learn, what we're really talking about learn, what we're really talking about learn, what we're really talking about is neuroplasticity, this incredible is neuroplasticity, this incredible is neuroplasticity, this incredible feature of your nervous system to be feature of your nervous system to be feature of your nervous system to be able to change in response to experience able to change in response to experience able to change in response to experience in deliberate ways. The plasticity that in deliberate ways. The plasticity that in deliberate ways. The plasticity that you have when you are a child, from the you have when you are a child, from the you have when you are a child, from the time you're born until about age 25, time you're born until about age 25, time you're born until about age 25, typically can occur even in passive typically can occur even in passive typically can occur even in passive experience. That is, you're in class, a experience. That is, you're in class, a experience. That is, you're in class, a teacher's teaching you something, your teacher's teaching you something, your teacher's teaching you something, your brain is changing. Maybe you put a bit brain is changing. Maybe you put a bit brain is changing. Maybe you put a bit more effort into something, you're more effort into something, you're more effort into something, you're focused, your brain will change. But as we get your brain will change. But as we get your brain will change. But as we get into adulthood, most of our neural maps into adulthood, most of our neural maps into adulthood, most of our neural maps in the brain, certainly our sensory maps in the brain, certainly our sensory maps in the brain, certainly our sensory maps in our cortex, our motor maps that allow in our cortex, our motor maps that allow in our cortex, our motor maps that allow us to move in particular ways, us to move in particular ways, us to move in particular ways, those have been established. You can those have been established. You can those have been established. You can still change them, but they've mostly still change them, but they've mostly still change them, but they've mostly been established throughout childhood been established throughout childhood been established throughout childhood and into our early 20s. And if we want and into our early 20s. And if we want and into our early 20s. And if we want to modify those circuits with to modify those circuits with to modify those circuits with neuroplasticity, there are a couple of neuroplasticity, there are a couple of neuroplasticity, there are a couple of key requirements. One, you need to be key requirements. One, you need to be key requirements. One, you need to be alert. You can't get neuroplasticity, alert. You can't get neuroplasticity, alert. You can't get neuroplasticity, that is, you can't trigger that is, you can't trigger that is, you can't trigger neuroplasticity unless you're alert. You neuroplasticity unless you're alert. You neuroplasticity unless you're alert. You also have to be focused. This is also have to be focused. This is also have to be focused. This is critical and differentiates adult critical and differentiates adult critical and differentiates adult plasticity in a major way from plasticity in a major way from plasticity in a major way from plasticity when we're young, where we plasticity when we're young, where we plasticity when we're young, where we can learn by passive exposure. Okay? can learn by passive exposure. Okay? can learn by passive exposure. Okay? When we're young, we can learn by When we're young, we can learn by When we're young, we can learn by passive exposure or, even better, by passive exposure or, even better, by passive exposure or, even better, by focused exposure. But when we are focused exposure. But when we are focused exposure. But when we are adults, we need alertness and we need adults, we need alertness and we need adults, we need alertness and we need focus. Just passively being exposed to focus. Just passively being exposed to focus. Just passively being exposed to a, you know, music or to a motor pattern is you know, music or to a motor pattern is you know, music or to a motor pattern is not going to allow us to change our not going to allow us to change our not going to allow us to change our nervous system. That's been shown over nervous system. That's been shown over nervous system. That's been shown over and over again. Fortunately, what also and over again. Fortunately, what also and over again. Fortunately, what also has been shown over and over again has been shown over and over again has been shown over and over again is that if we are alert and we're is that if we are alert and we're is that if we are alert and we're focused and we are determined, focused and we are determined, focused and we are determined, especially if we undertake what's called especially if we undertake what's called especially if we undertake what's called incremental learning, where we go after incremental learning, where we go after incremental learning, where we go after small bits of neuroplasticity repeatedly small bits of neuroplasticity repeatedly small bits of neuroplasticity repeatedly over time, we can get as much over time, we can get as much over time, we can get as much neuroplasticity as one observes in neuroplasticity as one observes in neuroplasticity as one observes in childhood, it just takes longer and you childhood, it just takes longer and you childhood, it just takes longer and you have to do it so-called incrementally. have to do it so-called incrementally. have to do it so-called incrementally. There's a lot to say about that, but for There's a lot to say about that, but for There's a lot to say about that, but for sake of today's discussion about the sake of today's discussion about the sake of today's discussion about the vagus nerve, I just want to tell you vagus nerve, I just want to tell you vagus nerve, I just want to tell you that there's a particular pathway in the that there's a particular pathway in the that there's a particular pathway in the brain that involves the molecule brain that involves the molecule brain that involves the molecule acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is used to contract the Acetylcholine is used to contract the Acetylcholine is used to contract the muscles. It's released from motor muscles. It's released from motor muscles. It's released from motor neurons in the spinal cord onto muscles neurons in the spinal cord onto muscles neurons in the spinal cord onto muscles to contract the muscles. It's also used to contract the muscles. It's also used to contract the muscles. It's also used in the brain and elsewhere in the in the brain and elsewhere in the in the brain and elsewhere in the nervous system and does a lot of nervous system and does a lot of nervous system and does a lot of different things. It's actually involved different things. It's actually involved different things. It's actually involved in generating the rhythms of the heart. in generating the rhythms of the heart. in generating the rhythms of the heart. But acetylcholine released from a But acetylcholine released from a But acetylcholine released from a particular nucleus in the brain called particular nucleus in the brain called particular nucleus in the brain called nucleus basalis, the acetylcholine nucleus basalis, the acetylcholine nucleus basalis, the acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis released from nucleus basalis released from nucleus basalis is what we call permissive for is what we call permissive for is what we call permissive for plasticity. In other words, if you have plasticity. In other words, if you have plasticity. In other words, if you have acetylcholine released from nucleus acetylcholine released from nucleus acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis into the brain, plasticity is basalis into the brain, plasticity is basalis into the brain, plasticity is much more likely to occur. much more likely to occur. much more likely to occur. And in fact, acetylcholine released from And in fact, acetylcholine released from And in fact, acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis is sort of like a gate nucleus basalis is sort of like a gate nucleus basalis is sort of like a gate whereby if you release acetylcholine, whereby if you release acetylcholine, whereby if you release acetylcholine, the opportunity for neuroplasticity and the opportunity for neuroplasticity and the opportunity for neuroplasticity and learning is available for some period of learning is available for some period of learning is available for some period of time. So, the question therefore time. So, the question therefore time. So, the question therefore becomes, how do you get acetylcholine becomes, how do you get acetylcholine becomes, how do you get acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis? There are released from nucleus basalis? There are released from nucleus basalis? There are these incredible experiments that have these incredible experiments that have these incredible experiments that have been done by Mike Merzenich and been done by Mike Merzenich and been done by Mike Merzenich and colleagues showing that if you stimulate nucleus showing that if you stimulate nucleus showing that if you stimulate nucleus basalis to release acetylcholine and you basalis to release acetylcholine and you basalis to release acetylcholine and you expose an animal or a human to a expose an animal or a human to a expose an animal or a human to a particular sensory stimulus, the brain particular sensory stimulus, the brain particular sensory stimulus, the brain remaps very fast according to that remaps very fast according to that remaps very fast according to that experience. Just enormous amounts of experience. Just enormous amounts of experience. Just enormous amounts of plasticity that you wouldn't observe plasticity that you wouldn't observe plasticity that you wouldn't observe otherwise. There are also, fortunately, otherwise. There are also, fortunately, otherwise. There are also, fortunately, experiments showing that if you experiments showing that if you experiments showing that if you pharmacologically increase pharmacologically increase pharmacologically increase acetylcholine, that you can enhance the acetylcholine, that you can enhance the acetylcholine, that you can enhance the opportunity for neuroplasticity. You opportunity for neuroplasticity. You opportunity for neuroplasticity. You still need to do the learning. You still need to do the learning. You still need to do the learning. You still need to attempt to learn something. You need to attempt to learn something. You need to attempt to learn something. You still have to make it incremental. But, still have to make it incremental. But, still have to make it incremental. But, the amount of plasticity is the amount of plasticity is the amount of plasticity is significantly increased when there's significantly increased when there's significantly increased when there's acetylcholine released from nucleus acetylcholine released from nucleus acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis. So, in the absence of deep brain So, in the absence of deep brain So, in the absence of deep brain stimulation using an electrode, which stimulation using an electrode, which stimulation using an electrode, which most of you fortunately will not most of you fortunately will not most of you fortunately will not experience because it requires drilling experience because it requires drilling experience because it requires drilling down through the skull and placing an down through the skull and placing an down through the skull and placing an electrode in basalis, electrode in basalis, electrode in basalis, and assuming that you're not taking and assuming that you're not taking and assuming that you're not taking anything to increase acetylcholine anything to increase acetylcholine anything to increase acetylcholine transmission to learn, although there transmission to learn, although there transmission to learn, although there are ways to do that. I've talked about are ways to do that. I've talked about are ways to do that. I've talked about that before and I'll talk about that before and I'll talk about that before and I'll talk about that again in a future podcast. Some of those again in a future podcast. Some of those again in a future podcast. Some of those ways include supplementing with things ways include supplementing with things ways include supplementing with things like alpha GPC, which is a precursor to like alpha GPC, which is a precursor to like alpha GPC, which is a precursor to acetylcholine. There are some other precursors to There are some other precursors to There are some other precursors to acetylcholine or things that stimulate acetylcholine or things that stimulate acetylcholine or things that stimulate the release of acetylcholine, such as the release of acetylcholine, such as the release of acetylcholine, such as Huperzine and things like that, that Huperzine and things like that, that Huperzine and things like that, that will open the opportunity for enhanced will open the opportunity for enhanced will open the opportunity for enhanced plasticity for a few hours. And there is plasticity for a few hours. And there is plasticity for a few hours. And there is good old nicotine. I know the word good old nicotine. I know the word good old nicotine. I know the word nicotine brings to mind things like lung nicotine brings to mind things like lung nicotine brings to mind things like lung cancer because for many, many years, cancer because for many, many years, cancer because for many, many years, many, many people, and still now, smoked many, many people, and still now, smoked many, many people, and still now, smoked nicotine in the form of cigarettes or nicotine in the form of cigarettes or nicotine in the form of cigarettes or vaping, both of which I think are vaping, both of which I think are vaping, both of which I think are absolutely terrible, as is dipping and absolutely terrible, as is dipping and absolutely terrible, as is dipping and snuffing, because yes, they increase levels of because yes, they increase levels of because yes, they increase levels of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor nicotinic acetylcholine receptor nicotinic acetylcholine receptor activation, which is just fancy nerd activation, which is just fancy nerd activation, which is just fancy nerd speak for acetylcholine transmission in speak for acetylcholine transmission in speak for acetylcholine transmission in the brain is enhanced by nicotine, but the brain is enhanced by nicotine, but the brain is enhanced by nicotine, but those delivery mechanisms also, of those delivery mechanisms also, of those delivery mechanisms also, of course, can give you cancer in the case course, can give you cancer in the case course, can give you cancer in the case of smoking, dipping, or snuffing, and of smoking, dipping, or snuffing, and of smoking, dipping, or snuffing, and vaping, despite what you hear out there, vaping, despite what you hear out there, vaping, despite what you hear out there, is absolutely terrible for your health. is absolutely terrible for your health. is absolutely terrible for your health. I don't care what anybody says, the I don't care what anybody says, the I don't care what anybody says, the evidence is starting to really pile up evidence is starting to really pile up evidence is starting to really pile up that vaping is bad for you. Now, that vaping is bad for you. Now, that vaping is bad for you. Now, is oral form nicotine bad for you in the is oral form nicotine bad for you in the is oral form nicotine bad for you in the form of gum or in the form of a pouch, form of gum or in the form of a pouch, form of gum or in the form of a pouch, etc.? I just want to say a couple of etc.? I just want to say a couple of etc.? I just want to say a couple of things. One, it's extremely habit-forming. One, it's extremely habit-forming. One, it's extremely habit-forming. Two, it increases blood pressure Two, it increases blood pressure Two, it increases blood pressure and it's a vasoconstrictor. These and it's a vasoconstrictor. These and it's a vasoconstrictor. These drawbacks about nicotine are real and drawbacks about nicotine are real and drawbacks about nicotine are real and are critical to consider if you're going are critical to consider if you're going are critical to consider if you're going to use nicotine as a focusing agent or a to use nicotine as a focusing agent or a to use nicotine as a focusing agent or a so-called nootropic. I don't really like so-called nootropic. I don't really like so-called nootropic. I don't really like that word, but if you're using nicotine that word, but if you're using nicotine that word, but if you're using nicotine as a way to enhance cognition and as a way to enhance cognition and as a way to enhance cognition and enhance neuroplasticity, you should know enhance neuroplasticity, you should know enhance neuroplasticity, you should know what the potential drawbacks are. Most what the potential drawbacks are. Most what the potential drawbacks are. Most notably, the habit-forming and addicting notably, the habit-forming and addicting notably, the habit-forming and addicting properties, which are very robust. Now, properties, which are very robust. Now, properties, which are very robust. Now, with that said, there are ways to with that said, there are ways to with that said, there are ways to non-pharmacologically stimulate the non-pharmacologically stimulate the non-pharmacologically stimulate the nucleus basalis acetylcholine pathway to nucleus basalis acetylcholine pathway to nucleus basalis acetylcholine pathway to enhance the window for plasticity. And enhance the window for plasticity. And enhance the window for plasticity. And the way to do that is, you guessed it, the way to do that is, you guessed it, the way to do that is, you guessed it, through the vagus nerve. Studies in through the vagus nerve. Studies in through the vagus nerve. Studies in healthy humans and humans who have had, healthy humans and humans who have had, healthy humans and humans who have had, for instance, stroke, as well as animal for instance, stroke, as well as animal for instance, stroke, as well as animal studies have shown that if you stimulate studies have shown that if you stimulate studies have shown that if you stimulate the vagus nerve electrically, you the vagus nerve electrically, you the vagus nerve electrically, you increase the level of alertness in the increase the level of alertness in the increase the level of alertness in the brain, and part of the mechanism by brain, and part of the mechanism by brain, and part of the mechanism by which you do that is the one I told you which you do that is the one I told you which you do that is the one I told you about a few minutes ago, about a few minutes ago, about a few minutes ago, the adrenals, vagus, locus ceruleus, but the adrenals, vagus, locus ceruleus, but the adrenals, vagus, locus ceruleus, but also there's a separate pathway from the also there's a separate pathway from the also there's a separate pathway from the NTS to nucleus basalis that stimulates NTS to nucleus basalis that stimulates NTS to nucleus basalis that stimulates the release of acetylcholine from the release of acetylcholine from the release of acetylcholine from nucleus basalis and opens up the nucleus basalis and opens up the nucleus basalis and opens up the opportunity for neuroplasticity. opportunity for neuroplasticity. opportunity for neuroplasticity. This, I should mention, is not a small This, I should mention, is not a small This, I should mention, is not a small effect. It is a rapid effect, and it's effect. It is a rapid effect, and it's effect. It is a rapid effect, and it's one that has allowed stroke patients, one that has allowed stroke patients, one that has allowed stroke patients, for instance, to improve their motor for instance, to improve their motor for instance, to improve their motor capabilities very quickly as compared to capabilities very quickly as compared to capabilities very quickly as compared to when the vagus nerve is not stimulated when the vagus nerve is not stimulated when the vagus nerve is not stimulated or when acetylcholine transmission is or when acetylcholine transmission is or when acetylcholine transmission is not enhanced pharmacologically. And not enhanced pharmacologically. And not enhanced pharmacologically. And fortunately now, there are studies fortunately now, there are studies fortunately now, there are studies starting to accumulate in animal models starting to accumulate in animal models starting to accumulate in animal models and some in humans. and some in humans. and some in humans. We need more, but there are some showing We need more, but there are some showing We need more, but there are some showing that if you enhance alertness by way of that if you enhance alertness by way of that if you enhance alertness by way of activating the vagus nerve through the activating the vagus nerve through the activating the vagus nerve through the mechanism that I told you before, which mechanism that I told you before, which mechanism that I told you before, which is good old-fashioned high-intensity is good old-fashioned high-intensity is good old-fashioned high-intensity exercise, that in the several hours exercise, that in the several hours exercise, that in the several hours following that exercise, there is an following that exercise, there is an following that exercise, there is an enhanced opportunity for enhanced opportunity for enhanced opportunity for neuroplasticity. Now, that enhanced neuroplasticity. Now, that enhanced neuroplasticity. Now, that enhanced opportunity for neuroplasticity comes by opportunity for neuroplasticity comes by opportunity for neuroplasticity comes by way of two different pathways. You way of two different pathways. You way of two different pathways. You already heard about the first one, which already heard about the first one, which already heard about the first one, which is the locus coeruleus release of is the locus coeruleus release of is the locus coeruleus release of norepinephrine. That's going to increase norepinephrine. That's going to increase norepinephrine. That's going to increase alertness, which is a prerequisite for alertness, which is a prerequisite for alertness, which is a prerequisite for focus, and it appears to be the case that the and it appears to be the case that the and it appears to be the case that the release of acetylcholine from nucleus release of acetylcholine from nucleus release of acetylcholine from nucleus basalis, that's also triggered by this basalis, that's also triggered by this basalis, that's also triggered by this high-intensity exercise, is what allows high-intensity exercise, is what allows high-intensity exercise, is what allows for that alertness to be converted into for that alertness to be converted into for that alertness to be converted into focus, and those two things together, focus, and those two things together, focus, and those two things together, alertness and focus, are the triggers alertness and focus, are the triggers alertness and focus, are the triggers for adult neuroplasticity. If you think for adult neuroplasticity. If you think for adult neuroplasticity. If you think about this, this is really exciting. For about this, this is really exciting. For about this, this is really exciting. For 25 years or more, we've known that 25 years or more, we've known that 25 years or more, we've known that plasticity is possible in the adult plasticity is possible in the adult plasticity is possible in the adult human. We knew you needed alertness and human. We knew you needed alertness and human. We knew you needed alertness and you needed focus. We also, by the way, you needed focus. We also, by the way, you needed focus. We also, by the way, know that you need to get great sleep know that you need to get great sleep know that you need to get great sleep that night and in subsequent nights in that night and in subsequent nights in that night and in subsequent nights in order to actually allow the plasticity order to actually allow the plasticity order to actually allow the plasticity to occur. Plasticity is a process. It's to occur. Plasticity is a process. It's to occur. Plasticity is a process. It's not just triggered when you go about not just triggered when you go about not just triggered when you go about trying to learn something. It actually trying to learn something. It actually trying to learn something. It actually takes place in sleep, as well as takes place in sleep, as well as takes place in sleep, as well as sleep-like states like non-sleep deep sleep-like states like non-sleep deep sleep-like states like non-sleep deep rest and meditation, but especially in rest and meditation, but especially in rest and meditation, but especially in deep sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. deep sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. deep sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. This is why you can attempt to learn This is why you can attempt to learn This is why you can attempt to learn something cognitively or behaviorally something cognitively or behaviorally something cognitively or behaviorally over and over and over. You can't get over and over and over. You can't get over and over and over. You can't get those scales on the piano right. You those scales on the piano right. You those scales on the piano right. You can't get the, you know, the information can't get the, you know, the information can't get the, you know, the information dialed in from your class, a language dialed in from your class, a language dialed in from your class, a language class, or from engineering, or you're class, or from engineering, or you're class, or from engineering, or you're trying to figure out what this picture trying to figure out what this picture trying to figure out what this picture should be in your mind that you're going should be in your mind that you're going should be in your mind that you're going to paint, etc. to paint, etc. to paint, etc. You work at it. You work at it. You work You work at it. You work at it. You work You work at it. You work at it. You work at it. You sleep. You sleep. And then at it. You sleep. You sleep. And then at it. You sleep. You sleep. And then one day you wake up and suddenly you one day you wake up and suddenly you one day you wake up and suddenly you have the skill. It's because the actual have the skill. It's because the actual have the skill. It's because the actual rewiring of those circuits that we call rewiring of those circuits that we call rewiring of those circuits that we call neuroplasticity occurs during sleep, but neuroplasticity occurs during sleep, but neuroplasticity occurs during sleep, but it's triggered in those moments of it's triggered in those moments of it's triggered in those moments of incremental learning and really incremental learning and really incremental learning and really struggling. And keep in mind the struggling. And keep in mind the struggling. And keep in mind the struggle to learn something, that struggle to learn something, that struggle to learn something, that friction is part of the neuroplasticity friction is part of the neuroplasticity friction is part of the neuroplasticity process. And it's oh so clear now that process. And it's oh so clear now that process. And it's oh so clear now that alertness and focus are the alertness and focus are the alertness and focus are the prerequisites for plasticity, that prerequisites for plasticity, that prerequisites for plasticity, that alertness is coming in large part by way alertness is coming in large part by way alertness is coming in large part by way of the release of norepinephrine from of the release of norepinephrine from of the release of norepinephrine from locus coeruleus, that the focus is being locus coeruleus, that the focus is being locus coeruleus, that the focus is being augmented and perhaps it's even augmented and perhaps it's even augmented and perhaps it's even originating entirely from the release of originating entirely from the release of originating entirely from the release of acetylcholine in nucleus basalis that acetylcholine in nucleus basalis that acetylcholine in nucleus basalis that acts as sort of a spotlight on a acts as sort of a spotlight on a acts as sort of a spotlight on a particular set of things that are particular set of things that are particular set of things that are happening while we're trying to learn. happening while we're trying to learn. happening while we're trying to learn. And then that triggers the plasticity And then that triggers the plasticity And then that triggers the plasticity process which takes place during sleep. process which takes place during sleep. process which takes place during sleep. So, that beautiful picture of So, that beautiful picture of So, that beautiful picture of self-directed adaptive plasticity in self-directed adaptive plasticity in self-directed adaptive plasticity in adulthood is allowed to happen because allowed to happen because allowed to happen because the vagus nerve, in part, is triggering the vagus nerve, in part, is triggering the vagus nerve, in part, is triggering NTS to say, "Hey, locus coeruleus, NTS to say, "Hey, locus coeruleus, NTS to say, "Hey, locus coeruleus, nucleus basalis, wake up, release nucleus basalis, wake up, release nucleus basalis, wake up, release norepinephrine, release acetylcholine. norepinephrine, release acetylcholine. norepinephrine, release acetylcholine. Now's the time to learn." So, what this Now's the time to learn." So, what this Now's the time to learn." So, what this means is if you're struggling to learn, means is if you're struggling to learn, means is if you're struggling to learn, if you want to continue to have robust if you want to continue to have robust if you want to continue to have robust neuroplasticity, if you happen to have neuroplasticity, if you happen to have neuroplasticity, if you happen to have some damage to motor pathways or you're some damage to motor pathways or you're some damage to motor pathways or you're having trouble with focusing and brain having trouble with focusing and brain having trouble with focusing and brain fog, keep in mind focus itself fog, keep in mind focus itself fog, keep in mind focus itself is served by a circuit that is subject is served by a circuit that is subject is served by a circuit that is subject to plasticity. You can actually get to plasticity. You can actually get to plasticity. You can actually get better at focusing by working on focus better at focusing by working on focus better at focusing by working on focus just the same way you would on any just the same way you would on any just the same way you would on any skill. And so, if you're struggling with focus, And so, if you're struggling with focus, And so, if you're struggling with focus, I highly recommend finding a threshold I highly recommend finding a threshold I highly recommend finding a threshold of exercise that stimulates brain of exercise that stimulates brain of exercise that stimulates brain alertness, that triggers these pathways that are that triggers these pathways that are that triggers these pathways that are now starting to be clear now starting to be clear now starting to be clear that they occur from the literature in that they occur from the literature in that they occur from the literature in animals and humans. animals and humans. animals and humans. And yes, you might augment this with And yes, you might augment this with And yes, you might augment this with something like caffeine which will something like caffeine which will something like caffeine which will further increase levels of further increase levels of further increase levels of norepinephrine. You might even use norepinephrine. You might even use norepinephrine. You might even use low-dose nicotine. I'm not necessarily low-dose nicotine. I'm not necessarily low-dose nicotine. I'm not necessarily recommending that, certainly not for recommending that, certainly not for recommending that, certainly not for young people, and you do need to be young people, and you do need to be young people, and you do need to be aware of the habit-forming, aka aware of the habit-forming, aka aware of the habit-forming, aka addictive, properties of nicotine. You addictive, properties of nicotine. You addictive, properties of nicotine. You definitely don't want to consume it in definitely don't want to consume it in definitely don't want to consume it in any form that's going to cause you to any form that's going to cause you to any form that's going to cause you to increase your risk of cancer or popcorn increase your risk of cancer or popcorn increase your risk of cancer or popcorn lung from vaping. lung from vaping. lung from vaping. You could use pharmacology. You could You could use pharmacology. You could You could use pharmacology. You could use alpha-GPC. You could use huperzine use alpha-GPC. You could use huperzine use alpha-GPC. You could use huperzine in combination with exercise. However, I in combination with exercise. However, I in combination with exercise. However, I strongly recommend that anyone strongly recommend that anyone strongly recommend that anyone who's interested in lifelong learning who's interested in lifelong learning who's interested in lifelong learning think about organizing your bouts of think about organizing your bouts of think about organizing your bouts of learning, especially cognitive learning, especially cognitive learning, especially cognitive learning, to come in the 2 to 3 hours, maybe even to come in the 2 to 3 hours, maybe even to come in the 2 to 3 hours, maybe even 4 hours, but certainly in the 1 to 2 4 hours, but certainly in the 1 to 2 4 hours, but certainly in the 1 to 2 hours after you do some sort of exercise hours after you do some sort of exercise hours after you do some sort of exercise that doesn't leave you exhausted, but that doesn't leave you exhausted, but that doesn't leave you exhausted, but leaves you with elevated levels leaves you with elevated levels leaves you with elevated levels of energy in your body. So, you don't of energy in your body. So, you don't of energy in your body. So, you don't want to take this physical exercise that want to take this physical exercise that want to take this physical exercise that I'm talking about to exhaustion, because I'm talking about to exhaustion, because I'm talking about to exhaustion, because that's going to leave you depleted. that's going to leave you depleted. that's going to leave you depleted. That's going to cause a, you know, That's going to cause a, you know, That's going to cause a, you know, uptick in parasympathetic activity. Any uptick in parasympathetic activity. Any uptick in parasympathetic activity. Any of you that have done a hard leg of you that have done a hard leg of you that have done a hard leg workout, and then, you know, 2 3 hours workout, and then, you know, 2 3 hours workout, and then, you know, 2 3 hours later, you're just like it's very clear, later, you're just like it's very clear, later, you're just like it's very clear, brain oxygen levels are down, brain oxygen levels are down, brain oxygen levels are down, parasympathetic activity is up. You are parasympathetic activity is up. You are parasympathetic activity is up. You are tired because you exhausted all that tired because you exhausted all that tired because you exhausted all that energy in exercise. But, if you can use energy in exercise. But, if you can use energy in exercise. But, if you can use exercise as a trigger to release exercise as a trigger to release exercise as a trigger to release adrenaline and stimulate these pathways adrenaline and stimulate these pathways adrenaline and stimulate these pathways within the brain that arrive via the within the brain that arrive via the within the brain that arrive via the signaling from the vagus, you do indeed signaling from the vagus, you do indeed signaling from the vagus, you do indeed open up the opportunity for enhanced open up the opportunity for enhanced open up the opportunity for enhanced neuroplasticity at any age. And that is neuroplasticity at any age. And that is neuroplasticity at any age. And that is a non-trivial thing. In fact, it's a non-trivial thing. In fact, it's a non-trivial thing. In fact, it's downright exciting because the search downright exciting because the search downright exciting because the search for adult neuroplasticity tools is one for adult neuroplasticity tools is one for adult neuroplasticity tools is one that's existed probably for thousands of that's existed probably for thousands of that's existed probably for thousands of years and that has been documented for years and that has been documented for years and that has been documented for hundreds of years. And the thing that hundreds of years. And the thing that hundreds of years. And the thing that makes the nervous system of humans so makes the nervous system of humans so makes the nervous system of humans so special is that it is capable of special is that it is capable of special is that it is capable of changing itself throughout the lifespan. changing itself throughout the lifespan. changing itself throughout the lifespan. So, now you know at least one method by So, now you know at least one method by So, now you know at least one method by which you can do that, and it of course which you can do that, and it of course which you can do that, and it of course involves the vagus. involves the vagus. involves the vagus. Okay, so one of the most incredible Okay, so one of the most incredible Okay, so one of the most incredible things about the vagus nerve that I things about the vagus nerve that I things about the vagus nerve that I myself have really not ever heard talked myself have really not ever heard talked myself have really not ever heard talked about out there about out there about out there is the way it communicates and is the way it communicates and is the way it communicates and coordinates levels of serotonin in the coordinates levels of serotonin in the coordinates levels of serotonin in the gut with levels of serotonin in the gut with levels of serotonin in the gut with levels of serotonin in the brain. Now, a discussion about serotonin brain. Now, a discussion about serotonin brain. Now, a discussion about serotonin that's complete would take many that's complete would take many that's complete would take many hours. But, suffice to say that hours. But, suffice to say that hours. But, suffice to say that serotonin is a neuromodulator, much like serotonin is a neuromodulator, much like serotonin is a neuromodulator, much like dopamine or acetylcholine or dopamine or acetylcholine or dopamine or acetylcholine or norepinephrine, in that it modulates the norepinephrine, in that it modulates the norepinephrine, in that it modulates the activity of other circuits. It's activity of other circuits. It's activity of other circuits. It's critically important for mood. In the critically important for mood. In the critically important for mood. In the gut, it's critically important for gut gut, it's critically important for gut gut, it's critically important for gut motility, for ease of digestion, and for motility, for ease of digestion, and for motility, for ease of digestion, and for gut health. In the brain, we say gut health. In the brain, we say gut health. In the brain, we say serotonin is important for mood. I don't serotonin is important for mood. I don't serotonin is important for mood. I don't want to give the impression that high want to give the impression that high want to give the impression that high levels of serotonin good, low levels of levels of serotonin good, low levels of levels of serotonin good, low levels of serotonin bad. serotonin bad. serotonin bad. Serotonin needs to be at a particular Serotonin needs to be at a particular Serotonin needs to be at a particular level, so neither too high nor too low. level, so neither too high nor too low. level, so neither too high nor too low. As many of you know, one of the major As many of you know, one of the major As many of you know, one of the major ways that depression has been treated ways that depression has been treated ways that depression has been treated over the last decades is through the over the last decades is through the over the last decades is through the administration of something called SSRI, administration of something called SSRI, administration of something called SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, which have the net effect of increasing which have the net effect of increasing which have the net effect of increasing levels of serotonin at synapses. SSRIs levels of serotonin at synapses. SSRIs levels of serotonin at synapses. SSRIs are somewhat controversial because in are somewhat controversial because in are somewhat controversial because in many people they do alleviate certain many people they do alleviate certain many people they do alleviate certain symptoms of depression, but they often symptoms of depression, but they often symptoms of depression, but they often carry side effects because serotonin is carry side effects because serotonin is carry side effects because serotonin is used in multiple circuits throughout the used in multiple circuits throughout the used in multiple circuits throughout the brain. I don't want to give the brain. I don't want to give the brain. I don't want to give the impression that SSRIs are always bad or impression that SSRIs are always bad or impression that SSRIs are always bad or always good. It's highly dependent on always good. It's highly dependent on always good. It's highly dependent on the patient and a bunch of other things the patient and a bunch of other things the patient and a bunch of other things that really unfortunately can only be that really unfortunately can only be that really unfortunately can only be explored through experimentation. That's explored through experimentation. That's explored through experimentation. That's typically what psychiatrists will do. typically what psychiatrists will do. typically what psychiatrists will do. They'll prescribe an SSRI at a given They'll prescribe an SSRI at a given They'll prescribe an SSRI at a given dose, see how a patient reacts, maybe dose, see how a patient reacts, maybe dose, see how a patient reacts, maybe they'll take them off an SSRI entirely, they'll take them off an SSRI entirely, they'll take them off an SSRI entirely, give them a different type of give them a different type of give them a different type of antidepressant that works on a different antidepressant that works on a different antidepressant that works on a different set of neuromodulators like dopamine and set of neuromodulators like dopamine and set of neuromodulators like dopamine and norepinephrine. So Wellbutrin would be a norepinephrine. So Wellbutrin would be a norepinephrine. So Wellbutrin would be a non-SSRI antidepressant. And there are a non-SSRI antidepressant. And there are a non-SSRI antidepressant. And there are a whole set of issues around SSRIs. For whole set of issues around SSRIs. For whole set of issues around SSRIs. For instance, they can be very beneficial for people they can be very beneficial for people they can be very beneficial for people with full clinical OCD, with full clinical OCD, with full clinical OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder. And then obsessive-compulsive disorder. And then obsessive-compulsive disorder. And then again, other people again, other people again, other people suffer terrible side effects from SSRIs. suffer terrible side effects from SSRIs. suffer terrible side effects from SSRIs. So, I don't want to suggest that SSRIs So, I don't want to suggest that SSRIs So, I don't want to suggest that SSRIs are a solution. I also don't want to are a solution. I also don't want to are a solution. I also don't want to suggest that serotonin is the only suggest that serotonin is the only suggest that serotonin is the only problem with depression or is always a problem with depression or is always a problem with depression or is always a problem in cases of depression. That problem in cases of depression. That problem in cases of depression. That itself is heavily debated. What's itself is heavily debated. What's itself is heavily debated. What's emerging from the data is that elevating emerging from the data is that elevating emerging from the data is that elevating levels of serotonin in the brain can levels of serotonin in the brain can levels of serotonin in the brain can increase neuroplasticity, which can increase neuroplasticity, which can increase neuroplasticity, which can allow people who have major depression allow people who have major depression allow people who have major depression to learn new contingencies. You know, to learn new contingencies. You know, to learn new contingencies. You know, these are people who these are people who these are people who at one point are thinking, you know, why at one point are thinking, you know, why at one point are thinking, you know, why would I ever try and get a new would I ever try and get a new would I ever try and get a new relationship or job? Like, everything relationship or job? Like, everything relationship or job? Like, everything always turns out terribly. These are always turns out terribly. These are always turns out terribly. These are hallmarks of depression, you know, um hallmarks of depression, you know, um hallmarks of depression, you know, um lack of excitement about the future. Uh lack of excitement about the future. Uh lack of excitement about the future. Uh everything's a negative outcome in their everything's a negative outcome in their everything's a negative outcome in their mind. Through neuroplasticity, it's clear that Through neuroplasticity, it's clear that Through neuroplasticity, it's clear that people can form new contingencies. They people can form new contingencies. They people can form new contingencies. They can start to imagine life as more can start to imagine life as more can start to imagine life as more positive and holding more possibility. positive and holding more possibility. positive and holding more possibility. And changing levels of serotonin is And changing levels of serotonin is And changing levels of serotonin is known to be, much in the same way known to be, much in the same way known to be, much in the same way acetylcholine can increase plasticity, acetylcholine can increase plasticity, acetylcholine can increase plasticity, permissive for neuroplasticity. So, that permissive for neuroplasticity. So, that permissive for neuroplasticity. So, that might be one way by which SSRIs actually might be one way by which SSRIs actually might be one way by which SSRIs actually can provide help for certain people for can provide help for certain people for can provide help for certain people for depression. However, because of the side depression. However, because of the side depression. However, because of the side effects associated with SSRIs, many effects associated with SSRIs, many effects associated with SSRIs, many people are leaning away from them. And people are leaning away from them. And people are leaning away from them. And yet, having adequate levels of serotonin yet, having adequate levels of serotonin yet, having adequate levels of serotonin is absolutely critical for people is absolutely critical for people is absolutely critical for people depressed, as well as people who are not depressed, as well as people who are not depressed, as well as people who are not depressed, to feel a sense of depressed, to feel a sense of depressed, to feel a sense of well-being. Just overall sense of well-being. Just overall sense of well-being. Just overall sense of well-being. Being okay with who they are well-being. Being okay with who they are well-being. Being okay with who they are and where life is at. Being able to lean and where life is at. Being able to lean and where life is at. Being able to lean into effort and all these things. It's into effort and all these things. It's into effort and all these things. It's absolutely critical that we have absolutely critical that we have absolutely critical that we have adequate levels of serotonin in the adequate levels of serotonin in the adequate levels of serotonin in the brain. Now, you may have heard, and it brain. Now, you may have heard, and it brain. Now, you may have heard, and it is absolutely true, that 90% of the is absolutely true, that 90% of the is absolutely true, that 90% of the serotonin manufactured in your body is serotonin manufactured in your body is serotonin manufactured in your body is in the gut. in the gut. in the gut. Now, what you don't often hear is that Now, what you don't often hear is that Now, what you don't often hear is that serotonin stays in the gut. Right? We serotonin stays in the gut. Right? We serotonin stays in the gut. Right? We hear these days, oh, you know, most of hear these days, oh, you know, most of hear these days, oh, you know, most of your serotonin is manufactured in your serotonin is manufactured in your serotonin is manufactured in your gut, which has given millions of people gut, which has given millions of people gut, which has given millions of people the false impression that if you get the false impression that if you get the false impression that if you get your gut serotonin right, your gut serotonin right, your gut serotonin right, somehow it's traveling up to your brain somehow it's traveling up to your brain somehow it's traveling up to your brain and performing all the important roles and performing all the important roles and performing all the important roles that serotonin plays in your brain. that serotonin plays in your brain. that serotonin plays in your brain. That's not how it works at all. That's not how it works at all. That's not how it works at all. Fortunately, however, there are ways Fortunately, however, there are ways Fortunately, however, there are ways that you can modify the levels of that you can modify the levels of that you can modify the levels of serotonin in your gut. And indeed, the serotonin in your gut. And indeed, the serotonin in your gut. And indeed, the levels of serotonin in your gut levels of serotonin in your gut levels of serotonin in your gut powerfully impact the levels of powerfully impact the levels of powerfully impact the levels of serotonin in your brain. And this serotonin in your brain. And this serotonin in your brain. And this occurs, you guessed it, by way of the occurs, you guessed it, by way of the occurs, you guessed it, by way of the vagus. It's a super cool mechanism, and vagus. It's a super cool mechanism, and vagus. It's a super cool mechanism, and it's one that you can exert some it's one that you can exert some it's one that you can exert some positive control over positive control over positive control over in to, for instance, increase your in to, for instance, increase your in to, for instance, increase your baseline levels of mood, in order to baseline levels of mood, in order to baseline levels of mood, in order to increase levels of serotonin if that's increase levels of serotonin if that's increase levels of serotonin if that's something that you seek. Here's the something that you seek. Here's the something that you seek. Here's the pathway and the mechanism, and I'm going pathway and the mechanism, and I'm going pathway and the mechanism, and I'm going to provide this in kind of top contour to provide this in kind of top contour to provide this in kind of top contour form. In the future, I'll do an entire form. In the future, I'll do an entire form. In the future, I'll do an entire episode about serotonin, but here's the episode about serotonin, but here's the episode about serotonin, but here's the idea. In your gut, you have cells, including In your gut, you have cells, including In your gut, you have cells, including neurons, but you also have a lot of neurons, but you also have a lot of neurons, but you also have a lot of other cells, mostly other cells, other cells, mostly other cells, other cells, mostly other cells, frankly. And there's a particular frankly. And there's a particular frankly. And there's a particular category of cells called the category of cells called the category of cells called the enterochromaffin cells. You don't need enterochromaffin cells. You don't need enterochromaffin cells. You don't need to know that name, but if you want, to know that name, but if you want, to know that name, but if you want, they're the enterochromaffin cells, and they're the enterochromaffin cells, and they're the enterochromaffin cells, and they manufacture serotonin. They do that they manufacture serotonin. They do that they manufacture serotonin. They do that through a beautiful pathway involving an through a beautiful pathway involving an through a beautiful pathway involving an enzymatic reaction that converts enzymatic reaction that converts enzymatic reaction that converts tryptophan from the food you eat, tryptophan from the food you eat, tryptophan from the food you eat, tryptophan's an amino acid, gets tryptophan's an amino acid, gets tryptophan's an amino acid, gets converted eventually into serotonin. converted eventually into serotonin. converted eventually into serotonin. There are a bunch of steps in there in There are a bunch of steps in there in There are a bunch of steps in there in the biochemistry. Gets converted into the biochemistry. Gets converted into the biochemistry. Gets converted into serotonin. That serotonin binds to the serotonin. That serotonin binds to the serotonin. That serotonin binds to the ends of neurons, the axons of neurons in ends of neurons, the axons of neurons in ends of neurons, the axons of neurons in the vagus nerve that innervate your gut, the vagus nerve that innervate your gut, the vagus nerve that innervate your gut, not just your stomach, but your large not just your stomach, but your large not just your stomach, but your large intestine and your small intestine. intestine and your small intestine. intestine and your small intestine. Remember, those sensory afferents, those Remember, those sensory afferents, those Remember, those sensory afferents, those sensory axons sensory axons sensory axons that extend into the body have receptors that extend into the body have receptors that extend into the body have receptors on them, right? on them, right? on them, right? The serotonin in the gut, assuming The serotonin in the gut, assuming The serotonin in the gut, assuming you're getting enough tryptophan, you're getting enough tryptophan, you're getting enough tryptophan, and assuming the milieu of your gut is and assuming the milieu of your gut is and assuming the milieu of your gut is correct, we'll talk about what that correct, we'll talk about what that correct, we'll talk about what that means and how you can exert control over means and how you can exert control over means and how you can exert control over it, get the milieu right, it, get the milieu right, it, get the milieu right, that serotonin binds to the ends of that serotonin binds to the ends of that serotonin binds to the ends of those axons in the gut those axons in the gut those axons in the gut and stimulates a particular category of and stimulates a particular category of and stimulates a particular category of them that then relays the signal up and that then relays the signal up and that then relays the signal up and through nodos ganglione, you know, through nodos ganglione, you know, through nodos ganglione, you know, you're familiar with these names, up you're familiar with these names, up you're familiar with these names, up into the brain into the brain into the brain to the nucleus tractus solitarius, okay, to the nucleus tractus solitarius, okay, to the nucleus tractus solitarius, okay, that NTS again, that NTS again, that NTS again, and then the nucleus tractus solitarius and then the nucleus tractus solitarius and then the nucleus tractus solitarius doesn't just communicate with locus doesn't just communicate with locus doesn't just communicate with locus coeruleus and with nucleus basalis, it coeruleus and with nucleus basalis, it coeruleus and with nucleus basalis, it also sends a powerful signal to what's also sends a powerful signal to what's also sends a powerful signal to what's called the dorsal raphe nucleus. The called the dorsal raphe nucleus. The called the dorsal raphe nucleus. The dorsal raphe nucleus in your brain dorsal raphe nucleus in your brain dorsal raphe nucleus in your brain is responsible for the release of the is responsible for the release of the is responsible for the release of the majority of the serotonin in your brain. majority of the serotonin in your brain. majority of the serotonin in your brain. So, when you hear that most of the So, when you hear that most of the So, when you hear that most of the serotonin in your body is made in your serotonin in your body is made in your serotonin in your body is made in your gut, that's true. And it stays in your gut. that's true. And it stays in your gut. that's true. And it stays in your gut. But, the levels of serotonin are But, the levels of serotonin are But, the levels of serotonin are communicated to the brain by the vagus communicated to the brain by the vagus communicated to the brain by the vagus and then stimulates the release of and then stimulates the release of and then stimulates the release of serotonin from the dorsal raphe nucleus. serotonin from the dorsal raphe nucleus. serotonin from the dorsal raphe nucleus. So, the question therefore becomes, So, the question therefore becomes, So, the question therefore becomes, if we want to increase levels of if we want to increase levels of if we want to increase levels of serotonin in the brain, or simply to serotonin in the brain, or simply to serotonin in the brain, or simply to maintain healthy levels of serotonin in maintain healthy levels of serotonin in maintain healthy levels of serotonin in the brain for somebody who's not the brain for somebody who's not the brain for somebody who's not depressed or maybe somebody who's having depressed or maybe somebody who's having depressed or maybe somebody who's having low mood, just to keep elevated levels low mood, just to keep elevated levels low mood, just to keep elevated levels of mood and proper levels of serotonin of mood and proper levels of serotonin of mood and proper levels of serotonin overall because it's involved in lots of overall because it's involved in lots of overall because it's involved in lots of things, not just mood, things, not just mood, things, not just mood, we need to make sure that we're getting we need to make sure that we're getting we need to make sure that we're getting adequate production of serotonin in the adequate production of serotonin in the adequate production of serotonin in the gut. And again, adequate production of gut. And again, adequate production of gut. And again, adequate production of serotonin in the gut has a bunch of serotonin in the gut has a bunch of serotonin in the gut has a bunch of other positive effects on the immune other positive effects on the immune other positive effects on the immune system, on gut motility. In fact, having system, on gut motility. In fact, having system, on gut motility. In fact, having adequate levels of serotonin in the gut adequate levels of serotonin in the gut adequate levels of serotonin in the gut is powerfully associated with having a is powerfully associated with having a is powerfully associated with having a healthy gut and not having irritable healthy gut and not having irritable healthy gut and not having irritable gut. Irritable bowel syndrome is gut. Irritable bowel syndrome is gut. Irritable bowel syndrome is something that vexes many people. You something that vexes many people. You something that vexes many people. You know, it might sound kind of funny to know, it might sound kind of funny to know, it might sound kind of funny to those of you that don't have it, "Oh, those of you that don't have it, "Oh, those of you that don't have it, "Oh, you have an irritable bowel." People you have an irritable bowel." People you have an irritable bowel." People with IBS, irritable bowel syndrome, with IBS, irritable bowel syndrome, with IBS, irritable bowel syndrome, often times suffer tremendously. They often times suffer tremendously. They often times suffer tremendously. They can't go out to dinner, they can't eat can't go out to dinner, they can't eat can't go out to dinner, they can't eat foods that other people foods that other people foods that other people offer them. They'll eat a bunch of foods offer them. They'll eat a bunch of foods offer them. They'll eat a bunch of foods for a while and feel fine, then they for a while and feel fine, then they for a while and feel fine, then they feel terrible. It's not just about feel terrible. It's not just about feel terrible. It's not just about having diarrhea. Often, they have a having diarrhea. Often, they have a having diarrhea. Often, they have a bunch of other gut issues and it's bunch of other gut issues and it's bunch of other gut issues and it's correlated with a bunch of other major correlated with a bunch of other major correlated with a bunch of other major problems over time. over time. over time. We're going to do an entire episode We're going to do an entire episode We're going to do an entire episode about gut health as it relates to IBS. about gut health as it relates to IBS. about gut health as it relates to IBS. There are things that you can do to There are things that you can do to There are things that you can do to improve IBS. One of them is to keep your improve IBS. One of them is to keep your improve IBS. One of them is to keep your or get your gut levels of serotonin right. get your gut levels of serotonin right. get your gut levels of serotonin right. How do you do that? Well, one way to do How do you do that? Well, one way to do How do you do that? Well, one way to do that is to make sure that the microbiota that is to make sure that the microbiota that is to make sure that the microbiota of your gut are healthy and that they of your gut are healthy and that they of your gut are healthy and that they are diverse. The best way to do that, are diverse. The best way to do that, are diverse. The best way to do that, not using any kind of supplementation, not using any kind of supplementation, not using any kind of supplementation, is to make sure that you're ingesting is to make sure that you're ingesting is to make sure that you're ingesting one to four servings of low-sugar one to four servings of low-sugar one to four servings of low-sugar fermented foods per day. I've talked fermented foods per day. I've talked fermented foods per day. I've talked about this before on the podcast. This about this before on the podcast. This about this before on the podcast. This is based on beautiful data from my is based on beautiful data from my is based on beautiful data from my colleague Justin Sonnenburg colleague Justin Sonnenburg colleague Justin Sonnenburg and Christopher Gardner at Stanford and Christopher Gardner at Stanford and Christopher Gardner at Stanford showed that the ingestion of one to four showed that the ingestion of one to four showed that the ingestion of one to four servings of low sugar fermented foods servings of low sugar fermented foods servings of low sugar fermented foods per day, so these would be things like per day, so these would be things like per day, so these would be things like kimchi, sauerkraut, again low sugar, kimchi, sauerkraut, again low sugar, kimchi, sauerkraut, again low sugar, look at the labels. This is the stuff look at the labels. This is the stuff look at the labels. This is the stuff that would need to be refrigerated. Not that would need to be refrigerated. Not that would need to be refrigerated. Not talking about pickles kept on the talking about pickles kept on the talking about pickles kept on the non-refrigerated shelf in the non-refrigerated shelf in the non-refrigerated shelf in the non-refrigerated section of the grocery non-refrigerated section of the grocery non-refrigerated section of the grocery store, but rather the brine in the store, but rather the brine in the store, but rather the brine in the pickles that don't have a ton of sugar, pickles that don't have a ton of sugar, pickles that don't have a ton of sugar, so the sour pickles that is that are so the sour pickles that is that are so the sour pickles that is that are kept in the refrigerator, things like kept in the refrigerator, things like kept in the refrigerator, things like kimchi, things like kombucha. Keep in mind some things like kombucha. Keep in mind some things like kombucha. Keep in mind some kombucha has alcohol, so keep that in kombucha has alcohol, so keep that in kombucha has alcohol, so keep that in mind if you're giving this to kids mind if you're giving this to kids mind if you're giving this to kids who shouldn't be ingesting alcohol. who shouldn't be ingesting alcohol. who shouldn't be ingesting alcohol. Many adults probably shouldn't be Many adults probably shouldn't be Many adults probably shouldn't be ingesting alcohol. Kombucha has very ingesting alcohol. Kombucha has very ingesting alcohol. Kombucha has very little alcohol, but if you're an little alcohol, but if you're an little alcohol, but if you're an alcoholic and you're completely avoiding alcoholic and you're completely avoiding alcoholic and you're completely avoiding alcohol, you should know that kombucha alcohol, you should know that kombucha alcohol, you should know that kombucha contains some alcohol. contains some alcohol. contains some alcohol. Things like kefir, Things like kefir, Things like kefir, quality yogurts, low sugar yogurts. You quality yogurts, low sugar yogurts. You quality yogurts, low sugar yogurts. You can look up online what are different can look up online what are different can look up online what are different low sugar fermented foods. These things low sugar fermented foods. These things low sugar fermented foods. These things are going to improve the gut microbiota are going to improve the gut microbiota are going to improve the gut microbiota that in turn promote the production of that in turn promote the production of that in turn promote the production of serotonin if and only if, this is serotonin if and only if, this is serotonin if and only if, this is important, if and only if there's also important, if and only if there's also important, if and only if there's also sufficient levels of tryptophan in your sufficient levels of tryptophan in your sufficient levels of tryptophan in your dietary intake. So you're going to want dietary intake. So you're going to want dietary intake. So you're going to want to take a look at what you're eating and to take a look at what you're eating and to take a look at what you're eating and just through a simple online search you just through a simple online search you just through a simple online search you can figure out whether or not you're can figure out whether or not you're can figure out whether or not you're getting sufficient levels of tryptophan. getting sufficient levels of tryptophan. getting sufficient levels of tryptophan. Many people are familiar with the idea, Many people are familiar with the idea, Many people are familiar with the idea, because it's true, that turkey contains because it's true, that turkey contains because it's true, that turkey contains high levels of tryptophan. This is high levels of tryptophan. This is high levels of tryptophan. This is thought to be responsible for the post thought to be responsible for the post thought to be responsible for the post Thanksgiving dinner effect, although Thanksgiving dinner effect, although Thanksgiving dinner effect, although that's probably due to just eating a lot that's probably due to just eating a lot that's probably due to just eating a lot of food. When the gut is distended, of food. When the gut is distended, of food. When the gut is distended, that distension of the gut is that distension of the gut is that distension of the gut is communicated by mechanosensors communicated by mechanosensors communicated by mechanosensors up the vagus nerve sensory neurons and up the vagus nerve sensory neurons and up the vagus nerve sensory neurons and set in motion the so-called rest and set in motion the so-called rest and set in motion the so-called rest and digest or I guess it would be like digest or I guess it would be like digest or I guess it would be like collapse and pass out in the case of collapse and pass out in the case of collapse and pass out in the case of Thanksgiving, collapse and pass out Thanksgiving, collapse and pass out Thanksgiving, collapse and pass out um effect of having a lot of food in your effect of having a lot of food in your effect of having a lot of food in your gut. Doesn't matter what the food is, gut. Doesn't matter what the food is, gut. Doesn't matter what the food is, but you're going to want to make sure but you're going to want to make sure but you're going to want to make sure that you're ingesting foods with that you're ingesting foods with that you're ingesting foods with sufficient levels of tryptophan. So sufficient levels of tryptophan. So sufficient levels of tryptophan. So dairy products will do that, white dairy products will do that, white dairy products will do that, white turkey meat will do that. There are turkey meat will do that. There are turkey meat will do that. There are other foods that have tryptophan in other foods that have tryptophan in other foods that have tryptophan in them. I'm not going to bother to list them. I'm not going to bother to list them. I'm not going to bother to list those off now. You can simply look those off now. You can simply look those off now. You can simply look those up. So, make sure you're getting enough up. So, make sure you're getting enough up. So, make sure you're getting enough tryptophan in your diet. Make sure that tryptophan in your diet. Make sure that tryptophan in your diet. Make sure that you're getting enough low sugar you're getting enough low sugar you're getting enough low sugar fermented foods or if you're not doing fermented foods or if you're not doing fermented foods or if you're not doing that, and perhaps even if you are, you that, and perhaps even if you are, you that, and perhaps even if you are, you might think about supplementing your might think about supplementing your might think about supplementing your diet with probiotic on occasion. Right? diet with probiotic on occasion. Right? diet with probiotic on occasion. Right? I'm not talking about constantly taking I'm not talking about constantly taking I'm not talking about constantly taking high doses of probiotics. I actually high doses of probiotics. I actually high doses of probiotics. I actually don't recommend that. But, for many don't recommend that. But, for many don't recommend that. But, for many people who are suffering low mood, people who are suffering low mood, people who are suffering low mood, supplementing with a quality probiotic supplementing with a quality probiotic supplementing with a quality probiotic can actually improve mood. And the can actually improve mood. And the can actually improve mood. And the purported mechanism by which that purported mechanism by which that purported mechanism by which that happens is the increase in serotonin happens is the increase in serotonin happens is the increase in serotonin that is allowed by improving the gut that is allowed by improving the gut that is allowed by improving the gut microbiota and including foods with microbiota and including foods with microbiota and including foods with enough tryptophan, which is the enough tryptophan, which is the enough tryptophan, which is the precursor to serotonin. So, what I've precursor to serotonin. So, what I've precursor to serotonin. So, what I've done here is I've created the real done here is I've created the real done here is I've created the real conceptual link, conceptual link, conceptual link, the anatomical link, and the chemical the anatomical link, and the chemical the anatomical link, and the chemical link between the production of serotonin link between the production of serotonin link between the production of serotonin in the gut and serotonin in the brain. in the gut and serotonin in the brain. in the gut and serotonin in the brain. And I wouldn't be talking about this if And I wouldn't be talking about this if And I wouldn't be talking about this if there wasn't actually data on this. I'll there wasn't actually data on this. I'll there wasn't actually data on this. I'll include links to a few papers about the include links to a few papers about the include links to a few papers about the uh and here I'm quoting the title of a uh and here I'm quoting the title of a uh and here I'm quoting the title of a great paper, the interaction of the great paper, the interaction of the great paper, the interaction of the vagus nerve and serotonin in the vagus nerve and serotonin in the vagus nerve and serotonin in the gut-brain axis. gut-brain axis. gut-brain axis. There's also been at least one clinical There's also been at least one clinical There's also been at least one clinical trial study exploring how taking trial study exploring how taking trial study exploring how taking probiotics, and in this case it was probiotics, and in this case it was probiotics, and in this case it was actually probiotics plus magnesium. It actually probiotics plus magnesium. It actually probiotics plus magnesium. It was magnesium orotate, which is was magnesium orotate, which is was magnesium orotate, which is just one form of magnesium, as well as just one form of magnesium, as well as just one form of magnesium, as well as uh I would say a lowish dose of coenzyme I would say a lowish dose of coenzyme I would say a lowish dose of coenzyme Q10. Combining those three things in Q10. Combining those three things in Q10. Combining those three things in this paper entitled probiotics and this paper entitled probiotics and this paper entitled probiotics and magnesium orotate, it should have said magnesium orotate, it should have said magnesium orotate, it should have said probiotics and magnesium orotate and probiotics and magnesium orotate and probiotics and magnesium orotate and coenzyme Q10. But, the title is coenzyme Q10. But, the title is coenzyme Q10. But, the title is probiotics and magnesium orotate for the probiotics and magnesium orotate for the probiotics and magnesium orotate for the treatment of major depressive disorder, treatment of major depressive disorder, treatment of major depressive disorder, a randomized double-blind control trial. a randomized double-blind control trial. a randomized double-blind control trial. Now, I want to emphasize that the Now, I want to emphasize that the Now, I want to emphasize that the results of this paper show that in the results of this paper show that in the results of this paper show that in the short term, short term, short term, there's an improvement in symptoms of there's an improvement in symptoms of there's an improvement in symptoms of major depression. That is, symptoms of major depression. That is, symptoms of major depression. That is, symptoms of major depression were reduced through major depression were reduced through major depression were reduced through the administration of this combination the administration of this combination the administration of this combination of probiotics, magnesium orotate, and probiotics, magnesium orotate, and probiotics, magnesium orotate, and coenzyme Q10. coenzyme Q10. coenzyme Q10. However, it was a short-lived effect. However, it was a short-lived effect. However, it was a short-lived effect. Now, it was also a short-lived Now, it was also a short-lived Now, it was also a short-lived treatment, but it was a short-lived treatment, but it was a short-lived treatment, but it was a short-lived effect that showed up effect that showed up effect that showed up in the essentially starting about the in the essentially starting about the in the essentially starting about the 4-week mark, and then carried out at 10 4-week mark, and then carried out at 10 4-week mark, and then carried out at 10 and 15 weeks, the effect disappeared. and 15 weeks, the effect disappeared. and 15 weeks, the effect disappeared. Now, this is important because what it Now, this is important because what it Now, this is important because what it suggests is that in the short term, if suggests is that in the short term, if suggests is that in the short term, if you're seeking to improve your mood, or you're seeking to improve your mood, or you're seeking to improve your mood, or if you're suffering from major if you're suffering from major if you're suffering from major depression, please seek help for major depression, please seek help for major depression, please seek help for major depression. This, of course, wouldn't be depression. This, of course, wouldn't be depression. This, of course, wouldn't be the only approach. You don't want to the only approach. You don't want to the only approach. You don't want to you know, start being your own you know, start being your own you know, start being your own psychiatrist. You know, this treatment psychiatrist. You know, this treatment psychiatrist. You know, this treatment very well could be combined with things very well could be combined with things very well could be combined with things and should be combined probably with and should be combined probably with and should be combined probably with things like exercise, maybe with things like exercise, maybe with things like exercise, maybe with pharmacologic treatment, with pharmacologic treatment, with pharmacologic treatment, with antidepressant drugs. It really depends antidepressant drugs. It really depends antidepressant drugs. It really depends on the situation. But if you are on the situation. But if you are on the situation. But if you are somebody who's suffering from major somebody who's suffering from major somebody who's suffering from major depression or just mild depression, or depression or just mild depression, or depression or just mild depression, or if you're just seeking to maintain if you're just seeking to maintain if you're just seeking to maintain healthy serotonin levels, or improve healthy serotonin levels, or improve healthy serotonin levels, or improve your mood slightly, your mood slightly, your mood slightly, the consumption of things that are going the consumption of things that are going the consumption of things that are going to improve your gut microbiome to improve your gut microbiome to improve your gut microbiome absolutely is going to support that absolutely is going to support that absolutely is going to support that process. This has been shown over and process. This has been shown over and process. This has been shown over and over again because the gut microbiota over again because the gut microbiota over again because the gut microbiota create these short-chain fatty acids create these short-chain fatty acids create these short-chain fatty acids that are critically involved in this that are critically involved in this that are critically involved in this biochemical pathway that converts biochemical pathway that converts biochemical pathway that converts tryptophan into serotonin. tryptophan into serotonin. tryptophan into serotonin. I'm going to repeat that because it's I'm going to repeat that because it's I'm going to repeat that because it's very important. The microbiota of the very important. The microbiota of the very important. The microbiota of the gut, if they're diverse and you have gut, if they're diverse and you have gut, if they're diverse and you have enough of them, are going to produce the enough of them, are going to produce the enough of them, are going to produce the short-chain fatty acids that are short-chain fatty acids that are short-chain fatty acids that are critically required for the conversion critically required for the conversion critically required for the conversion of tryptophan, which again is going to of tryptophan, which again is going to of tryptophan, which again is going to come from your diet, into the serotonin come from your diet, into the serotonin come from your diet, into the serotonin of your gut, which in turn is going to of your gut, which in turn is going to of your gut, which in turn is going to be relayed be relayed be relayed and it's not the actual serotonin that's and it's not the actual serotonin that's and it's not the actual serotonin that's relayed, but the presence of serotonin relayed, but the presence of serotonin relayed, but the presence of serotonin at sufficient levels in the gut is at sufficient levels in the gut is at sufficient levels in the gut is communicated by the vagus nerve up to communicated by the vagus nerve up to communicated by the vagus nerve up to the dorsal raphe nucleus. Remember, the dorsal raphe nucleus. Remember, the dorsal raphe nucleus. Remember, there's some stations in between, but there's some stations in between, but there's some stations in between, but it's communicated up to the dorsal it's communicated up to the dorsal it's communicated up to the dorsal raphe, and your dorsal raphe then raphe, and your dorsal raphe then raphe, and your dorsal raphe then releases serotonin in the brain. Again, releases serotonin in the brain. Again, releases serotonin in the brain. Again, a beautiful coordination of the body and a beautiful coordination of the body and a beautiful coordination of the body and the brain. Just as activity levels in the brain. Just as activity levels in the brain. Just as activity levels in the body and the brain are matched the body and the brain are matched the body and the brain are matched through the vagus, or from the brain to through the vagus, or from the brain to through the vagus, or from the brain to the body, depending on the direction of the body, depending on the direction of the body, depending on the direction of flow, right? Alertness in the brain, flow, right? Alertness in the brain, flow, right? Alertness in the brain, body becomes alert. Alertness in the body becomes alert. Alertness in the body becomes alert. Alertness in the body, brain becomes alert. Serotonin body, brain becomes alert. Serotonin body, brain becomes alert. Serotonin elevated in the gut, elevated in the gut, elevated in the gut, serotonin elevated in the brain. All of serotonin elevated in the brain. All of serotonin elevated in the brain. All of that happens by way of vagal signaling. that happens by way of vagal signaling. that happens by way of vagal signaling. Okay, so the vagus is involved in lots Okay, so the vagus is involved in lots Okay, so the vagus is involved in lots of lots of things. It's not just for of lots of things. It's not just for of lots of things. It's not just for calming down, it's also for slowing the calming down, it's also for slowing the calming down, it's also for slowing the heart rate. Which is related to calming heart rate. Which is related to calming heart rate. Which is related to calming down, but it's critically required for down, but it's critically required for down, but it's critically required for this thing that we're calling auto this thing that we're calling auto this thing that we're calling auto regulation, for increasing HRV. regulation, for increasing HRV. regulation, for increasing HRV. It's also involved in increasing levels It's also involved in increasing levels It's also involved in increasing levels of alertness. of alertness. of alertness. And you can do that through exercise. And you can do that through exercise. And you can do that through exercise. It's also involved in increasing levels It's also involved in increasing levels It's also involved in increasing levels of serotonin in the brain, you just of serotonin in the brain, you just of serotonin in the brain, you just learned about that. But there is, as learned about that. But there is, as learned about that. But there is, as you've probably heard before, also a you've probably heard before, also a you've probably heard before, also a role for the vagus nerve in calming role for the vagus nerve in calming role for the vagus nerve in calming down. Now, the reason I saved this portion for Now, the reason I saved this portion for Now, the reason I saved this portion for last is because there's just so much last is because there's just so much last is because there's just so much information out there about how vagal information out there about how vagal information out there about how vagal activation calms us down. activation calms us down. activation calms us down. And I felt it was important that I also And I felt it was important that I also And I felt it was important that I also focus on some of the ways that vagus focus on some of the ways that vagus focus on some of the ways that vagus does other things quite robustly, does other things quite robustly, does other things quite robustly, including also enhancing learning and including also enhancing learning and including also enhancing learning and plasticity. But I would be remiss if I didn't offer But I would be remiss if I didn't offer But I would be remiss if I didn't offer some of the science-backed tools for some of the science-backed tools for some of the science-backed tools for calming yourself down by engaging the calming yourself down by engaging the calming yourself down by engaging the vagus. And when I say engaging the vagus. And when I say engaging the vagus. And when I say engaging the vagus, I mean engaging very specific vagus, I mean engaging very specific vagus, I mean engaging very specific pathways within the vagus circuitry. You pathways within the vagus circuitry. You pathways within the vagus circuitry. You now, of course, can appreciate that the now, of course, can appreciate that the now, of course, can appreciate that the vagus nerve is a super highway, vagus nerve is a super highway, vagus nerve is a super highway, bidirectional super highway of sensory bidirectional super highway of sensory bidirectional super highway of sensory and motor connections. Has a ton of and motor connections. Has a ton of and motor connections. Has a ton of specificity. It's signaling mechanical specificity. It's signaling mechanical specificity. It's signaling mechanical and chemical information, it's and chemical information, it's and chemical information, it's controlling the body, and yet there are controlling the body, and yet there are controlling the body, and yet there are specific pathways that will indeed calm specific pathways that will indeed calm specific pathways that will indeed calm you down if you activate them. These are you down if you activate them. These are you down if you activate them. These are the ones that you typically hear about the ones that you typically hear about the ones that you typically hear about at the end of yoga classes, that you at the end of yoga classes, that you at the end of yoga classes, that you hear about often online, and I don't hear about often online, and I don't hear about often online, and I don't want to be disparaging of any of that. want to be disparaging of any of that. want to be disparaging of any of that. In fact, I love the book In fact, I love the book In fact, I love the book polyvagal theory by Stephen Porges. I polyvagal theory by Stephen Porges. I polyvagal theory by Stephen Porges. I think it's a beautiful description of think it's a beautiful description of think it's a beautiful description of our understanding about the vagus nerve our understanding about the vagus nerve our understanding about the vagus nerve circa, I don't know, maybe 10, 15 years circa, I don't know, maybe 10, 15 years circa, I don't know, maybe 10, 15 years ago, which is not disparaging at all. I ago, which is not disparaging at all. I ago, which is not disparaging at all. I think he did an incredible job of think he did an incredible job of think he did an incredible job of talking about the dorsal motor nucleus talking about the dorsal motor nucleus talking about the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, which I'll talk about in a of the vagus, which I'll talk about in a of the vagus, which I'll talk about in a few moments, few moments, few moments, as a pathway for regulation of bodily as a pathway for regulation of bodily as a pathway for regulation of bodily state, for calming down, about the role state, for calming down, about the role state, for calming down, about the role of parent-child relationships in of parent-child relationships in of parent-child relationships in infancy, and how the vagus nerve infancy, and how the vagus nerve infancy, and how the vagus nerve pathways are present and can be pathways are present and can be pathways are present and can be activated early in life without any activated early in life without any activated early in life without any learning or plasticity, and how that's learning or plasticity, and how that's learning or plasticity, and how that's so critically important to the bond so critically important to the bond so critically important to the bond that's formed between caretaker and that's formed between caretaker and that's formed between caretaker and infant. And there's just a beautiful set infant. And there's just a beautiful set infant. And there's just a beautiful set of studies and a beautiful set of studies and a beautiful set of studies and a beautiful set of clinical data that he describes in that clinical data that he describes in that clinical data that he describes in that book, polyvagal theory, as it relates to book, polyvagal theory, as it relates to book, polyvagal theory, as it relates to things like PTSD, et cetera. So, hats things like PTSD, et cetera. So, hats things like PTSD, et cetera. So, hats off, kudos, and much respect and off, kudos, and much respect and off, kudos, and much respect and gratitude to Stephen Porges for writing gratitude to Stephen Porges for writing gratitude to Stephen Porges for writing polyvagal theory. polyvagal theory. polyvagal theory. Most of what I've talked about up until Most of what I've talked about up until Most of what I've talked about up until now are things that are either touched on are things that are either touched on are things that are either touched on just briefly or that are not included in just briefly or that are not included in just briefly or that are not included in his book on polyvagal theory, mostly his book on polyvagal theory, mostly his book on polyvagal theory, mostly because they relate to data that have because they relate to data that have because they relate to data that have been accumulated in the last 10 or 15 been accumulated in the last 10 or 15 been accumulated in the last 10 or 15 years. And so, there was no way it could be in And so, there was no way it could be in And so, there was no way it could be in that book. The ways to calm down using that book. The ways to calm down using that book. The ways to calm down using activation of specific vagal pathways activation of specific vagal pathways activation of specific vagal pathways do indeed do indeed do indeed start to mimic some of the things that start to mimic some of the things that start to mimic some of the things that we hear about in or at the end of yoga we hear about in or at the end of yoga we hear about in or at the end of yoga classes, or that we think of in terms of classes, or that we think of in terms of classes, or that we think of in terms of kind of new agey kind of new agey kind of new agey types of things. Now, this is coming types of things. Now, this is coming types of things. Now, this is coming from somebody who earlier was talking from somebody who earlier was talking from somebody who earlier was talking about breath work, right? I was talking about breath work, right? I was talking about breath work, right? I was talking about cyclic sighing or cyclic about cyclic sighing or cyclic about cyclic sighing or cyclic physiological sighing. You know, in physiological sighing. You know, in physiological sighing. You know, in science we tend to call it respiration science we tend to call it respiration science we tend to call it respiration physiology. Uh we call it cyclic sighing. In Uh we call it cyclic sighing. In Uh we call it cyclic sighing. In yogic traditions or in breath work yogic traditions or in breath work yogic traditions or in breath work classes, they might call it something classes, they might call it something classes, they might call it something else. For those of you that are familiar else. For those of you that are familiar else. For those of you that are familiar with me, you know that I appreciate all with me, you know that I appreciate all with me, you know that I appreciate all the lenses into ways to be healthier the lenses into ways to be healthier the lenses into ways to be healthier mentally, physically, and into mentally, physically, and into mentally, physically, and into ways to improve our performance. I just ways to improve our performance. I just ways to improve our performance. I just happen to take the biological, typically happen to take the biological, typically happen to take the biological, typically the neurobiological, and physiological the neurobiological, and physiological the neurobiological, and physiological perspective on these things because I perspective on these things because I perspective on these things because I like to think, in fact, I know that like to think, in fact, I know that like to think, in fact, I know that understanding mechanism gives us more understanding mechanism gives us more understanding mechanism gives us more agency over these protocols and agency over these protocols and agency over these protocols and practices. So, what I'm going to describe next is So, what I'm going to describe next is So, what I'm going to describe next is my view of the specific practices that my view of the specific practices that my view of the specific practices that yes, absolutely exist in other yes, absolutely exist in other yes, absolutely exist in other territories related to yogic practices, territories related to yogic practices, territories related to yogic practices, etc. that have been that have been that have been purported to increase levels of purported to increase levels of purported to increase levels of parasympathetic activation by engaging parasympathetic activation by engaging parasympathetic activation by engaging the vagus. The reason I selected the vagus. The reason I selected the vagus. The reason I selected the things I'm about to tell you is because things I'm about to tell you is because things I'm about to tell you is because I ran them by two colleagues, one who is I ran them by two colleagues, one who is I ran them by two colleagues, one who is a neurologist and psychiatrist a neurologist and psychiatrist a neurologist and psychiatrist practicing. The other who is a neurosurgeon The other who is a neurosurgeon The other who is a neurosurgeon and is very familiar with the vagus. and is very familiar with the vagus. and is very familiar with the vagus. And what I did is I said, "Listen, And what I did is I said, "Listen, And what I did is I said, "Listen, there's all this stuff out there. there's all this stuff out there. there's all this stuff out there. You can hear all sorts of interesting You can hear all sorts of interesting You can hear all sorts of interesting things on YouTube and elsewhere about things on YouTube and elsewhere about things on YouTube and elsewhere about ways to calm down by engaging the vagus. ways to calm down by engaging the vagus. ways to calm down by engaging the vagus. Which of these Which of these Which of these and I basically described five. Which of and I basically described five. Which of and I basically described five. Which of these typical five practices do you these typical five practices do you these typical five practices do you think actually triggers think actually triggers think actually triggers activation of the specific nerve fibers activation of the specific nerve fibers activation of the specific nerve fibers that would trigger a parasympathetic that would trigger a parasympathetic that would trigger a parasympathetic response?" And what was interesting is that both of And what was interesting is that both of And what was interesting is that both of them said, "Actually, there are three of them said, "Actually, there are three of them said, "Actually, there are three of them that absolutely trigger activation them that absolutely trigger activation them that absolutely trigger activation of the parasympathetic response, and we of the parasympathetic response, and we of the parasympathetic response, and we know because we've recorded from those know because we've recorded from those know because we've recorded from those neural pathways. And so, it's obvious neural pathways. And so, it's obvious neural pathways. And so, it's obvious that they work." So, those are the three that they work." So, those are the three that they work." So, those are the three that I'm going to describe. that I'm going to describe. that I'm going to describe. I want to remind you that if you want to I want to remind you that if you want to I want to remind you that if you want to calm down fast, the physiological sigh calm down fast, the physiological sigh calm down fast, the physiological sigh is still going to be your best tool. If is still going to be your best tool. If is still going to be your best tool. If you want to improve HRV, you want to get you want to improve HRV, you want to get you want to improve HRV, you want to get better auto regulation, and you want better auto regulation, and you want better auto regulation, and you want your HRV to improve in sleep as well, your HRV to improve in sleep as well, your HRV to improve in sleep as well, the deliberate exhales from time to time the deliberate exhales from time to time the deliberate exhales from time to time spread throughout the day still going to spread throughout the day still going to spread throughout the day still going to be great. Still do your high-intensity be great. Still do your high-intensity be great. Still do your high-intensity interval training and other ways to interval training and other ways to interval training and other ways to increase HRV, but if you want to use the increase HRV, but if you want to use the increase HRV, but if you want to use the vagal pathways to calm down, here are vagal pathways to calm down, here are vagal pathways to calm down, here are the three best ways that are supported the three best ways that are supported the three best ways that are supported by the neurophysiology in humans by the neurophysiology in humans by the neurophysiology in humans that I'm going to tell you about. The that I'm going to tell you about. The that I'm going to tell you about. The first capitalizes on the fact that a first capitalizes on the fact that a first capitalizes on the fact that a major branch of the vagus major branch of the vagus major branch of the vagus that extends out of the brainstem and that extends out of the brainstem and that extends out of the brainstem and that includes a lot of those sensory that includes a lot of those sensory that includes a lot of those sensory afferents, those axons, afferents, those axons, afferents, those axons, coursing up from the body to the brain coursing up from the body to the brain coursing up from the body to the brain stem, runs along a portion of the neck that's runs along a portion of the neck that's runs along a portion of the neck that's deep to the muscle that's going to stick deep to the muscle that's going to stick deep to the muscle that's going to stick out if you turn your head to one side. out if you turn your head to one side. out if you turn your head to one side. Now, I'm specifically avoiding the Now, I'm specifically avoiding the Now, I'm specifically avoiding the muscle and vasculature nomenclature muscle and vasculature nomenclature muscle and vasculature nomenclature right now because we've already had so right now because we've already had so right now because we've already had so many terms this episode and it's really many terms this episode and it's really many terms this episode and it's really not necessary to understand how to use not necessary to understand how to use not necessary to understand how to use these practices, but were you to say lie these practices, but were you to say lie these practices, but were you to say lie down or even just sit at a table down or even just sit at a table down or even just sit at a table surface like I am now. For those of you surface like I am now. For those of you surface like I am now. For those of you that are listening, I'm just seated in that are listening, I'm just seated in that are listening, I'm just seated in front of my desk. I'm putting my hands front of my desk. I'm putting my hands front of my desk. I'm putting my hands palms down, palms down, palms down, my elbows at the edge of the table, my elbows at the edge of the table, my elbows at the edge of the table, and what I'm going to do next is I'm and what I'm going to do next is I'm and what I'm going to do next is I'm going to push my elbows down and away going to push my elbows down and away going to push my elbows down and away from my ears. from my ears. from my ears. Then I'm going to turn my head up and to Then I'm going to turn my head up and to Then I'm going to turn my head up and to the right. the right. the right. I'm going to talk while I'm doing it, I'm going to talk while I'm doing it, I'm going to talk while I'm doing it, but you wouldn't want to. but you wouldn't want to. but you wouldn't want to. And when one does that, you feel a kind And when one does that, you feel a kind And when one does that, you feel a kind of stretch both on the outside of the of stretch both on the outside of the of stretch both on the outside of the neck, so that's on the left-hand side, neck, so that's on the left-hand side, neck, so that's on the left-hand side, as well as in particular on the as well as in particular on the as well as in particular on the right-hand side. right-hand side. right-hand side. Okay? And it's important to keep your elbows And it's important to keep your elbows And it's important to keep your elbows pushing down and you're looking up into pushing down and you're looking up into pushing down and you're looking up into the right. And then you do it to the right. And then you do it to the right. And then you do it to the other side, you go up into the left. other side, you go up into the left. other side, you go up into the left. Yes, this is looking a lot like yoga, Yes, this is looking a lot like yoga, Yes, this is looking a lot like yoga, but this is not yoga. This is but this is not yoga. This is but this is not yoga. This is a way of mechanically activating some of a way of mechanically activating some of a way of mechanically activating some of the fibers that course along the fibers that course along the fibers that course along the vasculature and the musculature the side vasculature and the musculature the side vasculature and the musculature the side of the neck of the neck of the neck that is a major pathway of the vagus. that is a major pathway of the vagus. that is a major pathway of the vagus. Now, I had to ask my neurosurgeon and Now, I had to ask my neurosurgeon and Now, I had to ask my neurosurgeon and neurophysiology friends, neurophysiology friends, neurophysiology friends, "Does this actually activate the vagus "Does this actually activate the vagus "Does this actually activate the vagus nerve?" And they said, "Yes, to some degree. And they said, "Yes, to some degree. And they said, "Yes, to some degree. It's mechanically going to activate some It's mechanically going to activate some It's mechanically going to activate some of those of those of those fibers, some of those axons. Is it going fibers, some of those axons. Is it going fibers, some of those axons. Is it going to activate the calming pathways of your to activate the calming pathways of your to activate the calming pathways of your vagus nerve as much as say electrical vagus nerve as much as say electrical vagus nerve as much as say electrical stimulation of your vagus nerve? No, stimulation of your vagus nerve? No, stimulation of your vagus nerve? No, it's not. Electrical stimulation of the it's not. Electrical stimulation of the it's not. Electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve is used for major vagus nerve is used for major vagus nerve is used for major depression. It's also used using depression. It's also used using depression. It's also used using different patterns of stimulation different patterns of stimulation different patterns of stimulation frequency to calm people down. It can be frequency to calm people down. It can be frequency to calm people down. It can be used for a number of different things used for a number of different things used for a number of different things depending on the way the stimulation is depending on the way the stimulation is depending on the way the stimulation is done and where it's done along the vagus and where it's done along the vagus and where it's done along the vagus nerve pathways. nerve pathways. nerve pathways. However, this basically mechanical activation of this basically mechanical activation of this basically mechanical activation of this vagus nerve pathway, it doesn't just vagus nerve pathway, it doesn't just vagus nerve pathway, it doesn't just feel good because you're stretching your feel good because you're stretching your feel good because you're stretching your neck out. It does indeed activate some neck out. It does indeed activate some neck out. It does indeed activate some of the sensory and probably some of the of the sensory and probably some of the of the sensory and probably some of the motor fibers as well that course through motor fibers as well that course through motor fibers as well that course through the vagus nerve. And keep in mind, this the vagus nerve. And keep in mind, this the vagus nerve. And keep in mind, this is interesting, that the majority of the is interesting, that the majority of the is interesting, that the majority of the parasympathetic effect of mechanically parasympathetic effect of mechanically parasympathetic effect of mechanically activating those vagal nerve fibers is activating those vagal nerve fibers is activating those vagal nerve fibers is going to be on the right-hand side. I going to be on the right-hand side. I going to be on the right-hand side. I know this is starting to sound a little know this is starting to sound a little know this is starting to sound a little bit like yoga classes where they say, bit like yoga classes where they say, bit like yoga classes where they say, "Hey, you know, breathing through your "Hey, you know, breathing through your "Hey, you know, breathing through your left nostril or your right nostril is left nostril or your right nostril is left nostril or your right nostril is going to reflect sympathetic or going to reflect sympathetic or going to reflect sympathetic or parasympathetic activation." parasympathetic activation." parasympathetic activation." Guess what? When we had Noam Sobel, one Guess what? When we had Noam Sobel, one Guess what? When we had Noam Sobel, one of the world's foremost experts on of the world's foremost experts on of the world's foremost experts on olfaction and basically sniffing and olfaction and basically sniffing and olfaction and basically sniffing and breathing and its effects on the brain breathing and its effects on the brain breathing and its effects on the brain on the podcast, he indeed told us that on the podcast, he indeed told us that on the podcast, he indeed told us that the switching back and forth between the switching back and forth between the switching back and forth between right and left nostril dominance is right and left nostril dominance is right and left nostril dominance is indeed governed by changes in that indeed governed by changes in that indeed governed by changes in that seesaw of the autonomic nervous system. seesaw of the autonomic nervous system. seesaw of the autonomic nervous system. It switches over, I believe, once about It switches over, I believe, once about It switches over, I believe, once about every 90 minutes. Incredible, right? every 90 minutes. Incredible, right? every 90 minutes. Incredible, right? Obviously impacted if you have a Obviously impacted if you have a Obviously impacted if you have a deviated septum, etc. So, this stuff deviated septum, etc. So, this stuff deviated septum, etc. So, this stuff that comes from yogic tradition, while that comes from yogic tradition, while that comes from yogic tradition, while it might not be mechanistically accurate it might not be mechanistically accurate it might not be mechanistically accurate and it sometimes includes other things and it sometimes includes other things and it sometimes includes other things that are unrelated to the mechanism, that are unrelated to the mechanism, that are unrelated to the mechanism, oftentimes it's pretty spot-on. So, if oftentimes it's pretty spot-on. So, if oftentimes it's pretty spot-on. So, if you want to calm down and you want to do you want to calm down and you want to do you want to calm down and you want to do that by activating your vagus, you that by activating your vagus, you that by activating your vagus, you already know a bunch of ways that you already know a bunch of ways that you already know a bunch of ways that you can do that. We talked about it. can do that. We talked about it. can do that. We talked about it. The ear thing, the exhale thing, etc. The ear thing, the exhale thing, etc. The ear thing, the exhale thing, etc. Physiological sighs. Physiological sighs. Physiological sighs. But, this simple process of looking up But, this simple process of looking up But, this simple process of looking up and to the and to the and to the right and then up into the left. And the and then up into the left. And the and then up into the left. And the reason for doing it both sides is you'll reason for doing it both sides is you'll reason for doing it both sides is you'll feel a stretch on one side then a feel a stretch on one side then a feel a stretch on one side then a contraction on the other. Doing that contraction on the other. Doing that contraction on the other. Doing that a few times back and forth, indeed, can a few times back and forth, indeed, can a few times back and forth, indeed, can lead to a calmer state following. lead to a calmer state following. lead to a calmer state following. How robust that is How robust that is How robust that is going to depend on a lot of factors. is going to depend on a lot of factors. is going to depend on a lot of factors. Frankly, I don't think it's as robust as Frankly, I don't think it's as robust as Frankly, I don't think it's as robust as the physiological sigh or the physiological sigh or the physiological sigh or exhale-emphasized breathing. I don't exhale-emphasized breathing. I don't exhale-emphasized breathing. I don't think it's as fast, but nonetheless, it think it's as fast, but nonetheless, it think it's as fast, but nonetheless, it is supported by the anatomy, it's is supported by the anatomy, it's is supported by the anatomy, it's supported by the function, and a lot of supported by the function, and a lot of supported by the function, and a lot of people simply like to stretch. So, people simply like to stretch. So, people simply like to stretch. So, I'd be remiss if I didn't include that. I'd be remiss if I didn't include that. I'd be remiss if I didn't include that. The other way that you can calm down by The other way that you can calm down by The other way that you can calm down by way of incorporating vagus nerve way of incorporating vagus nerve way of incorporating vagus nerve activation, and you can do that activation, and you can do that activation, and you can do that non-invasively, is the following. All non-invasively, is the following. All non-invasively, is the following. All right, this one, again, right, this one, again, right, this one, again, verified with people who are expert in verified with people who are expert in verified with people who are expert in these specific pathways in humans. And these specific pathways in humans. And these specific pathways in humans. And I know it might not sound I know it might not sound I know it might not sound neuroscientific, but believe it or not, neuroscientific, but believe it or not, neuroscientific, but believe it or not, this stuff that you hear, no pun this stuff that you hear, no pun this stuff that you hear, no pun intended, about humming intended, about humming intended, about humming and activation of the vagus nerve and activation of the vagus nerve and activation of the vagus nerve and calming down by way of humming because calming down by way of humming because calming down by way of humming because of the way it impacts the vagus nerve, of the way it impacts the vagus nerve, of the way it impacts the vagus nerve, turns out to be true. However, and get turns out to be true. However, and get turns out to be true. However, and get this, you actually have to hum this, you actually have to hum this, you actually have to hum correctly. Now, you might think humming correctly. Now, you might think humming correctly. Now, you might think humming is just That's not what we're talking about That's not what we're talking about That's not what we're talking about here. What we're talking about here is, again, What we're talking about here is, again, What we're talking about here is, again, mechanically, through vibration, mechanically, through vibration, mechanically, through vibration, activating the branches of the vagus activating the branches of the vagus activating the branches of the vagus that innervate the larynx. And now, keep that innervate the larynx. And now, keep that innervate the larynx. And now, keep in mind, some of the neurons in nucleus in mind, some of the neurons in nucleus in mind, some of the neurons in nucleus ambiguus that carry neurons that are ambiguus that carry neurons that are ambiguus that carry neurons that are officially members of the vagus nerve, officially members of the vagus nerve, officially members of the vagus nerve, they travel with neurons that are not they travel with neurons that are not they travel with neurons that are not officially members of the vagus, but officially members of the vagus, but officially members of the vagus, but they travel together from nucleus they travel together from nucleus they travel together from nucleus ambiguus to a lot of the speech ambiguus to a lot of the speech ambiguus to a lot of the speech machinery in your throat and in your mouth and in your throat and in your mouth and in your throat and in your mouth and with your tongue and your lips, okay? with your tongue and your lips, okay? with your tongue and your lips, okay? That's a discussion for an entirely That's a discussion for an entirely That's a discussion for an entirely different podcast. But it turns out, if different podcast. But it turns out, if different podcast. But it turns out, if you view the hum through the perspective you view the hum through the perspective you view the hum through the perspective of that it's an H and an M, right? Hmm, of that it's an H and an M, right? Hmm, of that it's an H and an M, right? Hmm, right? That if you want to activate this vagal That if you want to activate this vagal That if you want to activate this vagal pathway to calm down, the way to hum pathway to calm down, the way to hum pathway to calm down, the way to hum correctly, I know this sounds wild, but correctly, I know this sounds wild, but correctly, I know this sounds wild, but the way to hum correctly is actually to the way to hum correctly is actually to the way to hum correctly is actually to extend the H part, not the M. I talked extend the H part, not the M. I talked extend the H part, not the M. I talked to somebody who's expert in speech to somebody who's expert in speech to somebody who's expert in speech neurophysiology, and it's because the H neurophysiology, and it's because the H neurophysiology, and it's because the H part, the is different than the is different than the is different than the part. The is slightly higher frequency, part. The is slightly higher frequency, part. The is slightly higher frequency, and actually, if you notice, if you do a and actually, if you notice, if you do a and actually, if you notice, if you do a extended H hum and then an M hum after, extended H hum and then an M hum after, extended H hum and then an M hum after, you'll notice that it shifts from the you'll notice that it shifts from the you'll notice that it shifts from the back and deeper parts of your throat, back and deeper parts of your throat, back and deeper parts of your throat, which is where the vagal activation which is where the vagal activation which is where the vagal activation comes from, to sort of further up along comes from, to sort of further up along comes from, to sort of further up along your speech pathway toward your mouth your speech pathway toward your mouth your speech pathway toward your mouth and your lips. So, just give that a try and your lips. So, just give that a try and your lips. So, just give that a try for a second. Maybe you have to do this for a second. Maybe you have to do this for a second. Maybe you have to do this in private, because otherwise it'll be in private, because otherwise it'll be in private, because otherwise it'll be too embarrassing, but you too embarrassing, but you too embarrassing, but you is incredibly calming. I did this is incredibly calming. I did this is incredibly calming. I did this earlier, and I was really positively earlier, and I was really positively earlier, and I was really positively surprised how well it worked. It's surprised how well it worked. It's surprised how well it worked. It's basically this. basically this. basically this. You're trying to get the vibration to You're trying to get the vibration to You're trying to get the vibration to move from the back of your throat down move from the back of your throat down move from the back of your throat down your neck into your chest and even into your neck into your chest and even into your neck into your chest and even into your belly and diaphragm. So, it goes your belly and diaphragm. So, it goes your belly and diaphragm. So, it goes like this. If you want to know what it's like from If you want to know what it's like from If you want to know what it's like from a sensation perspective, think about a sensation perspective, think about a sensation perspective, think about gargling. I know this is getting crazier gargling. I know this is getting crazier gargling. I know this is getting crazier and crazier toward the end of this and crazier toward the end of this and crazier toward the end of this podcast, but indeed, if you look online, podcast, but indeed, if you look online, podcast, but indeed, if you look online, gargling has been proposed as a way to gargling has been proposed as a way to gargling has been proposed as a way to activate the calming aspects, so-called activate the calming aspects, so-called activate the calming aspects, so-called parasympathetic aspects of the vagus parasympathetic aspects of the vagus parasympathetic aspects of the vagus nerve. And indeed, when you gargle, nerve. And indeed, when you gargle, nerve. And indeed, when you gargle, you're using the back of your throat. you're using the back of your throat. you're using the back of your throat. That's the sensation. It's this That's the sensation. It's this That's the sensation. It's this vibration at the back of your throat. vibration at the back of your throat. vibration at the back of your throat. So, when you hum, emphasizing the H part So, when you hum, emphasizing the H part So, when you hum, emphasizing the H part of the hmm and leaving off the M part, of the hmm and leaving off the M part, of the hmm and leaving off the M part, it's and you can actually move the vibration and you can actually move the vibration and you can actually move the vibration down into your chest. I find it's easier down into your chest. I find it's easier down into your chest. I find it's easier if I'm lying down. And when you do that, if I'm lying down. And when you do that, if I'm lying down. And when you do that, it's quite remarkable how fast you calm down. quite remarkable how fast you calm down. quite remarkable how fast you calm down. But, give this a try. I know it might But, give this a try. I know it might But, give this a try. I know it might seem a little silly, but if you want to seem a little silly, but if you want to seem a little silly, but if you want to try and really deep relax, try and really deep relax, try and really deep relax, this extended humming that you're trying this extended humming that you're trying this extended humming that you're trying to move down further and further from, to move down further and further from, to move down further and further from, say, your lips to the back of your say, your lips to the back of your say, your lips to the back of your throat to deeper in your throat near throat to deeper in your throat near throat to deeper in your throat near your Adam's apple to your chest region your Adam's apple to your chest region your Adam's apple to your chest region even into your even into your even into your abdomen and your diaphragm abdomen and your diaphragm abdomen and your diaphragm you notice that it really calms you notice that it really calms you notice that it really calms you down. This is also it turns out cuz you down. This is also it turns out cuz you down. This is also it turns out cuz I talked to somebody who is a singer. I talked to somebody who is a singer. I talked to somebody who is a singer. This is the way that singers often will This is the way that singers often will This is the way that singers often will start to relax in order to get into some start to relax in order to get into some start to relax in order to get into some of the deeper frequency notes that they of the deeper frequency notes that they of the deeper frequency notes that they need to hit with their voice. As you've need to hit with their voice. As you've need to hit with their voice. As you've probably observed high notes sort of probably observed high notes sort of probably observed high notes sort of bring people up into their head and even bring people up into their head and even bring people up into their head and even if they're using their diaphragm higher if they're using their diaphragm higher if they're using their diaphragm higher and higher and higher whereas lower and higher and higher whereas lower and higher and higher whereas lower frequency sounds deeper and deeper and frequency sounds deeper and deeper and frequency sounds deeper and deeper and it's just mechanical activation of the it's just mechanical activation of the it's just mechanical activation of the particular branches of the vagus that particular branches of the vagus that particular branches of the vagus that are able to drive this parasympathetic are able to drive this parasympathetic are able to drive this parasympathetic response. And if you notice the hum is response. And if you notice the hum is response. And if you notice the hum is like all speech like all speech like all speech an exhale. It's a long slow exhale. So an exhale. It's a long slow exhale. So an exhale. It's a long slow exhale. So this is the third part. There's also a this is the third part. There's also a this is the third part. There's also a collateral activation which is just collateral activation which is just collateral activation which is just neuroscience speak for activation of neuroscience speak for activation of neuroscience speak for activation of that deceleration pathway. When you do that deceleration pathway. When you do that deceleration pathway. When you do this humming at the back of your throat this humming at the back of your throat this humming at the back of your throat and down into your chest and into your and down into your chest and into your and down into your chest and into your belly you're also getting the same belly you're also getting the same belly you're also getting the same effect that you get with an exhale which effect that you get with an exhale which effect that you get with an exhale which is to slow the heart rate way is to slow the heart rate way is to slow the heart rate way down. So it turns out the stuff they say at So it turns out the stuff they say at So it turns out the stuff they say at retreats in yoga classes retreats in yoga classes retreats in yoga classes is mechanistically supported. At least is mechanistically supported. At least is mechanistically supported. At least some of it is and some of it perhaps some of it is and some of it perhaps some of it is and some of it perhaps isn't and that doesn't really matter isn't and that doesn't really matter isn't and that doesn't really matter right now. What we're talking about is right now. What we're talking about is right now. What we're talking about is the incredible pathway the incredible the incredible pathway the incredible the incredible pathway the incredible neural circuit that is the vagus nerve. neural circuit that is the vagus nerve. neural circuit that is the vagus nerve. In fact calling it the vagus nerve you In fact calling it the vagus nerve you In fact calling it the vagus nerve you now realize as I talked about the now realize as I talked about the now realize as I talked about the beginning of the episode is really not beginning of the episode is really not beginning of the episode is really not sufficient to encapsulate the incredible sufficient to encapsulate the incredible sufficient to encapsulate the incredible variety of different pathways the variety of different pathways the variety of different pathways the sensory stuff up from the body the motor sensory stuff up from the body the motor sensory stuff up from the body the motor stuff down from the brain the way you stuff down from the brain the way you stuff down from the brain the way you can calm down the way you can calm down the way you can calm down the way you can alert yourself the relationship and alert yourself the relationship and alert yourself the relationship and pairing of serotonin levels in the gut pairing of serotonin levels in the gut pairing of serotonin levels in the gut through the microbiome and what you eat through the microbiome and what you eat through the microbiome and what you eat and the tryptophan with serotonin levels and the tryptophan with serotonin levels and the tryptophan with serotonin levels in the brain and mood in the brain and mood in the brain and mood and neuroplasticity and learning and neuroplasticity and learning and neuroplasticity and learning and to be fair to be fair to be fair we didn't even cover everything that the we didn't even cover everything that the we didn't even cover everything that the vagus nerve does. There's this whole vagus nerve does. There's this whole vagus nerve does. There's this whole landscape of electrical stimulation of landscape of electrical stimulation of landscape of electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve, transcranial magnetic the vagus nerve, transcranial magnetic the vagus nerve, transcranial magnetic stimulation of the parts of the brain stimulation of the parts of the brain stimulation of the parts of the brain like the dorsal lateral prefrontal like the dorsal lateral prefrontal like the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex that allow you to engage more cortex that allow you to engage more cortex that allow you to engage more plasticity and control over auto plasticity and control over auto plasticity and control over auto regulation. That stuff all requires devices and a That stuff all requires devices and a That stuff all requires devices and a physician or a laboratory to deliver, so physician or a laboratory to deliver, so physician or a laboratory to deliver, so I focused on the things that you can do I focused on the things that you can do I focused on the things that you can do to activate your vagus in the various to activate your vagus in the various to activate your vagus in the various ways that's going to serve you best in ways that's going to serve you best in ways that's going to serve you best in terms of mental health, physical health, terms of mental health, physical health, terms of mental health, physical health, and performance. And I like to think and performance. And I like to think and performance. And I like to think that you also learned a lot about the that you also learned a lot about the that you also learned a lot about the vagus nerve biology both structurally vagus nerve biology both structurally vagus nerve biology both structurally and functionally. I personally find it and functionally. I personally find it and functionally. I personally find it to be one of the most incredible aspects to be one of the most incredible aspects to be one of the most incredible aspects of the nervous system. It exists in all of the nervous system. It exists in all of the nervous system. It exists in all mammals. It's also in non-mammalian mammals. It's also in non-mammalian mammals. It's also in non-mammalian vertebrates, but it's definitely in us humans and but it's definitely in us humans and but it's definitely in us humans and it's absolutely active from the time it's absolutely active from the time it's absolutely active from the time we're born until the very last breath we we're born until the very last breath we we're born until the very last breath we take in hopefully late age. take in hopefully late age. take in hopefully late age. And it's just a miraculous pathway. And it's just a miraculous pathway. And it's just a miraculous pathway. Nature created this vagus nerve thing created this vagus nerve thing created this vagus nerve thing and you can control it and understanding and you can control it and understanding and you can control it and understanding the mechanisms by which you can control the mechanisms by which you can control the mechanisms by which you can control it, I do believe, is the best way to go it, I do believe, is the best way to go it, I do believe, is the best way to go about it. about it. about it. So, thank you for joining me on this So, thank you for joining me on this So, thank you for joining me on this mechanistic {slash} practical voyage mechanistic {slash} practical voyage mechanistic {slash} practical voyage through the vagus nerve. I'm enchanted through the vagus nerve. I'm enchanted through the vagus nerve. I'm enchanted by the vagus nerve and I like to think by the vagus nerve and I like to think by the vagus nerve and I like to think that you might be, too. If you're that you might be, too. If you're that you might be, too. If you're learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide scientific substantiation for provide scientific substantiation for provide scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The the protocols that are included. The the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one-to-three protocols in the form of one-to-three protocols in the form of one-to-three page PDFs that cover everything from how page PDFs that cover everything from how page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize to optimize your sleep, how to optimize to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion about the vagus nerve today's discussion about the vagus nerve today's discussion about the vagus nerve and all the incredible things it can do and all the incredible things it can do and all the incredible things it can do and all the incredible things that you and all the incredible things that you and all the incredible things that you can do with it. And last but certainly can do with it. And last but certainly can do with it. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest not least, thank you for your interest not least, thank you for your interest in science.