Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Justin for my discussion with Dr. Justin for my discussion with Dr. Justin Sonnenburg. Justin, thanks so much for Sonnenburg. Justin, thanks so much for Sonnenburg. Justin, thanks so much for being here. Great to be here. being here. Great to be here. being here. Great to be here. I am a true novice when it comes to the I am a true novice when it comes to the I am a true novice when it comes to the microbiome. So, I'd like to start off microbiome. So, I'd like to start off microbiome. So, I'd like to start off with a really basic question, which is with a really basic question, which is with a really basic question, which is what is the microbiome? I think, you what is the microbiome? I think, you what is the microbiome? I think, you know, just to start off with clarifying know, just to start off with clarifying know, just to start off with clarifying terminology, microbiome and microbiota terminology, microbiome and microbiota terminology, microbiome and microbiota quite often are used to refer to our quite often are used to refer to our quite often are used to refer to our microbial community interchangeably, and microbial community interchangeably, and microbial community interchangeably, and I'll probably switch between those two I'll probably switch between those two I'll probably switch between those two terms today. The other important thing terms today. The other important thing terms today. The other important thing to realize is that these microbes are um to realize is that these microbes are um to realize is that these microbes are um not just in our gut, but they're all not just in our gut, but they're all not just in our gut, but they're all over our body. They're in our nose, over our body. They're in our nose, over our body. They're in our nose, they're in our mouths, they're on our they're in our mouths, they're on our they're in our mouths, they're on our skin. Basically, anywhere that the skin. Basically, anywhere that the skin. Basically, anywhere that the environment can get to environment can get to environment can get to uh in our body, which includes inside uh in our body, which includes inside uh in our body, which includes inside our digestive tract, of course, is, you our digestive tract, of course, is, you our digestive tract, of course, is, you know, colonized with microbes. And know, colonized with microbes. And know, colonized with microbes. And the vast majority of these are in our the vast majority of these are in our the vast majority of these are in our distal gut and in our colon. And so, distal gut and in our colon. And so, distal gut and in our colon. And so, this is the gut microbiota or gut this is the gut microbiota or gut this is the gut microbiota or gut microbiome. And um the microbiome. And um the microbiome. And um the &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; density of this community is astounding. &gt;&gt; density of this community is astounding. &gt;&gt; density of this community is astounding. You start off with a zoomed-out view and You start off with a zoomed-out view and You start off with a zoomed-out view and you see something that looks like, you see something that looks like, you see something that looks like, you know, fecal material that digest inside know, fecal material that digest inside know, fecal material that digest inside the gut, and you zoom in, and you the gut, and you zoom in, and you the gut, and you zoom in, and you start to, you know, get to the start to, you know, get to the start to, you know, get to the microscopic level and see the microbes. microscopic level and see the microbes. microscopic level and see the microbes. They are just packed, you know, side to They are just packed, you know, side to They are just packed, you know, side to side, end to end. It's a super dense side, end to end. It's a super dense side, end to end. It's a super dense bacterial community, almost like a bacterial community, almost like a bacterial community, almost like a biofilm. To the point where it's thought biofilm. To the point where it's thought biofilm. To the point where it's thought that, you know, around 30% of fecal that, you know, around 30% of fecal that, you know, around 30% of fecal matter is microbes, 30 to 50%. So, you matter is microbes, 30 to 50%. So, you matter is microbes, 30 to 50%. So, you know, it's an incredibly dense know, it's an incredibly dense know, it's an incredibly dense microbial community. We're talking of microbial community. We're talking of microbial community. We're talking of you know, you know, you know, trillions of microbial cells. And all trillions of microbial cells. And all trillions of microbial cells. And all those microbial cells, if you start to those microbial cells, if you start to those microbial cells, if you start to get to know them and see who they get to know them and see who they get to know them and see who they are, break out in the gut probably to break out in the gut probably to break out in the gut probably to hundreds to a thousand species. Most of hundreds to a thousand species. Most of hundreds to a thousand species. Most of these are bacteria, but there are a lot these are bacteria, but there are a lot these are bacteria, but there are a lot of other life forms there. There are of other life forms there. There are of other life forms there. There are archaea, which are little microbes that archaea, which are little microbes that archaea, which are little microbes that are bacteria-like, but they're are bacteria-like, but they're are bacteria-like, but they're different. There are There are There are eukaryotes. So, you know, eukaryotes. So, you know, eukaryotes. So, you know, we commonly think of eukaryotes in the we commonly think of eukaryotes in the we commonly think of eukaryotes in the gut as um as, you know, something like a gut as um as, you know, something like a gut as um as, you know, something like a parasite, but there are eukaryotes, parasite, but there are eukaryotes, parasite, but there are eukaryotes, there are fungi, there are also little there are fungi, there are also little there are fungi, there are also little viruses. There are these bacteriophages viruses. There are these bacteriophages viruses. There are these bacteriophages that infect bacterial cells. And so, that infect bacterial cells. And so, that infect bacterial cells. And so, and those actually outnumber the and those actually outnumber the and those actually outnumber the bacteria like 10 to 1. So, they're just bacteria like 10 to 1. So, they're just bacteria like 10 to 1. So, they're just everywhere there. They kill bacteria, everywhere there. They kill bacteria, everywhere there. They kill bacteria, and so there's these really and so there's these really and so there's these really interesting predator-prey interactions. interesting predator-prey interactions. interesting predator-prey interactions. But overall, it's just this really But overall, it's just this really But overall, it's just this really dense, complex, dynamic ecosystem. Are dense, complex, dynamic ecosystem. Are dense, complex, dynamic ecosystem. Are microbiota seen in newborns? microbiota seen in newborns? microbiota seen in newborns? In other words, where do they come from, In other words, where do they come from, In other words, where do they come from, and dare I ask, what direction do they and dare I ask, what direction do they and dare I ask, what direction do they enter the body? There have been some enter the body? There have been some enter the body? There have been some studies that have looked at whether studies that have looked at whether studies that have looked at whether there are microbes in the womb and there are microbes in the womb and there are microbes in the womb and microbes colonizing the fetus. And microbes colonizing the fetus. And microbes colonizing the fetus. And there's some debate about this, but there's some debate about this, but there's some debate about this, but overall, it looks like that's not a big overall, it looks like that's not a big overall, it looks like that's not a big part of the equation of microbial part of the equation of microbial part of the equation of microbial colonization. And so, each time an colonization. And so, each time an colonization. And so, each time an infant is born, it's this new ecosystem. infant is born, it's this new ecosystem. infant is born, it's this new ecosystem. It's like an island rising up out of the It's like an island rising up out of the It's like an island rising up out of the ocean that has no species on it, and ocean that has no species on it, and ocean that has no species on it, and suddenly there's this like land rush suddenly there's this like land rush suddenly there's this like land rush for, you know, this open territory. for, you know, this open territory. for, you know, this open territory. There also were a lot of different There also were a lot of different There also were a lot of different trajectories that developmental process trajectories that developmental process trajectories that developmental process can take because our microbiota is so can take because our microbiota is so can take because our microbiota is so malleable and so plastic. And those malleable and so plastic. And those malleable and so plastic. And those trajectories can be affected by all trajectories can be affected by all trajectories can be affected by all sorts of factors in early life. So, an sorts of factors in early life. So, an sorts of factors in early life. So, an example is whether an infant is born by example is whether an infant is born by example is whether an infant is born by C-section or born vaginally. Infants C-section or born vaginally. Infants C-section or born vaginally. Infants that are born by C-section actually have that are born by C-section actually have that are born by C-section actually have a gut microbiota that looks more like gut microbiota that looks more like gut microbiota that looks more like human skin than it does like either the human skin than it does like either the human skin than it does like either the birth canal, the vagina the birth canal, the vagina the birth canal, the vagina microbiota, or microbiota, or microbiota, or the mother's stool microbiota. Compound the mother's stool microbiota. Compound the mother's stool microbiota. Compound on top of that, whether you're breastfed on top of that, whether you're breastfed on top of that, whether you're breastfed or formula-fed, whether your family has or formula-fed, whether your family has or formula-fed, whether your family has a pet or doesn't have a pet, whether a pet or doesn't have a pet, whether a pet or doesn't have a pet, whether you're exposed to antibiotics, there are you're exposed to antibiotics, there are you're exposed to antibiotics, there are all these factors that really can change all these factors that really can change all these factors that really can change that developmental process and really that developmental process and really that developmental process and really change your microbial identity change your microbial identity change your microbial identity eventually in life. We know from animal eventually in life. We know from animal eventually in life. We know from animal studies that depending upon the microbes studies that depending upon the microbes studies that depending upon the microbes that you get early in life, you can send that you get early in life, you can send that you get early in life, you can send the immune system or metabolism of an the immune system or metabolism of an the immune system or metabolism of an organism or other parts of their biology organism or other parts of their biology organism or other parts of their biology in totally different developmental in totally different developmental in totally different developmental trajectories. So, what microbes you're trajectories. So, what microbes you're trajectories. So, what microbes you're colonized with early in life can really colonized with early in life can really colonized with early in life can really change your biology. change your biology. change your biology. &gt;&gt; How do I know if my microbiome is &gt;&gt; How do I know if my microbiome is &gt;&gt; How do I know if my microbiome is healthy or unhealthy? Context matters a healthy or unhealthy? Context matters a healthy or unhealthy? Context matters a lot. What's healthy for one person or lot. What's healthy for one person or lot. What's healthy for one person or one population may not be healthy for one population may not be healthy for one population may not be healthy for another person or population. And I will another person or population. And I will another person or population. And I will say that there's no single answer to say that there's no single answer to say that there's no single answer to this, but there are some really this, but there are some really this, but there are some really important considerations. Perhaps the important considerations. Perhaps the important considerations. Perhaps the best way to start talking about this is best way to start talking about this is best way to start talking about this is to go back to go back to go back to um the inception of the Human Microbiome the inception of the Human Microbiome the inception of the Human Microbiome Project, which was this program that Project, which was this program that Project, which was this program that NIH started. They invested a lot of that NIH started. They invested a lot of that NIH started. They invested a lot of money in 2008-2009 money in 2008-2009 money in 2008-2009 for really propelling the field of gut propelling the field of gut propelling the field of gut microbiome research. It was becoming microbiome research. It was becoming microbiome research. It was becoming evident at that point that this was not evident at that point that this was not evident at that point that this was not just a curiosity of human biology, that just a curiosity of human biology, that just a curiosity of human biology, that it was probably really important for our it was probably really important for our it was probably really important for our health. Through those studies, we really health. Through those studies, we really health. Through those studies, we really started to get the image that there is started to get the image that there is started to get the image that there is this tremendous individuality in the gut this tremendous individuality in the gut this tremendous individuality in the gut microbiome. And and so, it's really microbiome. And and so, it's really microbiome. And and so, it's really hard to hard to hard to start drawing start drawing start drawing you know, conclusions after initial pass you know, conclusions after initial pass you know, conclusions after initial pass of that project of what is a healthy of that project of what is a healthy of that project of what is a healthy microbiome. But the other thing that we microbiome. But the other thing that we microbiome. But the other thing that we started to realize at the same time, started to realize at the same time, started to realize at the same time, there were studies going on documenting there were studies going on documenting there were studies going on documenting the gut microbiome of traditional the gut microbiome of traditional the gut microbiome of traditional populations of humans, hunter-gatherers, populations of humans, hunter-gatherers, populations of humans, hunter-gatherers, rural agricultural populations. And um rural agricultural populations. And um rural agricultural populations. And um those studies were really mind-blowing those studies were really mind-blowing those studies were really mind-blowing from the perspective of, you know, all from the perspective of, you know, all from the perspective of, you know, all these people are healthy, they're living these people are healthy, they're living these people are healthy, they're living very different lifestyles, and their very different lifestyles, and their very different lifestyles, and their microbiome doesn't look anything like a microbiome doesn't look anything like a microbiome doesn't look anything like a healthy American microbiome. And so, one healthy American microbiome. And so, one healthy American microbiome. And so, one possibility is that in the possibility is that in the possibility is that in the industrialized world, we have a industrialized world, we have a industrialized world, we have a different microbiome from traditional different microbiome from traditional different microbiome from traditional populations, and that microbiome is well populations, and that microbiome is well populations, and that microbiome is well adapted to our current lifestyle, and adapted to our current lifestyle, and adapted to our current lifestyle, and therefore healthy in the context of an therefore healthy in the context of an therefore healthy in the context of an industrialized society. And there industrialized society. And there industrialized society. And there probably are elements of that are probably are elements of that are probably are elements of that are true. Um but another possibility is that true. Um but another possibility is that true. Um but another possibility is that this is a microbiome that's gone off the this is a microbiome that's gone off the this is a microbiome that's gone off the rails, that it is rails, that it is rails, that it is you know, deteriorating in the face of you know, deteriorating in the face of you know, deteriorating in the face of antibiotic use and antibiotic use and antibiotic use and all the um problems associated with a all the um problems associated with a all the um problems associated with a industrialized diet, Western diet. industrialized diet, Western diet. industrialized diet, Western diet. And that even though the Human And that even though the Human And that even though the Human Microbiome Project documented the microbiome of Project documented the microbiome of Project documented the microbiome of healthy people, healthy Americans, that healthy people, healthy Americans, that healthy people, healthy Americans, that what they really may have been what they really may have been what they really may have been documenting there is a perturbed documenting there is a perturbed documenting there is a perturbed microbiota that's really predisposing microbiota that's really predisposing microbiota that's really predisposing people to a variety of inflammatory and people to a variety of inflammatory and people to a variety of inflammatory and metabolic diseases. If my gut microbiome metabolic diseases. If my gut microbiome metabolic diseases. If my gut microbiome was dysbiotic, it was off dysbiotic, it was off dysbiotic, it was off um early in life, can I rescue that um early in life, can I rescue that um early in life, can I rescue that through proper conditions and exercise, through proper conditions and exercise, through proper conditions and exercise, or is there some sort of or is there some sort of or is there some sort of fixed pattern that's going to be hard fixed pattern that's going to be hard fixed pattern that's going to be hard for me to escape from? for me to escape from? for me to escape from? &gt;&gt; Yeah, the there's a big field that's &gt;&gt; Yeah, the there's a big field that's &gt;&gt; Yeah, the there's a big field that's emerging now that emerging now that emerging now that you know, we refer to as kind of you know, we refer to as kind of you know, we refer to as kind of reprogramming the gut microbiome. And reprogramming the gut microbiome. And reprogramming the gut microbiome. And the issue that I think we're seeing in the issue that I think we're seeing in the issue that I think we're seeing in the field is that uh microbiomes quite the field is that uh microbiomes quite the field is that uh microbiomes quite often, whether they're diseased or often, whether they're diseased or often, whether they're diseased or healthy, exist in stable states. They healthy, exist in stable states. They healthy, exist in stable states. They kind of tend towards this kind of tend towards this kind of tend towards this well that has gravity to it in a in a well that has gravity to it in a in a well that has gravity to it in a in a way, biological gravity, where it's way, biological gravity, where it's way, biological gravity, where it's really hard to dislodge that community really hard to dislodge that community really hard to dislodge that community from that state. So, even individuals, from that state. So, even individuals, from that state. So, even individuals, for instance, that get antibiotics, for instance, that get antibiotics, for instance, that get antibiotics, you know, you take oral antibiotics, the you know, you take oral antibiotics, the you know, you take oral antibiotics, the community takes this huge hit. We know community takes this huge hit. We know community takes this huge hit. We know that a bunch of microbes die, the that a bunch of microbes die, the that a bunch of microbes die, the composition changes, and you know, that composition changes, and you know, that composition changes, and you know, that represents a period of vulnerability represents a period of vulnerability represents a period of vulnerability where pathogens can come in and take where pathogens can come in and take where pathogens can come in and take over and cause disease. But if that over and cause disease. But if that over and cause disease. But if that doesn't happen, the microbiota kind of doesn't happen, the microbiota kind of doesn't happen, the microbiota kind of works its way back to something that is works its way back to something that is works its way back to something that is not exactly like, but similar to the not exactly like, but similar to the not exactly like, but similar to the pre-antibiotic treatment. We know with pre-antibiotic treatment. We know with pre-antibiotic treatment. We know with dietary perturbations, dietary perturbations, dietary perturbations, um quite often, you'll see a really rapid quite often, you'll see a really rapid quite often, you'll see a really rapid change to the gut microbiome. And then change to the gut microbiome. And then change to the gut microbiome. And then this it's almost like a memory where it this it's almost like a memory where it this it's almost like a memory where it snaps back to this something that's very snaps back to this something that's very snaps back to this something that's very similar to the original state, even similar to the original state, even similar to the original state, even though the diet remains different. And though the diet remains different. And though the diet remains different. And so, there's this incredible so, there's this incredible so, there's this incredible what we refer to as resilience of the what we refer to as resilience of the what we refer to as resilience of the gut microbiome and resistance to gut microbiome and resistance to gut microbiome and resistance to change, or at least resistance to change, or at least resistance to change, or at least resistance to establishing a new stable state. So, establishing a new stable state. So, establishing a new stable state. So, that doesn't mean it's hopeless to that doesn't mean it's hopeless to that doesn't mean it's hopeless to change an unhealthy microbiome to a change an unhealthy microbiome to a change an unhealthy microbiome to a healthy microbiome, but it does mean healthy microbiome, but it does mean healthy microbiome, but it does mean that we need to think carefully about that we need to think carefully about that we need to think carefully about you know, restructuring these you know, restructuring these you know, restructuring these communities in ways where we can achieve communities in ways where we can achieve communities in ways where we can achieve a new stable state that will resist the a new stable state that will resist the a new stable state that will resist the microbial community getting pulled back microbial community getting pulled back microbial community getting pulled back to that original state. And you know, to that original state. And you know, to that original state. And you know, one of the kind of simplest and nicest one of the kind of simplest and nicest one of the kind of simplest and nicest examples of this is a an experiment that examples of this is a an experiment that examples of this is a an experiment that we performed with mice, where we, we performed with mice, where we, we performed with mice, where we, you know, we're feeding mice a normal you know, we're feeding mice a normal you know, we're feeding mice a normal mouse diet, mouse diet, mouse diet, a lot of nutrients there for the gut a lot of nutrients there for the gut a lot of nutrients there for the gut microbiota, things like dietary fiber. microbiota, things like dietary fiber. microbiota, things like dietary fiber. And we switched those mice, half the And we switched those mice, half the And we switched those mice, half the mice, to a low-fiber diet. And we were mice, to a low-fiber diet. And we were mice, to a low-fiber diet. And we were basically asking the question that, you basically asking the question that, you basically asking the question that, you know, if you switch to kind of a know, if you switch to kind of a know, if you switch to kind of a Western-like diet, a low-fiber, Western-like diet, a low-fiber, Western-like diet, a low-fiber, higher-fat diet, what happens to the gut higher-fat diet, what happens to the gut higher-fat diet, what happens to the gut microbiota? And we saw the microbiota microbiota? And we saw the microbiota microbiota? And we saw the microbiota change, it lost diversity. It was very change, it lost diversity. It was very change, it lost diversity. It was very similar to what we see in similar to what we see in similar to what we see in the difference between industrialized in the difference between industrialized in the difference between industrialized and traditional populations. But when we and traditional populations. But when we and traditional populations. But when we brought back a healthy diet, a lot of brought back a healthy diet, a lot of brought back a healthy diet, a lot of the microbes returned, you know, it was the microbes returned, you know, it was the microbes returned, you know, it was fairly, you know, there was this fairly, you know, there was this fairly, you know, there was this kind of memory where it went back to kind of memory where it went back to kind of memory where it went back to very similar to its original state. The very similar to its original state. The very similar to its original state. The difference is that when we put the mice difference is that when we put the mice difference is that when we put the mice on a low-fiber, high-fat diet, and then on a low-fiber, high-fat diet, and then on a low-fiber, high-fat diet, and then kept them on that for multiple kept them on that for multiple kept them on that for multiple generations, um we saw this progressive deterioration um we saw this progressive deterioration um we saw this progressive deterioration over the course of generations, where by over the course of generations, where by over the course of generations, where by the fourth generation, the gut the fourth generation, the gut the fourth generation, the gut microbiome was a microbiome was a microbiome was a you know, a fraction of what it you know, a fraction of what it you know, a fraction of what it originally was. Let's say 30% of the originally was. Let's say 30% of the originally was. Let's say 30% of the species only remained. Um something like species only remained. Um something like species only remained. Um something like 70% of the species had gone extinct or 70% of the species had gone extinct or 70% of the species had gone extinct or appeared to have gone extinct. appeared to have gone extinct. appeared to have gone extinct. We then put those mice back onto a We then put those mice back onto a We then put those mice back onto a high-fiber diet, and we didn't see high-fiber diet, and we didn't see high-fiber diet, and we didn't see recovery. So, in that case, it's a um a recovery. So, in that case, it's a um a recovery. So, in that case, it's a um a situation where a new stable state has situation where a new stable state has situation where a new stable state has been achieved. Um in that case, it's been achieved. Um in that case, it's been achieved. Um in that case, it's probably because those mice don't probably because those mice don't probably because those mice don't actually have access to the microbes actually have access to the microbes actually have access to the microbes that they've lost. And we actually know that they've lost. And we actually know that they've lost. And we actually know that we did a the control experiment of that we did a the control experiment of that we did a the control experiment of um mice on a high-fiber diet for four um mice on a high-fiber diet for four um mice on a high-fiber diet for four generations, they maintain all their generations, they maintain all their generations, they maintain all their microbes. If we take those fourth microbes. If we take those fourth microbes. If we take those fourth generation mice with all the diversity generation mice with all the diversity generation mice with all the diversity and do a fecal transplant into the mice and do a fecal transplant into the mice and do a fecal transplant into the mice that had lost their microbes, but had that had lost their microbes, but had that had lost their microbes, but had been returned to a high-fiber diet, been returned to a high-fiber diet, been returned to a high-fiber diet, all of the diversity was reconstituted. all of the diversity was reconstituted. all of the diversity was reconstituted. So, it was um you know, so your So, it was um you know, so your So, it was um you know, so your question of like, how do we establish question of like, how do we establish question of like, how do we establish new stable states? How do we get back to new stable states? How do we get back to new stable states? How do we get back to a healthy microbiota if we have taken a healthy microbiota if we have taken a healthy microbiota if we have taken a lot of antibiotics or have a lot of antibiotics or have a lot of antibiotics or have a deteriorated microbiota? It's probably a deteriorated microbiota? It's probably a deteriorated microbiota? It's probably a combination of having access to the combination of having access to the combination of having access to the right microbes, and we can talk about right microbes, and we can talk about right microbes, and we can talk about what that access looks like. It may look what that access looks like. It may look what that access looks like. It may look like therapeutics in the future. There like therapeutics in the future. There like therapeutics in the future. There are a lot of companies working on are a lot of companies working on are a lot of companies working on creating cocktails of healthy microbes, creating cocktails of healthy microbes, creating cocktails of healthy microbes, but it'll be a combination of access to but it'll be a combination of access to but it'll be a combination of access to the right microbes, and um nourishing the right microbes, and um nourishing the right microbes, and um nourishing those microbes with the proper diet. those microbes with the proper diet. those microbes with the proper diet. What's the idea about cleanses and What's the idea about cleanses and What's the idea about cleanses and fasting as it relates to the health or fasting as it relates to the health or fasting as it relates to the health or the dysbiosis of the microbiota? Yeah, I the dysbiosis of the microbiota? Yeah, I the dysbiosis of the microbiota? Yeah, I mean, we know that like, you know, in mean, we know that like, you know, in mean, we know that like, you know, in studies that are being done now to studies that are being done now to studies that are being done now to reprogram the gut microbiota to install reprogram the gut microbiota to install reprogram the gut microbiota to install a completely new microbial community, a completely new microbial community, a completely new microbial community, the first step is to wash away the first step is to wash away the first step is to wash away the resident microbial community that's resident microbial community that's resident microbial community that's there. So, if you're in the process of there. So, if you're in the process of there. So, if you're in the process of acquiring a really good microbiota, and acquiring a really good microbiota, and acquiring a really good microbiota, and you know how to do that, then the you know how to do that, then the you know how to do that, then the flushing everything out is great. Um flushing everything out is great. Um flushing everything out is great. Um otherwise, what is happening is you're otherwise, what is happening is you're otherwise, what is happening is you're kind of leaving rebuilding of the kind of leaving rebuilding of the kind of leaving rebuilding of the community to chance. Like, what is it? community to chance. Like, what is it? community to chance. Like, what is it? And so, um And so, um And so, um you know, what microbes are going you know, what microbes are going you know, what microbes are going to colonize, who's going to take up to colonize, who's going to take up to colonize, who's going to take up space after you do this flush or space after you do this flush or space after you do this flush or cleanse? And um cleanse? And um cleanse? And um you know, that I think it's a little you know, that I think it's a little you know, that I think it's a little bit like playing Russian roulette. You bit like playing Russian roulette. You bit like playing Russian roulette. You may end up with a good microbial may end up with a good microbial may end up with a good microbial community in there afterwards, you may community in there afterwards, you may community in there afterwards, you may not. Um you certainly want to pay close not. Um you certainly want to pay close not. Um you certainly want to pay close attention to what you're eating while attention to what you're eating while attention to what you're eating while you're doing the reconstitution of the you're doing the reconstitution of the you're doing the reconstitution of the community after you do something like community after you do something like community after you do something like that. It sounds to me that avoiding that. It sounds to me that avoiding that. It sounds to me that avoiding processed foods is a good idea, or processed foods is a good idea, or processed foods is a good idea, or heavily processed foods in general. I heavily processed foods in general. I heavily processed foods in general. I mean, not that mean, not that mean, not that you know, the occasional consumption is you know, the occasional consumption is you know, the occasional consumption is necessarily bad, but consuming processed necessarily bad, but consuming processed necessarily bad, but consuming processed foods is just bad for the microbiome. foods is just bad for the microbiome. foods is just bad for the microbiome. Can we say that categorically? For sure. Can we say that categorically? For sure. Can we say that categorically? For sure. Yeah. You're you're exactly right. And Yeah. You're you're exactly right. And Yeah. You're you're exactly right. And we can break down you know, there's a we can break down you know, there's a we can break down you know, there's a lot of data of why different components lot of data of why different components lot of data of why different components of processed food are so bad for us and of processed food are so bad for us and of processed food are so bad for us and so bad for our microbiome, and I can so bad for our microbiome, and I can so bad for our microbiome, and I can talk about a few examples of that. But talk about a few examples of that. But talk about a few examples of that. But the flip side of this, the plant-based the flip side of this, the plant-based the flip side of this, the plant-based diet, if you're eating a bunch of diet, if you're eating a bunch of diet, if you're eating a bunch of complex um you know, fibers that feed complex um you know, fibers that feed complex um you know, fibers that feed your gut microbiota, your gut microbiota your gut microbiota, your gut microbiota your gut microbiota, your gut microbiota produces these substances called produces these substances called produces these substances called short-chain fatty acids, things like short-chain fatty acids, things like short-chain fatty acids, things like butyrate. And it's known that these butyrate. And it's known that these butyrate. And it's known that these short-chain fatty acids play really short-chain fatty acids play really short-chain fatty acids play really essential components both in terms of essential components both in terms of essential components both in terms of fueling colonocytes, enforcing the fueling colonocytes, enforcing the fueling colonocytes, enforcing the barrier, keeping inflammation low, barrier, keeping inflammation low, barrier, keeping inflammation low, regulating the immune system, regulating the immune system, regulating the immune system, regulating metabolism. Your gut microbiota is just metabolism. Your gut microbiota is just metabolism. Your gut microbiota is just producing this vast array of producing this vast array of producing this vast array of fermentation end products that then get fermentation end products that then get fermentation end products that then get absorbed into our bloodstream and have absorbed into our bloodstream and have absorbed into our bloodstream and have all of these tremendous cascading all of these tremendous cascading all of these tremendous cascading effects that appear to be largely effects that appear to be largely effects that appear to be largely beneficial on our biology. Now, beneficial on our biology. Now, beneficial on our biology. Now, processed foods, I think, is this other processed foods, I think, is this other processed foods, I think, is this other dimension where you have all of these dimension where you have all of these dimension where you have all of these weird chemicals, artificial sweeteners, weird chemicals, artificial sweeteners, weird chemicals, artificial sweeteners, weird fats, um you know, a lot of weird fats, um you know, a lot of weird fats, um you know, a lot of refined simple nutrients. The simple refined simple nutrients. The simple refined simple nutrients. The simple nutrients we've talked about, but we nutrients we've talked about, but we nutrients we've talked about, but we know that, for instance, artificial know that, for instance, artificial know that, for instance, artificial sweeteners can have a massive negative sweeteners can have a massive negative sweeteners can have a massive negative impact on the gut microbiome and can impact on the gut microbiome and can impact on the gut microbiome and can lead us towards metabolic syndrome. lead us towards metabolic syndrome. lead us towards metabolic syndrome. Actually, there's been beautiful work Actually, there's been beautiful work Actually, there's been beautiful work out of the Weizmann Institute on this. out of the Weizmann Institute on this. out of the Weizmann Institute on this. And then emulsifiers, these compounds And then emulsifiers, these compounds And then emulsifiers, these compounds that are put in processed foods to help that are put in processed foods to help that are put in processed foods to help them maintain shelf stability, so things them maintain shelf stability, so things them maintain shelf stability, so things don't separate and so, um you know, all don't separate and so, um you know, all don't separate and so, um you know, all the moisture content is retained the moisture content is retained the moisture content is retained appropriately. Um appropriately. Um appropriately. Um many of these are known to disrupt the many of these are known to disrupt the many of these are known to disrupt the mucus layer. And as soon as you start mucus layer. And as soon as you start mucus layer. And as soon as you start disrupting that barrier, that can lead disrupting that barrier, that can lead disrupting that barrier, that can lead you in the direction of inflammation. you in the direction of inflammation. you in the direction of inflammation. And in animal models, we know that can And in animal models, we know that can And in animal models, we know that can lead towards metabolic syndrome as well. lead towards metabolic syndrome as well. lead towards metabolic syndrome as well. So, there's components of So, there's components of So, there's components of processed food that are, when studied in processed food that are, when studied in processed food that are, when studied in isolation, known to have a direct isolation, known to have a direct isolation, known to have a direct negative impact on gut biology and the negative impact on gut biology and the negative impact on gut biology and the microbiota. &gt;&gt; I do want to make sure that we &gt;&gt; I do want to make sure that we &gt;&gt; I do want to make sure that we distinguish artificial sweeteners from distinguish artificial sweeteners from distinguish artificial sweeteners from non-caloric plant-based sweeteners. Do non-caloric plant-based sweeteners. Do non-caloric plant-based sweeteners. Do we know anything about plant-based we know anything about plant-based we know anything about plant-based non-caloric sweeteners or low-caloric non-caloric sweeteners or low-caloric non-caloric sweeteners or low-caloric sweeteners? Very little. You know, a lot sweeteners? Very little. You know, a lot sweeteners? Very little. You know, a lot of those have a lot more bang for the of those have a lot more bang for the of those have a lot more bang for the buck. They're they're incredibly sweet, buck. They're they're incredibly sweet, buck. They're they're incredibly sweet, so it takes a really small amount for so it takes a really small amount for so it takes a really small amount for them to trigger a huge amount of them to trigger a huge amount of them to trigger a huge amount of sweetness. And so, it's depending upon sweetness. And so, it's depending upon sweetness. And so, it's depending upon the mechanism of action by which these the mechanism of action by which these the mechanism of action by which these sweeteners that are not sugar are sweeteners that are not sugar are sweeteners that are not sugar are impacting our biology, it may be that impacting our biology, it may be that impacting our biology, it may be that those are actually um you know, those are actually um you know, those are actually um you know, less negative or more healthy than less negative or more healthy than less negative or more healthy than the ones that are artificial, just the ones that are artificial, just the ones that are artificial, just because it requires less of them in the because it requires less of them in the because it requires less of them in the food for us to perceive that sweet food for us to perceive that sweet food for us to perceive that sweet taste. Um historically, there are, I taste. Um historically, there are, I taste. Um historically, there are, I think, traditional populations that use think, traditional populations that use think, traditional populations that use these, for instance, to sweeten um you these, for instance, to sweeten um you these, for instance, to sweeten um you know, sweeten different foods um that know, sweeten different foods um that know, sweeten different foods um that our bodies just kind of know how to deal our bodies just kind of know how to deal our bodies just kind of know how to deal with those compounds better than the with those compounds better than the with those compounds better than the ones that are synthetic. Um but I think ones that are synthetic. Um but I think ones that are synthetic. Um but I think the you know, the studies still need to the you know, the studies still need to the you know, the studies still need to be done. Do you actively avoid be done. Do you actively avoid be done. Do you actively avoid artificial sweeteners, sucralose, artificial sweeteners, sucralose, artificial sweeteners, sucralose, aspartame, saccharin? You personally? aspartame, saccharin? You personally? aspartame, saccharin? You personally? Yeah, you know, I do. I avoid them, Yeah, you know, I do. I avoid them, Yeah, you know, I do. I avoid them, but I'm not I you know, I think that but I'm not I you know, I think that but I'm not I you know, I think that just doing things in moderation makes it just doing things in moderation makes it just doing things in moderation makes it a lot easier. And doing things slowly a lot easier. And doing things slowly a lot easier. And doing things slowly makes it a lot easier. And so, so there makes it a lot easier. And so, so there makes it a lot easier. And so, so there are very few rules that I have that are very few rules that I have that are very few rules that I have that are hard and fast. I'm a pretty flexible hard and fast. I'm a pretty flexible hard and fast. I'm a pretty flexible eater. I don't believe that having an eater. I don't believe that having an eater. I don't believe that having an artificial, you know, having a diet Coke artificial, you know, having a diet Coke artificial, you know, having a diet Coke um will, you know, somehow cascade into um will, you know, somehow cascade into um will, you know, somehow cascade into some terrible disease or something like some terrible disease or something like some terrible disease or something like that. I'd love to talk about fiber and that. I'd love to talk about fiber and that. I'd love to talk about fiber and fermented foods, because you and Chris fermented foods, because you and Chris fermented foods, because you and Chris had a what I think is a really had a what I think is a really had a what I think is a really interesting and exciting paper comparing interesting and exciting paper comparing interesting and exciting paper comparing inflammatory markers of people who ate a inflammatory markers of people who ate a inflammatory markers of people who ate a certain amount of fiber or a certain amount of fiber or a certain amount of fiber or a certain amount of these fermented foods. Let amount of these fermented foods. Let amount of these fermented foods. Let me take before I dive into that study, me take before I dive into that study, me take before I dive into that study, let me take a step back, because I think let me take a step back, because I think let me take a step back, because I think the reason that we did this study goes the reason that we did this study goes the reason that we did this study goes back to this kind of epiphany that we back to this kind of epiphany that we back to this kind of epiphany that we had while studying the gut microbiome, had while studying the gut microbiome, had while studying the gut microbiome, because I think when we started studying because I think when we started studying because I think when we started studying it at Stanford, we were thinking about it at Stanford, we were thinking about it at Stanford, we were thinking about it as this kind of newly appreciated it as this kind of newly appreciated it as this kind of newly appreciated aspect of our biology, almost like um aspect of our biology, almost like um aspect of our biology, almost like um finding an organ that we didn't know was finding an organ that we didn't know was finding an organ that we didn't know was there, and starting to think about like there, and starting to think about like there, and starting to think about like all the drug targets that were there. all the drug targets that were there. all the drug targets that were there. Can we go in with small molecule drugs Can we go in with small molecule drugs Can we go in with small molecule drugs and think of ways to manipulate this and think of ways to manipulate this and think of ways to manipulate this community to ameliorate disease. And um community to ameliorate disease. And um community to ameliorate disease. And um this is largely the mindset of Western this is largely the mindset of Western this is largely the mindset of Western medicine, and largely born out of the medicine, and largely born out of the medicine, and largely born out of the era of infectious disease. Um you wait era of infectious disease. Um you wait era of infectious disease. Um you wait for an infection to start, a bacterial for an infection to start, a bacterial for an infection to start, a bacterial infection, you treat with antibiotics, infection, you treat with antibiotics, infection, you treat with antibiotics, and you know, that's the way medicine is and you know, that's the way medicine is and you know, that's the way medicine is practiced. And that's become less practiced. And that's become less practiced. And that's become less successful over time as we've moved into successful over time as we've moved into successful over time as we've moved into this era of inflammatory Western this era of inflammatory Western this era of inflammatory Western diseases, and largely moved out of the diseases, and largely moved out of the diseases, and largely moved out of the era of infectious diseases, at least era of infectious diseases, at least era of infectious diseases, at least infectious bacterial diseases. That is infectious bacterial diseases. That is infectious bacterial diseases. That is paradigm of waiting for diseases to paradigm of waiting for diseases to paradigm of waiting for diseases to appear and come into the clinic um is appear and come into the clinic um is appear and come into the clinic um is not really very effective in the context not really very effective in the context not really very effective in the context of inflammatory Western diseases, of inflammatory Western diseases, of inflammatory Western diseases, autoimmune diseases, metabolic syndrome, autoimmune diseases, metabolic syndrome, autoimmune diseases, metabolic syndrome, uh heart diseases, and inflammatory uh heart diseases, and inflammatory uh heart diseases, and inflammatory disease. You know, the list goes on and disease. You know, the list goes on and disease. You know, the list goes on and on. And so, we started to think a lot on. And so, we started to think a lot on. And so, we started to think a lot about like, how can we get out in front about like, how can we get out in front about like, how can we get out in front of this? How can we think about like of this? How can we think about like of this? How can we think about like preventative ways of dealing with this preventative ways of dealing with this preventative ways of dealing with this crisis of metabolic and inflammatory crisis of metabolic and inflammatory crisis of metabolic and inflammatory diseases. And this tremendous, beautiful diseases. And this tremendous, beautiful diseases. And this tremendous, beautiful body of literature started to come body of literature started to come body of literature started to come forward in the field that showed that forward in the field that showed that forward in the field that showed that the gut microbiome is absolutely the gut microbiome is absolutely the gut microbiome is absolutely critical to modulating our immune critical to modulating our immune critical to modulating our immune status. So, if you change the status. So, if you change the status. So, if you change the microbiome, you can fundamentally change microbiome, you can fundamentally change microbiome, you can fundamentally change how the immune system operates. And we how the immune system operates. And we how the immune system operates. And we know that the immune system is the at know that the immune system is the at know that the immune system is the at the basis of a lot of these diseases, the basis of a lot of these diseases, the basis of a lot of these diseases, inflammatory chronic diseases. And so, inflammatory chronic diseases. And so, inflammatory chronic diseases. And so, it brought up this possibility that it brought up this possibility that it brought up this possibility that maybe the fact that we're not nourishing maybe the fact that we're not nourishing maybe the fact that we're not nourishing this community well enough, maybe the this community well enough, maybe the this community well enough, maybe the fact that it's um deteriorated over time fact that it's um deteriorated over time fact that it's um deteriorated over time um due to all of the things that go um due to all of the things that go um due to all of the things that go along with an industrialized lifestyle, along with an industrialized lifestyle, along with an industrialized lifestyle, antibiotics, and so forth. Um maybe we antibiotics, and so forth. Um maybe we antibiotics, and so forth. Um maybe we have a microbiome right now in the have a microbiome right now in the have a microbiome right now in the industrialized world that is setting our industrialized world that is setting our industrialized world that is setting our immune system at a set point, simmering immune system at a set point, simmering immune system at a set point, simmering inflammation, that's driving us towards inflammation, that's driving us towards inflammation, that's driving us towards these inflammatory diseases. And these inflammatory diseases. And these inflammatory diseases. And wouldn't it be wonderful if we could wouldn't it be wonderful if we could wouldn't it be wonderful if we could figure out how to um figure out how to um figure out how to um uh use diet specifically, but just kind of use diet specifically, but just kind of use diet specifically, but just kind of learn the rules of how to reconfigure learn the rules of how to reconfigure learn the rules of how to reconfigure both the composition and function of our both the composition and function of our both the composition and function of our gut microbiome, so that inflammation was gut microbiome, so that inflammation was gut microbiome, so that inflammation was different in our bodies, so that each different in our bodies, so that each different in our bodies, so that each one of us was less likely to go on and one of us was less likely to go on and one of us was less likely to go on and develop an inflammatory disease. Our develop an inflammatory disease. Our develop an inflammatory disease. Our flagship study, we wanted to understand flagship study, we wanted to understand flagship study, we wanted to understand if we put people on a high-fiber diet, if we put people on a high-fiber diet, if we put people on a high-fiber diet, um how would that affect their um how would that affect their um how would that affect their microbiome and immune system? And if we microbiome and immune system? And if we microbiome and immune system? And if we put them on a high-fermented food diet, put them on a high-fermented food diet, put them on a high-fermented food diet, a diet rich in live microbes and all the a diet rich in live microbes and all the a diet rich in live microbes and all the metabolites that um are present from metabolites that um are present from metabolites that um are present from fermentation in foods, how would that fermentation in foods, how would that fermentation in foods, how would that change microbiome and immune system? The change microbiome and immune system? The change microbiome and immune system? The idea was, in the case of the high-fiber idea was, in the case of the high-fiber idea was, in the case of the high-fiber diet, just increasing plant-based fiber. diet, just increasing plant-based fiber. diet, just increasing plant-based fiber. So, can you eat more whole grains, more So, can you eat more whole grains, more So, can you eat more whole grains, more legumes, more vegetables, nuts, get the legumes, more vegetables, nuts, get the legumes, more vegetables, nuts, get the fiber up in the range of, you know, from fiber up in the range of, you know, from fiber up in the range of, you know, from 15 to 20 g per day up to over 40 g per 15 to 20 g per day up to over 40 g per 15 to 20 g per day up to over 40 g per day. So, can you kind of double or more day. So, can you kind of double or more day. So, can you kind of double or more the amount of fiber that you eat per the amount of fiber that you eat per the amount of fiber that you eat per day? The people that were eating the day? The people that were eating the day? The people that were eating the high-fermented food uh diet, um they high-fermented food uh diet, um they high-fermented food uh diet, um they were instructed to basically eat um, you were instructed to basically eat um, you were instructed to basically eat um, you know, foods that you could buy at a know, foods that you could buy at a know, foods that you could buy at a grocery store that were naturally grocery store that were naturally grocery store that were naturally fermented and contain live microbes. fermented and contain live microbes. fermented and contain live microbes. Yogurt, kefir, uh, sauerkraut, kimchi. Yogurt, kefir, uh, sauerkraut, kimchi. Yogurt, kefir, uh, sauerkraut, kimchi. We instructed people to eat We instructed people to eat We instructed people to eat non-sweetened yogurts. Um, a huge non-sweetened yogurts. Um, a huge non-sweetened yogurts. Um, a huge pitfall in this area is you can have a pitfall in this area is you can have a pitfall in this area is you can have a yogurt loaded with bacteria, kind of the yogurt loaded with bacteria, kind of the yogurt loaded with bacteria, kind of the base of what's healthy, and then a ton base of what's healthy, and then a ton base of what's healthy, and then a ton of like artificial flavoring and sugar of like artificial flavoring and sugar of like artificial flavoring and sugar loaded on top of that. Manufacturers put loaded on top of that. Manufacturers put loaded on top of that. Manufacturers put a ton of sugar in after the fact to kind a ton of sugar in after the fact to kind a ton of sugar in after the fact to kind of mask the sour taste of fermented of mask the sour taste of fermented of mask the sour taste of fermented foods, which is hard for some people to foods, which is hard for some people to foods, which is hard for some people to become accustomed to. Getting used to become accustomed to. Getting used to become accustomed to. Getting used to that sour flavor is difficult, but that sour flavor is difficult, but that sour flavor is difficult, but people really should try to stay away people really should try to stay away people really should try to stay away from those um, fermented foods that are from those um, fermented foods that are from those um, fermented foods that are loaded with sugar, and that's what we loaded with sugar, and that's what we loaded with sugar, and that's what we instructed people in this study. A lot instructed people in this study. A lot instructed people in this study. A lot of people shy away from the high-quality of people shy away from the high-quality of people shy away from the high-quality fermented foods because they can be fermented foods because they can be fermented foods because they can be quite costly. Um, I'll just refer people quite costly. Um, I'll just refer people quite costly. Um, I'll just refer people to a resource in Tim Ferriss's book, The to a resource in Tim Ferriss's book, The to a resource in Tim Ferriss's book, The 4-Hour Chef. He actually gives an 4-Hour Chef. He actually gives an 4-Hour Chef. He actually gives an excellent recipe for making your own excellent recipe for making your own excellent recipe for making your own sauerkraut, which basically sauerkraut, which basically sauerkraut, which basically um, involves cabbage and water and salt, um, involves cabbage and water and salt, um, involves cabbage and water and salt, but you have to do it properly because but you have to do it properly because but you have to do it properly because you can grow some um, not necessarily you can grow some um, not necessarily you can grow some um, not necessarily uh, lethal, but some somewhat dangerous uh, lethal, but some somewhat dangerous uh, lethal, but some somewhat dangerous bacteria if you don't scrape off the top bacteria if you don't scrape off the top bacteria if you don't scrape off the top layer properly. But he gives beautiful layer properly. But he gives beautiful layer properly. But he gives beautiful instructions for how to do this in vats. instructions for how to do this in vats. instructions for how to do this in vats. You can make large amounts of truly You can make large amounts of truly You can make large amounts of truly fermented sauerkraut just from cabbage, fermented sauerkraut just from cabbage, fermented sauerkraut just from cabbage, water, and salt if you're willing to water, and salt if you're willing to water, and salt if you're willing to follow the protocol. You know, if you follow the protocol. You know, if you follow the protocol. You know, if you can get your hands on a scoby, kombucha can get your hands on a scoby, kombucha can get your hands on a scoby, kombucha is another one that's super simple. It's is another one that's super simple. It's is another one that's super simple. It's like &gt;&gt; grow your own. You can you can just make &gt;&gt; grow your own. You can you can just make &gt;&gt; grow your own. You can you can just make your own, and it's super easy to do. I your own, and it's super easy to do. I your own, and it's super easy to do. I make it I constantly have a batch of make it I constantly have a batch of make it I constantly have a batch of kombucha going at home, and it's just, kombucha going at home, and it's just, kombucha going at home, and it's just, you know, it's a it's a scoby, a you know, it's a it's a scoby, a you know, it's a it's a scoby, a symbiotic community of bacteria and symbiotic community of bacteria and symbiotic community of bacteria and yeast that you, you know, you brew yeast that you, you know, you brew yeast that you, you know, you brew tea, you add sugar to it, and you put tea, you add sugar to it, and you put tea, you add sugar to it, and you put the scoby in, and you wait a week or two the scoby in, and you wait a week or two the scoby in, and you wait a week or two depending upon the temperature, and you depending upon the temperature, and you depending upon the temperature, and you then you just, you know, then you just, you know, then you just, you know, move the scoby over to a new batch, and move the scoby over to a new batch, and move the scoby over to a new batch, and your old you what the scoby was in your old you what the scoby was in your old you what the scoby was in is kombucha, and it's wonderful. is kombucha, and it's wonderful. is kombucha, and it's wonderful. So, how much fermented food were they how much fermented food were they how much fermented food were they consuming? Eating? Servings? Ounces? Um, consuming? Eating? Servings? Ounces? Um, consuming? Eating? Servings? Ounces? Um, how many times a day? Early day? Late how many times a day? Early day? Late how many times a day? Early day? Late day? The general instructions were for day? The general instructions were for day? The general instructions were for people to eat as much fermented foods as people to eat as much fermented foods as people to eat as much fermented foods as possible. More is better. People um, possible. More is better. People um, possible. More is better. People um, during the height of the intervention during the height of the intervention during the height of the intervention phase were up over six servings on phase were up over six servings on phase were up over six servings on average per day of fermented foods. So, average per day of fermented foods. So, average per day of fermented foods. So, kind of two servings at each meal, and kind of two servings at each meal, and kind of two servings at each meal, and the uh, you know, ounces or weights or the uh, you know, ounces or weights or the uh, you know, ounces or weights or size it really depended on what the size it really depended on what the size it really depended on what the fermented food was, and we just told fermented food was, and we just told fermented food was, and we just told them to stick to what was a recommended them to stick to what was a recommended them to stick to what was a recommended dose on the package that they were dose on the package that they were dose on the package that they were they were buying. You know, for a they were buying. You know, for a they were buying. You know, for a kombucha it'd be like a 6-to-8-oz glass, kombucha it'd be like a 6-to-8-oz glass, kombucha it'd be like a 6-to-8-oz glass, um, sauerkraut like a half cup or um, sauerkraut like a half cup or um, sauerkraut like a half cup or something like that. And same with something like that. And same with something like that. And same with yogurt. The the big signal really was in yogurt. The the big signal really was in yogurt. The the big signal really was in the fermented food group. We saw all the fermented food group. We saw all the fermented food group. We saw all the things that you would hope to see in a things that you would hope to see in a things that you would hope to see in a Western microbiota and Western human. We Western microbiota and Western human. We Western microbiota and Western human. We saw this increase in microbiota saw this increase in microbiota saw this increase in microbiota diversity over the course of the 6 weeks diversity over the course of the 6 weeks diversity over the course of the 6 weeks while they were consuming the fermented while they were consuming the fermented while they were consuming the fermented foods. We can't always say that um, foods. We can't always say that um, foods. We can't always say that um, higher diversity is better when it comes higher diversity is better when it comes higher diversity is better when it comes to our microbial communities. We know to our microbial communities. We know to our microbial communities. We know there are cases, for instance, bacterial there are cases, for instance, bacterial there are cases, for instance, bacterial vaginosis where higher diversity is vaginosis where higher diversity is vaginosis where higher diversity is actually indicative of a disease state. actually indicative of a disease state. actually indicative of a disease state. Um, but we um, know in the context of Um, but we um, know in the context of Um, but we um, know in the context of the gut and for people living in the gut and for people living in the gut and for people living in the industrialized world, higher diversity industrialized world, higher diversity industrialized world, higher diversity is generally better. Um, we know that is generally better. Um, we know that is generally better. Um, we know that there's a spectrum of diversity. People there's a spectrum of diversity. People there's a spectrum of diversity. People with higher diversity generally are with higher diversity generally are with higher diversity generally are healthier. If you can push your healthier. If you can push your healthier. If you can push your diversity higher, you're in better diversity higher, you're in better diversity higher, you're in better shape. And so, we saw that increase in shape. And so, we saw that increase in shape. And so, we saw that increase in diversity, and then the major question diversity, and then the major question diversity, and then the major question is what happened to the immune system as is what happened to the immune system as is what happened to the immune system as these people were increasing their gut these people were increasing their gut these people were increasing their gut microbiota diversity through the microbiota diversity through the microbiota diversity through the fermented foods. Um, we so, we did the fermented foods. Um, we so, we did the fermented foods. Um, we so, we did the um, this massive immune profiling, and um, this massive immune profiling, and um, this massive immune profiling, and we see, you know, a couple dozen immune we see, you know, a couple dozen immune we see, you know, a couple dozen immune markers, inflammatory markers decrease markers, inflammatory markers decrease markers, inflammatory markers decrease over the course of the study. So, we over the course of the study. So, we over the course of the study. So, we um, measured these at multiple time um, measured these at multiple time um, measured these at multiple time points throughout the course of the points throughout the course of the points throughout the course of the study, and there's kind of this study, and there's kind of this study, and there's kind of this step-wise reduction in things like step-wise reduction in things like step-wise reduction in things like interleukin-6 and um, you know, interleukin-6 and um, you know, interleukin-6 and um, you know, interleukin-12, a variety of kind of interleukin-12, a variety of kind of interleukin-12, a variety of kind of famous inflammatory mediators. Um, and famous inflammatory mediators. Um, and famous inflammatory mediators. Um, and then even if you go into the immune then even if you go into the immune then even if you go into the immune cells and you start looking at their cells and you start looking at their cells and you start looking at their signaling cascades, we see that those signaling cascades, we see that those signaling cascades, we see that those signaling cascades are less activated at signaling cascades are less activated at signaling cascades are less activated at the end of the study compared to the end of the study compared to the end of the study compared to the beginning of the study, indicating an beginning of the study, indicating an beginning of the study, indicating an attenuation of inflammation. So, so kind attenuation of inflammation. So, so kind attenuation of inflammation. So, so kind of exactly what we would hypothesize of exactly what we would hypothesize of exactly what we would hypothesize would lead to less propensity for would lead to less propensity for would lead to less propensity for inflammatory disease over time. That's a inflammatory disease over time. That's a inflammatory disease over time. That's a huge extension of a very short study. a huge extension of a very short study. a huge extension of a very short study. &gt;&gt; So, did people say they were feeling &gt;&gt; So, did people say they were feeling &gt;&gt; So, did people say they were feeling better um, in any way? And if so, what better um, in any way? And if so, what better um, in any way? And if so, what did you observe? And again, we're did you observe? And again, we're did you observe? And again, we're highlighting these as anecdata. You highlighting these as anecdata. You highlighting these as anecdata. You know, tons of people say they have more know, tons of people say they have more know, tons of people say they have more energy, they think more clearly, they energy, they think more clearly, they energy, they think more clearly, they sleep better. And it's really hard to sleep better. And it's really hard to sleep better. And it's really hard to uncouple like, is this because, you uncouple like, is this because, you uncouple like, is this because, you know, these people have taken charge now know, these people have taken charge now know, these people have taken charge now of what they're eating and just feel of what they're eating and just feel of what they're eating and just feel better in general for being in control better in general for being in control better in general for being in control of kind of what they're doing, or is of kind of what they're doing, or is of kind of what they're doing, or is there this cascading um, set of effects there this cascading um, set of effects there this cascading um, set of effects that are actually kind of emanating from that are actually kind of emanating from that are actually kind of emanating from the gut-brain axis? And and I should the gut-brain axis? And and I should the gut-brain axis? And and I should say, you know, the list of this goes say, you know, the list of this goes say, you know, the list of this goes on and on. There are people who claim on and on. There are people who claim on and on. There are people who claim that their complexion improves and that their complexion improves and that their complexion improves and that their, you know, allergies and there's their, you know, allergies and there's their, you know, allergies and there's probably all sorts of ripple effects. If probably all sorts of ripple effects. If probably all sorts of ripple effects. If you can affect your inflammation, you can affect your inflammation, you can affect your inflammation, you can we know that you can affect your can we know that you can affect your can we know that you can affect your cognition. We know that you can affect cognition. We know that you can affect cognition. We know that you can affect your, you know, your skin and your, you know, your skin and your, you know, your skin and inflammation that's occurring on your inflammation that's occurring on your inflammation that's occurring on your skin. So, so I really think that there skin. So, so I really think that there skin. So, so I really think that there is a basis for a lot of those anecdotes. is a basis for a lot of those anecdotes. is a basis for a lot of those anecdotes. It may just be hard to see in a short It may just be hard to see in a short It may just be hard to see in a short study and in study and in study and in um, a small, you know, a small cohort of um, a small, you know, a small cohort of um, a small, you know, a small cohort of people over a short period of time. You people over a short period of time. You people over a short period of time. You know, we also have a um, a standardized know, we also have a um, a standardized know, we also have a um, a standardized um, uh, stool measure that people use, um, uh, stool measure that people use, um, uh, stool measure that people use, and there was um, you know, kind of less and there was um, you know, kind of less and there was um, you know, kind of less constipation, better bowel movements constipation, better bowel movements constipation, better bowel movements over the course of both of these over the course of both of these over the course of both of these interventions. So, it did seem like interventions. So, it did seem like interventions. So, it did seem like bowel habits improved, which um, a lot bowel habits improved, which um, a lot bowel habits improved, which um, a lot of times can lead to better moods, but of times can lead to better moods, but of times can lead to better moods, but that we weren't able to measure that. that we weren't able to measure that. that we weren't able to measure that. What sorts of interesting things did you What sorts of interesting things did you What sorts of interesting things did you observe in the fiber group? Data seemed observe in the fiber group? Data seemed observe in the fiber group? Data seemed to be telling us that if you start off to be telling us that if you start off to be telling us that if you start off with a diverse microbiota, maybe one with a diverse microbiota, maybe one with a diverse microbiota, maybe one that's better equipped to degrade a wide that's better equipped to degrade a wide that's better equipped to degrade a wide variety of dietary fiber, you're more variety of dietary fiber, you're more variety of dietary fiber, you're more likely to respond positively to it. If likely to respond positively to it. If likely to respond positively to it. If you have a very depleted gut microbiome, you have a very depleted gut microbiome, you have a very depleted gut microbiome, you're not as likely to be able to you're not as likely to be able to you're not as likely to be able to respond to it. And thinking back to that respond to it. And thinking back to that respond to it. And thinking back to that experiment that we talked about before experiment that we talked about before experiment that we talked about before with the multi-generational loss of with the multi-generational loss of with the multi-generational loss of fiber-fermenting microbes in mice fiber-fermenting microbes in mice fiber-fermenting microbes in mice that were fed uh, a Western diet, um, it that were fed uh, a Western diet, um, it that were fed uh, a Western diet, um, it may be that um, many of us in the it may be that um, many of us in the it may be that um, many of us in the industrialized world have a microbiome industrialized world have a microbiome industrialized world have a microbiome that's so depleted now that even if we that's so depleted now that even if we that's so depleted now that even if we consume a high-fiber diet, at least for consume a high-fiber diet, at least for consume a high-fiber diet, at least for a short period of time, we don't have a short period of time, we don't have a short period of time, we don't have the right microbes in our gut to degrade the right microbes in our gut to degrade the right microbes in our gut to degrade that fiber. And this has actually been that fiber. And this has actually been that fiber. And this has actually been observed by other groups. Beautiful observed by other groups. Beautiful observed by other groups. Beautiful study out of University of Minnesota study out of University of Minnesota study out of University of Minnesota looking at immigrants coming to the looking at immigrants coming to the looking at immigrants coming to the United States, and you know, within 9 United States, and you know, within 9 United States, and you know, within 9 months, but certainly over the course of months, but certainly over the course of months, but certainly over the course of years, immigrants that come here lose years, immigrants that come here lose years, immigrants that come here lose um, a lot of the diversity in their um, a lot of the diversity in their um, a lot of the diversity in their gut microbiome, but a lot of the gut microbiome, but a lot of the gut microbiome, but a lot of the fiber-degrading capacity in their gut fiber-degrading capacity in their gut fiber-degrading capacity in their gut microbiome, too. So, it could be that microbiome, too. So, it could be that microbiome, too. So, it could be that over time this becomes a one-way street, over time this becomes a one-way street, over time this becomes a one-way street, and it's hard for us to recover and it's hard for us to recover and it's hard for us to recover um, the microbes that actually um, the microbes that actually um, the microbes that actually can degrade the fiber. And I think that can degrade the fiber. And I think that can degrade the fiber. And I think that this probably intersects with sanitation this probably intersects with sanitation this probably intersects with sanitation in our environment and the fact that we in our environment and the fact that we in our environment and the fact that we don't have access to new microbes that don't have access to new microbes that don't have access to new microbes that might help us degrade the fiber, that we might help us degrade the fiber, that we might help us degrade the fiber, that we actually um, you know, have lost these actually um, you know, have lost these actually um, you know, have lost these microbes, and they're in some ways microbes, and they're in some ways microbes, and they're in some ways irrecoverable without deliberate irrecoverable without deliberate irrecoverable without deliberate reintroduction of fiber-degrading reintroduction of fiber-degrading reintroduction of fiber-degrading microbes. Well, you have children. Did microbes. Well, you have children. Did microbes. Well, you have children. Did you do you encourage them to uh, you do you encourage them to uh, you do you encourage them to uh, interact with pets and dirt and interact with pets and dirt and interact with pets and dirt and Absolutely. stuff in the environment, Absolutely. stuff in the environment, Absolutely. stuff in the environment, provided that stuff wasn't immediately provided that stuff wasn't immediately provided that stuff wasn't immediately toxic? &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. Certainly just with &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. Certainly just with &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. Certainly just with infectious diseases in general, it's infectious diseases in general, it's infectious diseases in general, it's really important to be aware of um, you really important to be aware of um, you really important to be aware of um, you know, the possibility for know, the possibility for know, the possibility for compromising your health through the compromising your health through the compromising your health through the spread of germs. And so, that is spread of germs. And so, that is spread of germs. And so, that is just, you know, hand washing is just, you know, hand washing is just, you know, hand washing is important, and we have to be careful important, and we have to be careful important, and we have to be careful with, you know, um, the spread of with, you know, um, the spread of with, you know, um, the spread of germs, but I do think that um, you know, germs, but I do think that um, you know, germs, but I do think that um, you know, the sanitation sanitization of our the sanitation sanitization of our the sanitation sanitization of our environment um, has gone overboard with environment um, has gone overboard with environment um, has gone overboard with the, you know, um, various things being the, you know, um, various things being the, you know, um, various things being impregnated with antibiotics, you know, impregnated with antibiotics, you know, impregnated with antibiotics, you know, shopping carts and things like that, and shopping carts and things like that, and shopping carts and things like that, and toothbrushes, and you know, it's toothbrushes, and you know, it's toothbrushes, and you know, it's like antibiotics and um, you know, like antibiotics and um, you know, like antibiotics and um, you know, things for killing microbes are things for killing microbes are things for killing microbes are everywhere. And everywhere. And everywhere. And when we were raising, you know, when our when we were raising, you know, when our when we were raising, you know, when our daughters were young and we were we were daughters were young and we were we were daughters were young and we were we were making these decisions, the calculations making these decisions, the calculations making these decisions, the calculations that we would make were really um, one, that we would make were really um, one, that we would make were really um, one, uh, how likely are they to encounter a uh, how likely are they to encounter a uh, how likely are they to encounter a disease-causing microbe? If we've been disease-causing microbe? If we've been disease-causing microbe? If we've been out, you know, on a hike or in our out, you know, on a hike or in our out, you know, on a hike or in our garden, you know, just kind of working garden, you know, just kind of working garden, you know, just kind of working in the dirt or whatever, maybe it's not in the dirt or whatever, maybe it's not in the dirt or whatever, maybe it's not as important to wash your hands before as important to wash your hands before as important to wash your hands before you have lunch, even if there's a little you have lunch, even if there's a little you have lunch, even if there's a little bit of dirt on them. Um, if they've been bit of dirt on them. Um, if they've been bit of dirt on them. Um, if they've been in a public playground where maybe in a public playground where maybe in a public playground where maybe there's um, other kids with germs or there's um, other kids with germs or there's um, other kids with germs or maybe even chemicals like pesticides and maybe even chemicals like pesticides and maybe even chemicals like pesticides and herbicides that are being used, um, and herbicides that are being used, um, and herbicides that are being used, um, it maybe it's more important then to it maybe it's more important then to it maybe it's more important then to wash your hands. You know, certainly if wash your hands. You know, certainly if wash your hands. You know, certainly if you've been in the grocery store or on you've been in the grocery store or on you've been in the grocery store or on the subway, probably a good idea to wash the subway, probably a good idea to wash the subway, probably a good idea to wash your hands. But I so, I think you really your hands. But I so, I think you really your hands. But I so, I think you really need to think about kind of the need to think about kind of the need to think about kind of the context of it, and um, it context of it, and um, it context of it, and um, it exposure to microbes uh, from the exposure to microbes uh, from the exposure to microbes uh, from the environment is likely an important part environment is likely an important part environment is likely an important part of um, educating our immune system and of um, educating our immune system and of um, educating our immune system and keeping the proper balance in our immune keeping the proper balance in our immune keeping the proper balance in our immune system, and it's just a matter of system, and it's just a matter of system, and it's just a matter of figuring out the right way to do that figuring out the right way to do that figuring out the right way to do that safely. What what's the thought about safely. What what's the thought about safely. What what's the thought about probiotics for the typical person probiotics for the typical person probiotics for the typical person that's not recovering from a round of that's not recovering from a round of that's not recovering from a round of antibiotics or that um, has been antibiotics or that um, has been antibiotics or that um, has been prescribed them? The so, I think the prescribed them? The so, I think the prescribed them? The so, I think the first thing to say is buyer beware first thing to say is buyer beware first thing to say is buyer beware because it's a supplement market, it's because it's a supplement market, it's because it's a supplement market, it's largely unregulated, and that means that largely unregulated, and that means that largely unregulated, and that means that there are a lot of bad products out there are a lot of bad products out there are a lot of bad products out there, and a lot of products that um, there, and a lot of products that um, there, and a lot of products that um, even though they're not intended to be even though they're not intended to be even though they're not intended to be bad, just don't have great quality bad, just don't have great quality bad, just don't have great quality control. There have been several studies control. There have been several studies control. There have been several studies that have taken off the uh, that have taken off the uh, that have taken off the uh, over-the-counter, just kind of over-the-counter, just kind of over-the-counter, just kind of off-the-shelf probiotics, surveyed off-the-shelf probiotics, surveyed off-the-shelf probiotics, surveyed what's in there based on sequencing, and what's in there based on sequencing, and what's in there based on sequencing, and shown that they what is in there does shown that they what is in there does shown that they what is in there does not match what's on the label. there are not match what's on the label. there are not match what's on the label. there are places that probiotic companies can send places that probiotic companies can send places that probiotic companies can send their product to have it independently their product to have it independently their product to have it independently validated. So, you want to look for that validated. So, you want to look for that validated. So, you want to look for that sort of validation on the on a product. sort of validation on the on a product. sort of validation on the on a product. Um there also are names that are just Um there also are names that are just Um there also are names that are just very well known and um you know, it's uh very well known and um you know, it's uh very well known and um you know, it's uh you know, you know, you know, their reputations are on the line, so their reputations are on the line, so their reputations are on the line, so they probably invest a little bit more they probably invest a little bit more they probably invest a little bit more in quality control than maybe some of in quality control than maybe some of in quality control than maybe some of the other lesser-known names. Because the other lesser-known names. Because the other lesser-known names. Because there's such a huge range of products there's such a huge range of products there's such a huge range of products and because each person is their own and because each person is their own and because each person is their own little caper when it comes to the little caper when it comes to the little caper when it comes to the microbiome, it's really hard to know microbiome, it's really hard to know microbiome, it's really hard to know um whether there are great products for um whether there are great products for um whether there are great products for a given indication. The really good a given indication. The really good a given indication. The really good advice that I've heard is try to find a advice that I've heard is try to find a advice that I've heard is try to find a study that supports in you know, a study that supports in you know, a study that supports in you know, a really well-designed study and this is really well-designed study and this is really well-designed study and this is very hard for people who aren't very hard for people who aren't very hard for people who aren't scientists to evaluate, but so you know, scientists to evaluate, but so you know, scientists to evaluate, but so you know, if you're experiencing a medical problem if you're experiencing a medical problem if you're experiencing a medical problem or want to consult a doctor, um the you or want to consult a doctor, um the you or want to consult a doctor, um the you know, that might be helpful, but know, that might be helpful, but know, that might be helpful, but finding a study where a specific finding a study where a specific finding a study where a specific probiotic has successfully done whatever probiotic has successfully done whatever probiotic has successfully done whatever it is you're looking for and then stick it is you're looking for and then stick it is you're looking for and then stick sticking with that probiotic is really sticking with that probiotic is really sticking with that probiotic is really the best recipe for as a as a place to the best recipe for as a as a place to the best recipe for as a as a place to start in this space, I think. And what start in this space, I think. And what start in this space, I think. And what about prebiotics? There's there a number about prebiotics? There's there a number about prebiotics? There's there a number of um reasons why I can imagine that of um reasons why I can imagine that of um reasons why I can imagine that prebiotics would be beneficial. The prebiotics would be beneficial. The prebiotics would be beneficial. The studies that have been done studies that have been done studies that have been done &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; on prebiotics, the it's really kind of a &gt;&gt; on prebiotics, the it's really kind of a &gt;&gt; on prebiotics, the it's really kind of a um mixed bag of results. The um mixed bag of results. The um mixed bag of results. The um there have been studies done with um there have been studies done with um there have been studies done with um purified fibers where you actually see purified fibers where you actually see purified fibers where you actually see microbiota diversity plummet over the microbiota diversity plummet over the microbiota diversity plummet over the course of the study because um you get a course of the study because um you get a course of the study because um you get a very specific bloom in a small number of very specific bloom in a small number of very specific bloom in a small number of bacteria that are good at using that one bacteria that are good at using that one bacteria that are good at using that one type of fiber and that's at the expense type of fiber and that's at the expense type of fiber and that's at the expense of all the other microbes that are in of all the other microbes that are in of all the other microbes that are in the gut. And so um so it's really hard the gut. And so um so it's really hard the gut. And so um so it's really hard to replicate with purified fiber what to replicate with purified fiber what to replicate with purified fiber what you'd get for instance at a salad bar in you'd get for instance at a salad bar in you'd get for instance at a salad bar in terms of the array of complex terms of the array of complex terms of the array of complex carbohydrates that you would be exposing carbohydrates that you would be exposing carbohydrates that you would be exposing your microbiota to and I think the kind your microbiota to and I think the kind your microbiota to and I think the kind of um of um of um uh broad view of this in the field is that broad view of this in the field is that broad view of this in the field is that consuming a broad variety of plants is consuming a broad variety of plants is consuming a broad variety of plants is uh and all the diverse fiber uh and all the diverse fiber uh and all the diverse fiber that comes with that is probably better that comes with that is probably better that comes with that is probably better in fostering diversity in your in fostering diversity in your in fostering diversity in your microbiota than purified fibers. Now, microbiota than purified fibers. Now, microbiota than purified fibers. Now, there are um again a lot of people who there are um again a lot of people who there are um again a lot of people who benefit from purified fibers either for benefit from purified fibers either for benefit from purified fibers either for GI motility um or for other aspects GI motility um or for other aspects GI motility um or for other aspects of GI health problems that they've of GI health problems that they've of GI health problems that they've been experiencing. Again, I think it's been experiencing. Again, I think it's been experiencing. Again, I think it's the type of thing where you have to um the type of thing where you have to um the type of thing where you have to um try to find the thing that that's right try to find the thing that that's right try to find the thing that that's right for you, but there um there also are for you, but there um there also are for you, but there um there also are studies that suggest that if you layer studies that suggest that if you layer studies that suggest that if you layer rapidly fermentable um fibers on top of rapidly fermentable um fibers on top of rapidly fermentable um fibers on top of a Western diet, you actually can um a Western diet, you actually can um a Western diet, you actually can um result in weird metabolism happening result in weird metabolism happening result in weird metabolism happening in your liver because you have this in your liver because you have this in your liver because you have this incredibly rapid fermentation of fiber incredibly rapid fermentation of fiber incredibly rapid fermentation of fiber along with a lot of fat um coming into along with a lot of fat um coming into along with a lot of fat um coming into the system, at least that's the that's the system, at least that's the that's the system, at least that's the that's the theory. And in a mouse study that the theory. And in a mouse study that the theory. And in a mouse study that was published a few years ago, they was published a few years ago, they was published a few years ago, they actually see that a subset of the mice actually see that a subset of the mice actually see that a subset of the mice develop hepatocellular carcinoma develop hepatocellular carcinoma develop hepatocellular carcinoma when they're fed a high-dose when they're fed a high-dose when they're fed a high-dose prebiotic. &gt;&gt; cancer liver cancer on top of a um on &gt;&gt; cancer liver cancer on top of a um on &gt;&gt; cancer liver cancer on top of a um on top of a Western diet. So, whether top of a Western diet. So, whether top of a Western diet. So, whether that's representative of human biology, that's representative of human biology, that's representative of human biology, we don't know, but um you know, purified we don't know, but um you know, purified we don't know, but um you know, purified fibers are definitely very different um fibers are definitely very different um fibers are definitely very different um both in terms of the diversity of both in terms of the diversity of both in terms of the diversity of structures, but also in terms of how structures, but also in terms of how structures, but also in terms of how rapidly they're fermented in the gut rapidly they're fermented in the gut rapidly they're fermented in the gut because um you know, if you are eating because um you know, if you are eating because um you know, if you are eating plants, the complex structures there plants, the complex structures there plants, the complex structures there really slow the microbes down in terms really slow the microbes down in terms really slow the microbes down in terms of fermentation and you end up with a of fermentation and you end up with a of fermentation and you end up with a slow rate of fermentation over the slow rate of fermentation over the slow rate of fermentation over the length of your colon as opposed to this length of your colon as opposed to this length of your colon as opposed to this big burst of fermentation that can big burst of fermentation that can big burst of fermentation that can happen if you eat something that is happen if you eat something that is happen if you eat something that is highly soluble and easily accessed highly soluble and easily accessed highly soluble and easily accessed by the microbes. So, you've covered a by the microbes. So, you've covered a by the microbes. So, you've covered a tremendous amount of information and I'm tremendous amount of information and I'm tremendous amount of information and I'm incredibly grateful. Where can people incredibly grateful. Where can people incredibly grateful. Where can people find out more about the work that you're find out more about the work that you're find out more about the work that you're doing? We can certainly provide links doing? We can certainly provide links doing? We can certainly provide links and you have a book on this topic, so and you have a book on this topic, so and you have a book on this topic, so could you tell us about the book where could you tell us about the book where could you tell us about the book where we can learn more about the Sonnenburg we can learn more about the Sonnenburg we can learn more about the Sonnenburg lab and the work that you're doing. lab and the work that you're doing. lab and the work that you're doing. Maybe people will even try and enroll in Maybe people will even try and enroll in Maybe people will even try and enroll in some of these studies. Um yeah, so uh some of these studies. Um yeah, so uh some of these studies. Um yeah, so uh Erica, my wife and I wrote a book called Erica, my wife and I wrote a book called Erica, my wife and I wrote a book called The Good Gut and um that really was The Good Gut and um that really was The Good Gut and um that really was a um response to how we were changing a um response to how we were changing a um response to how we were changing our lives in response to being in the our lives in response to being in the our lives in response to being in the field, being very familiar with the field, being very familiar with the field, being very familiar with the research, seeing that a lot of our research, seeing that a lot of our research, seeing that a lot of our friends that weren't studying the gut friends that weren't studying the gut friends that weren't studying the gut microbiome, but were very well informed, microbiome, but were very well informed, microbiome, but were very well informed, many of them scientists, were not doing many of them scientists, were not doing many of them scientists, were not doing the same things we were doing and it was the same things we were doing and it was the same things we were doing and it was very clear that it was just the um lack very clear that it was just the um lack very clear that it was just the um lack of information funneling out of the of information funneling out of the of information funneling out of the field to other people. And so we wanted field to other people. And so we wanted field to other people. And so we wanted to um make that accessible to people who to um make that accessible to people who to um make that accessible to people who are not microbiome scientists. And then, are not microbiome scientists. And then, are not microbiome scientists. And then, you know, in terms of kind of connecting you know, in terms of kind of connecting you know, in terms of kind of connecting with our research, certainly there's the with our research, certainly there's the with our research, certainly there's the Center for Human Microbiome Studies at Center for Human Microbiome Studies at Center for Human Microbiome Studies at Stanford, which is kind of our home base Stanford, which is kind of our home base Stanford, which is kind of our home base for doing a lot of these dietary for doing a lot of these dietary for doing a lot of these dietary interventions. We list the studies interventions. We list the studies interventions. We list the studies there, um give more information on what there, um give more information on what there, um give more information on what we're doing, and then we have a lab we're doing, and then we have a lab we're doing, and then we have a lab website, too, that people can go to and website, too, that people can go to and website, too, that people can go to and read more about our research and we're read more about our research and we're read more about our research and we're always looking for participants for our always looking for participants for our always looking for participants for our studies. Thank you so much for your time studies. Thank you so much for your time studies. Thank you so much for your time and for the work you do and I hope we and for the work you do and I hope we and for the work you do and I hope we can do it again. Thanks, Andrew. This can do it again. Thanks, Andrew. This can do it again. Thanks, Andrew. This was a great conversation. Terrific. &gt;&gt; [music]