Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This Stanford School of Medicine. This Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost consumer information bring zero-cost consumer information bring zero-cost consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. Today, we're to the general public. Today, we're to the general public. Today, we're going to talk about how hormones impact going to talk about how hormones impact going to talk about how hormones impact feeding and hunger, feeding and hunger, feeding and hunger, as well as satiety, the feeling that you as well as satiety, the feeling that you as well as satiety, the feeling that you don't want to eat or that you've eaten don't want to eat or that you've eaten don't want to eat or that you've eaten enough. Now, it's important to understand that Now, it's important to understand that Now, it's important to understand that hormones don't work alone in this hormones don't work alone in this hormones don't work alone in this context. Today, I'm going to describe context. Today, I'm going to describe context. Today, I'm going to describe some hormones that have powerful effects some hormones that have powerful effects some hormones that have powerful effects on whether or not you want to eat more on whether or not you want to eat more on whether or not you want to eat more or less or stop eating altogether. or less or stop eating altogether. or less or stop eating altogether. But, they don't do that on their own. But, they don't do that on their own. But, they don't do that on their own. They do that in cooperation with the They do that in cooperation with the They do that in cooperation with the nervous system. The first thing that you nervous system. The first thing that you nervous system. The first thing that you need to know about the nervous system need to know about the nervous system need to know about the nervous system side, the neural control over feeding side, the neural control over feeding side, the neural control over feeding and hunger, is that there's an area of and hunger, is that there's an area of and hunger, is that there's an area of your brain called the hypothalamus. Now, your brain called the hypothalamus. Now, your brain called the hypothalamus. Now, the hypothalamus contains lots of the hypothalamus contains lots of the hypothalamus contains lots of different kinds of neurons doing lots of different kinds of neurons doing lots of different kinds of neurons doing lots of different kinds of things. There's a different kinds of things. There's a different kinds of things. There's a particular area of the hypothalamus particular area of the hypothalamus particular area of the hypothalamus called the ventromedial hypothalamus. called the ventromedial hypothalamus. called the ventromedial hypothalamus. And it's one that researchers have been And it's one that researchers have been And it's one that researchers have been interested for a long time now in terms interested for a long time now in terms interested for a long time now in terms of its relationship to hunger and of its relationship to hunger and of its relationship to hunger and feeding. And the reason is feeding. And the reason is feeding. And the reason is it creates these paradoxical effects. it creates these paradoxical effects. it creates these paradoxical effects. What do I mean by that? What they found What do I mean by that? What they found What do I mean by that? What they found was that sometimes lesioning or was that sometimes lesioning or was that sometimes lesioning or disrupting the neurons in the disrupting the neurons in the disrupting the neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus would make ventromedial hypothalamus would make ventromedial hypothalamus would make animals or people hyperphagic. They animals or people hyperphagic. They animals or people hyperphagic. They would want to eat like crazy. would want to eat like crazy. would want to eat like crazy. And other lesions in other individuals or other lesions in other individuals or other lesions in other individuals or animals would make them anorexic. It animals would make them anorexic. It animals would make them anorexic. It would make them not want to eat at all. would make them not want to eat at all. would make them not want to eat at all. It would make food aversive. So, that It would make food aversive. So, that It would make food aversive. So, that means that the ventromedial hypothalamus means that the ventromedial hypothalamus means that the ventromedial hypothalamus is definitely an interesting control is definitely an interesting control is definitely an interesting control station for hunger and feeding and station for hunger and feeding and station for hunger and feeding and satiety, but it doesn't really tell you satiety, but it doesn't really tell you satiety, but it doesn't really tell you what's going on at a deeper level. In what's going on at a deeper level. In what's going on at a deeper level. In fact, it's a little bit confusing or fact, it's a little bit confusing or fact, it's a little bit confusing or paradoxical. Turns out that there are multiple Turns out that there are multiple Turns out that there are multiple populations of neurons in there. Some populations of neurons in there. Some populations of neurons in there. Some are promoting feeding and some are promoting feeding and some are promoting feeding and some are promoting not feeding or not eating. promoting not feeding or not eating. promoting not feeding or not eating. Now, the other neural component of all Now, the other neural component of all Now, the other neural component of all this that you need to know about this that you need to know about this that you need to know about actually has to do with your mouth. So, actually has to do with your mouth. So, actually has to do with your mouth. So, there's an area of your cortex, so there's an area of your cortex, so there's an area of your cortex, so that's a little bit further up in your that's a little bit further up in your that's a little bit further up in your brain, called the insular cortex, and it called the insular cortex, and it called the insular cortex, and it processes a lot of different kinds of processes a lot of different kinds of processes a lot of different kinds of information, mostly information about information, mostly information about information, mostly information about what's going on inside you, so-called what's going on inside you, so-called what's going on inside you, so-called interoception. The insular cortex has neurons that get The insular cortex has neurons that get The insular cortex has neurons that get input from your mouth, from the touch input from your mouth, from the touch input from your mouth, from the touch receptors in your mouth. And insular receptors in your mouth. And insular receptors in your mouth. And insular cortex has powerful control over whether cortex has powerful control over whether cortex has powerful control over whether or not you are enjoying what you're or not you are enjoying what you're or not you are enjoying what you're eating, whether or not you want to avoid eating, whether or not you want to avoid eating, whether or not you want to avoid what you're eating, whether or not what you're eating, whether or not what you're eating, whether or not you've had enough, or whether or not you you've had enough, or whether or not you you've had enough, or whether or not you want to continue eating more. want to continue eating more. want to continue eating more. And that has to do, believe it or not, And that has to do, believe it or not, And that has to do, believe it or not, with the touch or sensation of eating. with the touch or sensation of eating. with the touch or sensation of eating. But the key point right now is to know But the key point right now is to know But the key point right now is to know you got these two brain areas, the you got these two brain areas, the you got these two brain areas, the ventromedial hypothalamus, that's ventromedial hypothalamus, that's ventromedial hypothalamus, that's involved in hunger and lack of hunger, involved in hunger and lack of hunger, involved in hunger and lack of hunger, and you have this insular cortex that and you have this insular cortex that and you have this insular cortex that gets input from your mouth and cares gets input from your mouth and cares gets input from your mouth and cares about chewing and the consistency of about chewing and the consistency of about chewing and the consistency of foods, and all sorts of interesting foods, and all sorts of interesting foods, and all sorts of interesting things that are just very tactile. And I things that are just very tactile. And I things that are just very tactile. And I think most people think about the touch think most people think about the touch think most people think about the touch receptors on Excuse me, the taste receptors on Excuse me, the taste receptors on Excuse me, the taste receptors on the tongue, but we often receptors on the tongue, but we often receptors on the tongue, but we often don't think about the touch or tactile don't think about the touch or tactile don't think about the touch or tactile essence of food. Now, let's get back to essence of food. Now, let's get back to essence of food. Now, let's get back to the ventromedial hypothalamus. Sometimes the ventromedial hypothalamus. Sometimes the ventromedial hypothalamus. Sometimes it makes animals or people want to eat it makes animals or people want to eat it makes animals or people want to eat more, sometimes less. So, what's going more, sometimes less. So, what's going more, sometimes less. So, what's going on there? There's a classic experiment on there? There's a classic experiment on there? There's a classic experiment that was done in which researchers took that was done in which researchers took that was done in which researchers took two rats two rats two rats and so-called parabiosed them to each and so-called parabiosed them to each and so-called parabiosed them to each other. What that meant is that they did other. What that meant is that they did other. What that meant is that they did a little surgery and they linked their a little surgery and they linked their a little surgery and they linked their blood supply so that they were forever blood supply so that they were forever blood supply so that they were forever physically linked to one another and physically linked to one another and physically linked to one another and could exchange factors in the blood, but could exchange factors in the blood, but could exchange factors in the blood, but their brains were separate, their mouths their brains were separate, their mouths their brains were separate, their mouths were separate, and they essentially did were separate, and they essentially did were separate, and they essentially did everything uh separately except that they were uh separately except that they were uh separately except that they were linked to one another. So, they had to linked to one another. So, they had to linked to one another. So, they had to walk together and go to the same places walk together and go to the same places walk together and go to the same places in order to do it. in order to do it. in order to do it. This parabiosis experiment revealed This parabiosis experiment revealed This parabiosis experiment revealed something really important. When they something really important. When they something really important. When they lesioned the ventromedial hypothalamus lesioned the ventromedial hypothalamus lesioned the ventromedial hypothalamus in one of the rats that was connected to in one of the rats that was connected to in one of the rats that was connected to the other rat, that rat got very, very the other rat, that rat got very, very the other rat, that rat got very, very fat. It's just really obese. The other fat. It's just really obese. The other fat. It's just really obese. The other one, however, got very thin. It actually one, however, got very thin. It actually one, however, got very thin. It actually lost weight. So, what does this tell us? lost weight. So, what does this tell us? lost weight. So, what does this tell us? This tells us that there's something in This tells us that there's something in This tells us that there's something in the blood that's being exchanged between the blood that's being exchanged between the blood that's being exchanged between the two animals because it was their the two animals because it was their the two animals because it was their blood supply that was linked, blood supply that was linked, blood supply that was linked, and that tells us that there's hormone and that tells us that there's hormone and that tells us that there's hormone or endocrine signals that are involved or endocrine signals that are involved or endocrine signals that are involved in the desire to eat and hunger and in the desire to eat and hunger and in the desire to eat and hunger and appetite. And so, next we're going to appetite. And so, next we're going to appetite. And so, next we're going to talk about what those endocrine signals talk about what those endocrine signals talk about what those endocrine signals are, and then I'm going to immediately are, and then I'm going to immediately are, and then I'm going to immediately point to some entry points that you can point to some entry points that you can point to some entry points that you can use and use and use and you can use these even if you're not you can use these even if you're not you can use these even if you're not parabiost to anything, parabiost to anything, parabiost to anything, and that can allow you to time your meal and that can allow you to time your meal and that can allow you to time your meal frequency and predict when you're going frequency and predict when you're going frequency and predict when you're going to be hungry or not. So, let's talk to be hungry or not. So, let's talk to be hungry or not. So, let's talk about the endocrine factors that about the endocrine factors that about the endocrine factors that regulate feeding, hunger, and satiety. regulate feeding, hunger, and satiety. regulate feeding, hunger, and satiety. One of the really exciting things to One of the really exciting things to One of the really exciting things to emerge in the science of feeding and emerge in the science of feeding and emerge in the science of feeding and appetite in the last 20 years is the appetite in the last 20 years is the appetite in the last 20 years is the discovery of another brain area, not discovery of another brain area, not discovery of another brain area, not just the ventromedial hypothalamus, but just the ventromedial hypothalamus, but just the ventromedial hypothalamus, but it's an area of the brain called the it's an area of the brain called the it's an area of the brain called the arcuate nucleus. And the arcuate nucleus arcuate nucleus. And the arcuate nucleus arcuate nucleus. And the arcuate nucleus has some really fascinating sets of has some really fascinating sets of has some really fascinating sets of neurons that release even more neurons that release even more neurons that release even more incredible molecules and chemicals into incredible molecules and chemicals into incredible molecules and chemicals into the blood. the blood. the blood. And these chemicals act as accelerators And these chemicals act as accelerators And these chemicals act as accelerators on feeding and appetite or brakes. on feeding and appetite or brakes. on feeding and appetite or brakes. So, first of all, there are a set of So, first of all, there are a set of So, first of all, there are a set of neurons in this arcuate nucleus. It's neurons in this arcuate nucleus. It's neurons in this arcuate nucleus. It's the proopiomelanocortin system. the proopiomelanocortin system. the proopiomelanocortin system. Now, the POMC neurons Now, the POMC neurons Now, the POMC neurons make something called alpha-MSH. Melanocyte-stimulating hormone. Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone. Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone. Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone. MSH reduces appetite. MSH reduces appetite. MSH reduces appetite. And it's a powerful molecule. All right, And it's a powerful molecule. All right, And it's a powerful molecule. All right, so just put that on the shelf. MSH so just put that on the shelf. MSH so just put that on the shelf. MSH reduces appetite. Now, there's another reduces appetite. Now, there's another reduces appetite. Now, there's another population of neurons in the arcuate population of neurons in the arcuate population of neurons in the arcuate nucleus called the AGRP neurons. The nucleus called the AGRP neurons. The nucleus called the AGRP neurons. The AGRP neurons AGRP neurons AGRP neurons stimulate eating. The activity in these stimulate eating. The activity in these stimulate eating. The activity in these AGRP neurons goes way up when animals or AGRP neurons goes way up when animals or AGRP neurons goes way up when animals or people haven't eaten for a while. And people haven't eaten for a while. And people haven't eaten for a while. And the activity of MSH, the release of MSH, the activity of MSH, the release of MSH, the activity of MSH, the release of MSH, goes up when we've eaten. Next, let's goes up when we've eaten. Next, let's goes up when we've eaten. Next, let's talk about a hormone peptide that talk about a hormone peptide that talk about a hormone peptide that activates hunger. activates hunger. activates hunger. And this is a really interesting one And this is a really interesting one And this is a really interesting one because it relates to when you get because it relates to when you get because it relates to when you get hungry, in addition to the fact that you hungry, in addition to the fact that you hungry, in addition to the fact that you get hungry at all. get hungry at all. get hungry at all. And it's called ghrelin. It's spelled g And it's called ghrelin. It's spelled g And it's called ghrelin. It's spelled g h r e l i n. h r e l i n. h r e l i n. Ghrelin is released actually from the GI Ghrelin is released actually from the GI Ghrelin is released actually from the GI tract. And its main role is to increase your desire its main role is to increase your desire its main role is to increase your desire to eat. And it does that through a to eat. And it does that through a to eat. And it does that through a variety of mechanisms. variety of mechanisms. variety of mechanisms. Part of that is to stimulate some of the Part of that is to stimulate some of the Part of that is to stimulate some of the brain areas, the actual neurons, that brain areas, the actual neurons, that brain areas, the actual neurons, that make you want to eat. make you want to eat. make you want to eat. In addition, it creates food In addition, it creates food In addition, it creates food anticipatory signals within your nervous anticipatory signals within your nervous anticipatory signals within your nervous system. So, you start thinking about the system. So, you start thinking about the system. So, you start thinking about the things that you happen to like to eat at things that you happen to like to eat at things that you happen to like to eat at that particular time of day. This is that particular time of day. This is that particular time of day. This is fascinating. Ghrelin is sort of like a fascinating. Ghrelin is sort of like a fascinating. Ghrelin is sort of like a clock, a hormonal clock that makes you want to a hormonal clock that makes you want to a hormonal clock that makes you want to eat at particular times. Now, the signal eat at particular times. Now, the signal eat at particular times. Now, the signal for ghrelin is reduced glucose levels in for ghrelin is reduced glucose levels in for ghrelin is reduced glucose levels in the blood. If it drops too low, ghrelin the blood. If it drops too low, ghrelin the blood. If it drops too low, ghrelin is secreted from your gut. It is secreted from your gut. It is secreted from your gut. It activates neurons in your brain at activates neurons in your brain at activates neurons in your brain at various locations. And we all know about various locations. And we all know about various locations. And we all know about the famous Pavlovian the famous Pavlovian the famous Pavlovian experiments of Pavlov's dogs. You know, experiments of Pavlov's dogs. You know, experiments of Pavlov's dogs. You know, they start salivating to the bell after they start salivating to the bell after they start salivating to the bell after the bell was presented with food. You the bell was presented with food. You the bell was presented with food. You remove the food, and then just the bell remove the food, and then just the bell remove the food, and then just the bell can stimulate the salivation. We can stimulate the salivation. We can stimulate the salivation. We become Pavlovian at times. But become Pavlovian at times. But become Pavlovian at times. But rarely is it ever discussed what the rarely is it ever discussed what the rarely is it ever discussed what the neural pathways for that are. And it neural pathways for that are. And it neural pathways for that are. And it turns out that these hormones that are turns out that these hormones that are turns out that these hormones that are secreted from the gut can stimulate the secreted from the gut can stimulate the secreted from the gut can stimulate the neurons to create a sensation and a neurons to create a sensation and a neurons to create a sensation and a desire for certain foods at certain desire for certain foods at certain desire for certain foods at certain times of day. times of day. times of day. You've done this experiment. If you are You've done this experiment. If you are You've done this experiment. If you are somebody who eats breakfast at more or somebody who eats breakfast at more or somebody who eats breakfast at more or less the same time each day, let's say less the same time each day, let's say less the same time each day, let's say 8:00 a.m., your ghrelin secretion will 8:00 a.m., your ghrelin secretion will 8:00 a.m., your ghrelin secretion will start to match when you typically eat. start to match when you typically eat. start to match when you typically eat. And it's able to override the low levels And it's able to override the low levels And it's able to override the low levels of glucose in your bloodstream because of glucose in your bloodstream because of glucose in your bloodstream because the ghrelin system also gets input from the ghrelin system also gets input from the ghrelin system also gets input from a clock in your liver a clock in your liver a clock in your liver that is linked to the clock in your that is linked to the clock in your that is linked to the clock in your hypothalamus in your brain. And what hypothalamus in your brain. And what hypothalamus in your brain. And what this means is if you eat at regular meal this means is if you eat at regular meal this means is if you eat at regular meal times, you will start to get hungry a times, you will start to get hungry a times, you will start to get hungry a few minutes before those meals times. If few minutes before those meals times. If few minutes before those meals times. If you've ever wondered why your stomach you've ever wondered why your stomach you've ever wondered why your stomach kind of starts to growl kind of starts to growl kind of starts to growl because it's a particular time of day, because it's a particular time of day, because it's a particular time of day, and you're like, "Oh, it's I must want and you're like, "Oh, it's I must want and you're like, "Oh, it's I must want to eat." Well, that's ghrelin. So, to eat." Well, that's ghrelin. So, to eat." Well, that's ghrelin. So, ghrelin is secreted as a kind of food ghrelin is secreted as a kind of food ghrelin is secreted as a kind of food anticipatory signal anticipatory signal anticipatory signal to get you motivated to go eat at to get you motivated to go eat at to get you motivated to go eat at regular times. But, regular times. But, regular times. But, what that means is that if you suddenly what that means is that if you suddenly what that means is that if you suddenly go from eating on a very regular go from eating on a very regular go from eating on a very regular schedule to skipping a meal or pushing schedule to skipping a meal or pushing schedule to skipping a meal or pushing your meal timing out or shifting it all, your meal timing out or shifting it all, your meal timing out or shifting it all, you're going to have ghrelin in your you're going to have ghrelin in your you're going to have ghrelin in your system, and that ghrelin is going to system, and that ghrelin is going to system, and that ghrelin is going to stimulate the desire to eat by acting at stimulate the desire to eat by acting at stimulate the desire to eat by acting at the level of your brain. So, ghrelin the level of your brain. So, ghrelin the level of your brain. So, ghrelin stimulates the AgRP neurons, which makes stimulates the AgRP neurons, which makes stimulates the AgRP neurons, which makes you want to eat. Regularity of eating you want to eat. Regularity of eating you want to eat. Regularity of eating equals regularity of ghrelin secretion equals regularity of ghrelin secretion equals regularity of ghrelin secretion equals regularity of activity of these equals regularity of activity of these equals regularity of activity of these AgRP neurons, meaning you'll be hungry AgRP neurons, meaning you'll be hungry AgRP neurons, meaning you'll be hungry at very regular intervals. So, if MSH at very regular intervals. So, if MSH at very regular intervals. So, if MSH inhibits feeding, makes us want to eat inhibits feeding, makes us want to eat inhibits feeding, makes us want to eat less, and ghrelin makes us want to eat less, and ghrelin makes us want to eat less, and ghrelin makes us want to eat more, there's another hormone called CCK, there's another hormone called CCK, there's another hormone called CCK, cholecystokinin, that is potent in reducing our levels of that is potent in reducing our levels of that is potent in reducing our levels of hunger. Now, CCK Now, CCK Now, CCK is in the GI tract. It's released from is in the GI tract. It's released from is in the GI tract. It's released from the GI tract. And its release is the GI tract. And its release is the GI tract. And its release is governed by two things. One is a subset governed by two things. One is a subset governed by two things. One is a subset of very specialized neurons that detect of very specialized neurons that detect of very specialized neurons that detect what's in the gut, the specific contents what's in the gut, the specific contents what's in the gut, the specific contents of the gut. of the gut. of the gut. And by certain elements of the mucosa, And by certain elements of the mucosa, And by certain elements of the mucosa, of the mucus lining of the gut and the of the mucus lining of the gut and the of the mucus lining of the gut and the gut microbiome. gut microbiome. gut microbiome. So, what's really interesting is that CCK what's really interesting is that CCK what's really interesting is that CCK is stimulated by fatty acids, is stimulated by fatty acids, is stimulated by fatty acids, amino acids, amino acids, amino acids, and particular amino acids that we'll and particular amino acids that we'll and particular amino acids that we'll talk about, as well as by sugar. So, talk about, as well as by sugar. So, talk about, as well as by sugar. So, which fatty acids in the gut stimulate which fatty acids in the gut stimulate which fatty acids in the gut stimulate the release of CCK? Omega-3 fatty acids the release of CCK? Omega-3 fatty acids the release of CCK? Omega-3 fatty acids and conjugated linoleic acid, CLA, and conjugated linoleic acid, CLA, and conjugated linoleic acid, CLA, either from food or from supplements, either from food or from supplements, either from food or from supplements, stimulate the release of CCK, which then stimulate the release of CCK, which then stimulate the release of CCK, which then reduces or at least blunts appetite. The reduces or at least blunts appetite. The reduces or at least blunts appetite. The other thing that stimulates CCK that I other thing that stimulates CCK that I other thing that stimulates CCK that I mentioned are amino acids. So, when we mentioned are amino acids. So, when we mentioned are amino acids. So, when we eat, we have the ability to break down eat, we have the ability to break down eat, we have the ability to break down different macronutrients, different macronutrients, different macronutrients, you know, carbohydrates, you know, carbohydrates, you know, carbohydrates, fats, or proteins into fats, or proteins into fats, or proteins into sugars and glucose that then we can sugars and glucose that then we can sugars and glucose that then we can convert to ATP and all that stuff from convert to ATP and all that stuff from convert to ATP and all that stuff from the Krebs cycle from high school. We're the Krebs cycle from high school. We're the Krebs cycle from high school. We're not going to go into that today, that's not going to go into that today, that's not going to go into that today, that's for a future episode. Amino acids both for a future episode. Amino acids both for a future episode. Amino acids both can be used as energy can be used as energy can be used as energy through a process called gluconeogenesis through a process called gluconeogenesis through a process called gluconeogenesis of converting proteins into energy, or of converting proteins into energy, or of converting proteins into energy, or those amino acids can be broken down and those amino acids can be broken down and those amino acids can be broken down and then rebuilt into things like repairing then rebuilt into things like repairing then rebuilt into things like repairing muscle tissue, as well as other forms of muscle tissue, as well as other forms of muscle tissue, as well as other forms of cellular repair. They're involved in all cellular repair. They're involved in all cellular repair. They're involved in all sorts of things related to protein sorts of things related to protein sorts of things related to protein synthesis. What does this mean? What does this mean? What does this mean? If we eat the proper amino acids at the If we eat the proper amino acids at the If we eat the proper amino acids at the proper levels, if we ingest omega-3s and proper levels, if we ingest omega-3s and proper levels, if we ingest omega-3s and CLAs, conjugated linoleic acids, at the CLAs, conjugated linoleic acids, at the CLAs, conjugated linoleic acids, at the proper levels, or get them from proper levels, or get them from proper levels, or get them from supplements, there is a blunting of appetite. there is a blunting of appetite. there is a blunting of appetite. Appetite is kept clamped and we don't Appetite is kept clamped and we don't Appetite is kept clamped and we don't become hyperphagic. We don't overeat. We become hyperphagic. We don't overeat. We become hyperphagic. We don't overeat. We tend to eat within healthy or normal tend to eat within healthy or normal tend to eat within healthy or normal ranges. So, this is very important because So, this is very important because So, this is very important because most people don't understand that when most people don't understand that when most people don't understand that when we're eating, we are basically fat we're eating, we are basically fat we're eating, we are basically fat foraging and amino acid foraging. foraging and amino acid foraging. foraging and amino acid foraging. In other words, even if it's not In other words, even if it's not In other words, even if it's not conscious, we are eating until we conscious, we are eating until we conscious, we are eating until we trigger the activation of CCK. Now, trigger the activation of CCK. Now, trigger the activation of CCK. Now, there are other reasons why we shut down there are other reasons why we shut down there are other reasons why we shut down eating, too. The volume of food in our eating, too. The volume of food in our eating, too. The volume of food in our gut can be large and we can feel very gut can be large and we can feel very gut can be large and we can feel very distended. That's the physical reason, distended. That's the physical reason, distended. That's the physical reason, obviously, but obviously, but obviously, but at a subconscious level, the gut is at a subconscious level, the gut is at a subconscious level, the gut is informing the brain via CCK and other informing the brain via CCK and other informing the brain via CCK and other mechanisms when we've ingested enough of mechanisms when we've ingested enough of mechanisms when we've ingested enough of what we need. So, as you can see, what we need. So, as you can see, what we need. So, as you can see, feeding is an interplay between brain feeding is an interplay between brain feeding is an interplay between brain and body and it's some of the and body and it's some of the and body and it's some of the micronutrients and even the breakdown of micronutrients and even the breakdown of micronutrients and even the breakdown of particular nutrients that's putting the particular nutrients that's putting the particular nutrients that's putting the accelerator or the brake on the feeding accelerator or the brake on the feeding accelerator or the brake on the feeding process. You are essentially trying to process. You are essentially trying to process. You are essentially trying to eat to get these nutrients and then a eat to get these nutrients and then a eat to get these nutrients and then a signal can be deployed up to your brain signal can be deployed up to your brain signal can be deployed up to your brain that you're not really interested in that you're not really interested in that you're not really interested in eating that much more. There's one eating that much more. There's one eating that much more. There's one particular aspect of food that can particular aspect of food that can particular aspect of food that can powerfully impact CCK and I think most powerfully impact CCK and I think most powerfully impact CCK and I think most people, I'm guessing 99.9% of people out people, I'm guessing 99.9% of people out people, I'm guessing 99.9% of people out there are not aware of this. there are not aware of this. there are not aware of this. And it has to do with highly processed And it has to do with highly processed And it has to do with highly processed foods. There's a lot of reasons why one foods. There's a lot of reasons why one foods. There's a lot of reasons why one would want to avoid highly processed would want to avoid highly processed would want to avoid highly processed foods. In fact, if you're interested in that In fact, if you're interested in that In fact, if you're interested in that topic and the history of whole foods topic and the history of whole foods topic and the history of whole foods transitioning to highly processed foods transitioning to highly processed foods transitioning to highly processed foods in this country, I highly recommend you in this country, I highly recommend you in this country, I highly recommend you listen to a YouTube video by Dr. Robert listen to a YouTube video by Dr. Robert listen to a YouTube video by Dr. Robert Lustig. He's at University of Lustig. He's at University of Lustig. He's at University of California, San Francisco. It gives a California, San Francisco. It gives a California, San Francisco. It gives a beautiful description of the history of beautiful description of the history of beautiful description of the history of this and why the food industry started this and why the food industry started this and why the food industry started packing in additional sugars and salts packing in additional sugars and salts packing in additional sugars and salts and turning foods into commodities. It's and turning foods into commodities. It's and turning foods into commodities. It's really fascinating. It has no conspiracy really fascinating. It has no conspiracy really fascinating. It has no conspiracy theory. It's just all scientific facts. theory. It's just all scientific facts. theory. It's just all scientific facts. It's really a wonderful lecture. It has It's really a wonderful lecture. It has It's really a wonderful lecture. It has millions of views. Should be very easy millions of views. Should be very easy millions of views. Should be very easy to find. There's another reason to avoid to find. There's another reason to avoid to find. There's another reason to avoid highly processed foods, however. highly processed foods, however. highly processed foods, however. And that has to do with what's called And that has to do with what's called And that has to do with what's called emulsifiers. Now, many of you are familiar with Now, many of you are familiar with Now, many of you are familiar with emulsifiers even though you don't know emulsifiers even though you don't know emulsifiers even though you don't know it. When you put detergent in the it. When you put detergent in the it. When you put detergent in the laundry, that is in a contains emulsifiers. The that is in a contains emulsifiers. The that is in a contains emulsifiers. The goal of that detergent is to bring The goal of that detergent is to bring The goal of that detergent is to bring together fatty molecules with water together fatty molecules with water together fatty molecules with water molecules and be able to dissociate them molecules and be able to dissociate them molecules and be able to dissociate them and break them up to get the stains out and break them up to get the stains out and break them up to get the stains out of clothes and things of that sort. of clothes and things of that sort. of clothes and things of that sort. There are a lot of emulsifiers put into There are a lot of emulsifiers put into There are a lot of emulsifiers put into processed foods. processed foods. processed foods. And those emulsifiers allow certain And those emulsifiers allow certain And those emulsifiers allow certain chemical reactions to occur that extends chemical reactions to occur that extends chemical reactions to occur that extends the shelf life of those foods. Why are the shelf life of those foods. Why are the shelf life of those foods. Why are emulsifiers bad? Okay, there are a lot emulsifiers bad? Okay, there are a lot emulsifiers bad? Okay, there are a lot of reasons why they're bad, but the of reasons why they're bad, but the of reasons why they're bad, but the reason why they're bad for the reason why they're bad for the reason why they're bad for the mechanisms that we've been talking about mechanisms that we've been talking about mechanisms that we've been talking about today is that when you ingest those today is that when you ingest those today is that when you ingest those foods, you're bringing those emulsifiers foods, you're bringing those emulsifiers foods, you're bringing those emulsifiers into your gut. And those emulsifiers into your gut. And those emulsifiers into your gut. And those emulsifiers strip away the mucosal lining of the gut strip away the mucosal lining of the gut strip away the mucosal lining of the gut and they actually cause the neurons that and they actually cause the neurons that and they actually cause the neurons that innervate the gut, that extend those innervate the gut, that extend those innervate the gut, that extend those little processes we call axons into the little processes we call axons into the little processes we call axons into the gut, to retract deeper into the gut. gut, to retract deeper into the gut. gut, to retract deeper into the gut. And as a consequence, you're ingesting a And as a consequence, you're ingesting a And as a consequence, you're ingesting a bunch of food and the signals like CCK bunch of food and the signals like CCK bunch of food and the signals like CCK never get deployed. The signals that never get deployed. The signals that never get deployed. The signals that actually shut down hunger are never actually shut down hunger are never actually shut down hunger are never actually triggered. And so as a actually triggered. And so as a actually triggered. And so as a consequence, you want to eat far more of consequence, you want to eat far more of consequence, you want to eat far more of these highly processed foods. In these highly processed foods. In these highly processed foods. In addition, if you then go from eating a addition, if you then go from eating a addition, if you then go from eating a highly processed food to non-highly highly processed food to non-highly highly processed food to non-highly processed foods, you're not able to processed foods, you're not able to processed foods, you're not able to measure the amounts of amino acid sugars measure the amounts of amino acid sugars measure the amounts of amino acid sugars and fatty acids in those foods as and fatty acids in those foods as and fatty acids in those foods as accurately. You've actually done accurately. You've actually done accurately. You've actually done structural damage at a micro level, but structural damage at a micro level, but structural damage at a micro level, but structural level damage, excuse me, to structural level damage, excuse me, to structural level damage, excuse me, to the mucosal lining of the gut. Now, this the mucosal lining of the gut. Now, this the mucosal lining of the gut. Now, this can all be repaired if you stay away can all be repaired if you stay away can all be repaired if you stay away from highly processed foods for some from highly processed foods for some from highly processed foods for some period of time. But the negative effects period of time. But the negative effects period of time. But the negative effects of these emulsifiers are quite real. So, of these emulsifiers are quite real. So, of these emulsifiers are quite real. So, to make it really clean and simple, to make it really clean and simple, to make it really clean and simple, emulsifiers from highly processed foods emulsifiers from highly processed foods emulsifiers from highly processed foods are limiting your gut's ability to are limiting your gut's ability to are limiting your gut's ability to detect what's in the foods you eat and detect what's in the foods you eat and detect what's in the foods you eat and therefore to deploy the satiety signals, therefore to deploy the satiety signals, therefore to deploy the satiety signals, the signals that shut down hunger. In the signals that shut down hunger. In the signals that shut down hunger. In addition to that, there's a parallel addition to that, there's a parallel addition to that, there's a parallel mechanism at play that I talked about in mechanism at play that I talked about in mechanism at play that I talked about in a previous episode, but I'll remind you a previous episode, but I'll remind you a previous episode, but I'll remind you again that you have neurons in your gut again that you have neurons in your gut again that you have neurons in your gut that are sensing sugar that are sensing sugar that are sensing sugar and are sending a subconscious signal up and are sending a subconscious signal up and are sending a subconscious signal up to the brain via the vagus nerve. to the brain via the vagus nerve. to the brain via the vagus nerve. And those neurons trigger the release of And those neurons trigger the release of And those neurons trigger the release of dopamine, which makes you crave more of dopamine, which makes you crave more of dopamine, which makes you crave more of that food. So, now you've got parallel that food. So, now you've got parallel that food. So, now you've got parallel signals making you want to eat more sugar, making you want to eat more sugar, making you want to eat more sugar, making you unaware of how much sugar making you unaware of how much sugar making you unaware of how much sugar you've eaten, and that are disrupting you've eaten, and that are disrupting you've eaten, and that are disrupting the inputs to the nervous system that the inputs to the nervous system that the inputs to the nervous system that signal to the rest of your brain and signal to the rest of your brain and signal to the rest of your brain and body that you've obtained enough fatty body that you've obtained enough fatty body that you've obtained enough fatty acids and you've obtained enough amino acids and you've obtained enough amino acids and you've obtained enough amino acids. So, these highly processed foods acids. So, these highly processed foods acids. So, these highly processed foods are really terrible. And, you know, I'm are really terrible. And, you know, I'm are really terrible. And, you know, I'm not out here to say, you know, never not out here to say, you know, never not out here to say, you know, never enjoy a processed food of any kind. I'd enjoy a processed food of any kind. I'd enjoy a processed food of any kind. I'd be a hypocrite cuz I do eat processed be a hypocrite cuz I do eat processed be a hypocrite cuz I do eat processed foods from time to time, although the foods from time to time, although the foods from time to time, although the ones that I tend to eat, I try and make ones that I tend to eat, I try and make ones that I tend to eat, I try and make of the healthier variety. But, eating of the healthier variety. But, eating of the healthier variety. But, eating whole foods has tremendous value, and whole foods has tremendous value, and whole foods has tremendous value, and eating highly processed food has eating highly processed food has eating highly processed food has tremendous negative impact on the gut tremendous negative impact on the gut tremendous negative impact on the gut and on the gut-brain axis. The bottom and on the gut-brain axis. The bottom and on the gut-brain axis. The bottom line is that highly processed foods are line is that highly processed foods are line is that highly processed foods are just bad for you. They increase weight just bad for you. They increase weight just bad for you. They increase weight gain, they disrupt the lining of your gain, they disrupt the lining of your gain, they disrupt the lining of your gut in a way that disrupts things like gut in a way that disrupts things like gut in a way that disrupts things like CCK and proper satiety signals. So, CCK and proper satiety signals. So, CCK and proper satiety signals. So, there's just so many reasons why these there's just so many reasons why these there's just so many reasons why these highly processed foods are terrible, and highly processed foods are terrible, and highly processed foods are terrible, and they can explain a lot of the ill-health they can explain a lot of the ill-health they can explain a lot of the ill-health effects that we've seen in the last 50 effects that we've seen in the last 50 effects that we've seen in the last 50 years, not just in the United States, years, not just in the United States, years, not just in the United States, but all over the world. The enormous but all over the world. The enormous but all over the world. The enormous increase in diabetes, juvenile diabetes. increase in diabetes, juvenile diabetes. increase in diabetes, juvenile diabetes. It's just remarkable how far down the It's just remarkable how far down the It's just remarkable how far down the path of bad we've gone, and it's clear path of bad we've gone, and it's clear path of bad we've gone, and it's clear it's almost a smoking gun what the cause it's almost a smoking gun what the cause it's almost a smoking gun what the cause of this is. If you'd like to learn more of this is. If you'd like to learn more of this is. If you'd like to learn more about that, please refer to the about that, please refer to the about that, please refer to the Lustig lecture. He also spells out why Lustig lecture. He also spells out why Lustig lecture. He also spells out why non-processed foods is far more non-processed foods is far more non-processed foods is far more economical in terms of economical in terms of economical in terms of just at the level of the household or just at the level of the household or just at the level of the household or individual, as well as at the societal individual, as well as at the societal individual, as well as at the societal level. Really interesting stuff. I level. Really interesting stuff. I level. Really interesting stuff. I highly recommend you check it out. So, highly recommend you check it out. So, highly recommend you check it out. So, now let's move on to some other hormones now let's move on to some other hormones now let's move on to some other hormones that regulate hunger and satiety. In that regulate hunger and satiety. In that regulate hunger and satiety. In particular, insulin. particular, insulin. particular, insulin. Now, you've probably heard of insulin Now, you've probably heard of insulin Now, you've probably heard of insulin before. Insulin is the thing that's before. Insulin is the thing that's before. Insulin is the thing that's lacking in type 1 diabetics. That's why lacking in type 1 diabetics. That's why lacking in type 1 diabetics. That's why they have to inject insulin whenever they have to inject insulin whenever they have to inject insulin whenever they eat. The reason they have to do they eat. The reason they have to do they eat. The reason they have to do that is because when they eat, their that is because when they eat, their that is because when they eat, their foods are broken down into glucose, and foods are broken down into glucose, and foods are broken down into glucose, and in order to shuttle glucose to the in order to shuttle glucose to the in order to shuttle glucose to the appropriate tissues in the body, and appropriate tissues in the body, and appropriate tissues in the body, and also to keep glucose levels in check, also to keep glucose levels in check, also to keep glucose levels in check, you need insulin. So, the simplest way you need insulin. So, the simplest way you need insulin. So, the simplest way to think about insulin and glucose is to think about insulin and glucose is to think about insulin and glucose is that when you eat, that food is broken down when you eat, that food is broken down when you eat, that food is broken down into sugars. into sugars. into sugars. That's true whether or not it's fats or That's true whether or not it's fats or That's true whether or not it's fats or it's sugars or eventually if it's sugars or eventually if it's sugars or eventually if it's proteins. They're oxidized into fuels as we say. They're oxidized into fuels as we say. They're oxidized into fuels as we say. Your blood sugar needs to be kept in a Your blood sugar needs to be kept in a Your blood sugar needs to be kept in a particular range. Hypoglycemic means too particular range. Hypoglycemic means too particular range. Hypoglycemic means too low, hyperglycemic means too high, and low, hyperglycemic means too high, and low, hyperglycemic means too high, and what they call euglycemic, E U glycemic, what they call euglycemic, E U glycemic, what they call euglycemic, E U glycemic, is the healthy range. is the healthy range. is the healthy range. Now, what those healthy ranges are, Now, what those healthy ranges are, Now, what those healthy ranges are, in general, the healthy range, the in general, the healthy range, the in general, the healthy range, the euglycemic range is about 70 to 100 euglycemic range is about 70 to 100 euglycemic range is about 70 to 100 nanograms per deciliter. Why is it nanograms per deciliter. Why is it nanograms per deciliter. Why is it important that glucose be kept at a important that glucose be kept at a important that glucose be kept at a particular level? Once you understand particular level? Once you understand particular level? Once you understand that, keeping glucose in check starts to have keeping glucose in check starts to have keeping glucose in check starts to have a rationale behind it, and the ways to a rationale behind it, and the ways to a rationale behind it, and the ways to do that start to make a lot more sense. do that start to make a lot more sense. do that start to make a lot more sense. So, the reason is So, the reason is So, the reason is if glucose levels get too high because if glucose levels get too high because if glucose levels get too high because of the way that our cells, in particular of the way that our cells, in particular of the way that our cells, in particular neurons, interact with glucose, neurons, interact with glucose, neurons, interact with glucose, high levels of glucose can damage high levels of glucose can damage high levels of glucose can damage neurons. It can actually kill them. You neurons. It can actually kill them. You neurons. It can actually kill them. You can start getting what are called can start getting what are called can start getting what are called periperal peripheral, excuse me, periperal peripheral, excuse me, periperal peripheral, excuse me, neuropathies. One of the symptoms of neuropathies. One of the symptoms of neuropathies. One of the symptoms of some forms of diabetes is that people some forms of diabetes is that people some forms of diabetes is that people start losing the sensation of touch in start losing the sensation of touch in start losing the sensation of touch in their fingers or their hands or their fingers or their hands or their fingers or their hands or their feet, and they can start going blind. feet, and they can start going blind. feet, and they can start going blind. There's diabetic retinopathies. There's diabetic retinopathies. There's diabetic retinopathies. So, it's very important that insulin So, it's very important that insulin So, it's very important that insulin manage your glucose levels. manage your glucose levels. manage your glucose levels. Now, there's also type 2 diabetes where Now, there's also type 2 diabetes where Now, there's also type 2 diabetes where there's insulin there's insulin there's insulin secreted from the pancreas, but people secreted from the pancreas, but people secreted from the pancreas, but people are insulin insensitive. There's a are insulin insensitive. There's a are insulin insensitive. There's a disruption in the receptors, and insulin disruption in the receptors, and insulin disruption in the receptors, and insulin insensitivity isn't quite the same as having no isn't quite the same as having no isn't quite the same as having no insulin at all, but it parallels some of insulin at all, but it parallels some of insulin at all, but it parallels some of the same mechanisms. Now, type 1 the same mechanisms. Now, type 1 the same mechanisms. Now, type 1 diabetes is often picked up because diabetes is often picked up because diabetes is often picked up because someone has a sudden someone has a sudden someone has a sudden weight loss because they're not weight loss because they're not weight loss because they're not processing blood sugar the same way they processing blood sugar the same way they processing blood sugar the same way they were before. Type 2 diabetes is often, were before. Type 2 diabetes is often, were before. Type 2 diabetes is often, although not always, associated with although not always, associated with although not always, associated with being overweight and with obesity. being overweight and with obesity. being overweight and with obesity. Both of them are challenging Both of them are challenging Both of them are challenging conditions. Type 2 diabetes almost conditions. Type 2 diabetes almost conditions. Type 2 diabetes almost always can be managed by always can be managed by always can be managed by managing one's weight. managing one's weight. managing one's weight. And of course, there are prescription And of course, there are prescription And of course, there are prescription drugs and supplements that can help drugs and supplements that can help drugs and supplements that can help manage those. We're going to talk about manage those. We're going to talk about manage those. We're going to talk about all of that. But for most people that all of that. But for most people that all of that. But for most people that don't have diabetes, the important thing don't have diabetes, the important thing don't have diabetes, the important thing is to manage glucose, to keep it in that is to manage glucose, to keep it in that is to manage glucose, to keep it in that euglycemic range. euglycemic range. euglycemic range. And there are a number of different ways And there are a number of different ways And there are a number of different ways to do that. Some of them are behavioral, to do that. Some of them are behavioral, to do that. Some of them are behavioral, some of them are diet-based, and some of some of them are diet-based, and some of some of them are diet-based, and some of them are based on supplements or them are based on supplements or them are based on supplements or prescription drugs. So, let's talk about prescription drugs. So, let's talk about prescription drugs. So, let's talk about those now. So, if you eat, and in those now. So, if you eat, and in those now. So, if you eat, and in particular if you eat carbohydrates, particular if you eat carbohydrates, particular if you eat carbohydrates, blood glucose goes up. If you eat fats, blood glucose goes up. If you eat fats, blood glucose goes up. If you eat fats, blood glucose goes up to a far less blood glucose goes up to a far less blood glucose goes up to a far less degree. And if you eat proteins, degree. And if you eat proteins, degree. And if you eat proteins, depending on the protein, it'll depending on the protein, it'll depending on the protein, it'll eventually be broken down for fuel or eventually be broken down for fuel or eventually be broken down for fuel or assembled into amino acid chains for assembled into amino acid chains for assembled into amino acid chains for protein synthesis and repair of other protein synthesis and repair of other protein synthesis and repair of other tissues and bodily functions, tissues and bodily functions, tissues and bodily functions, but glucose goes up and then is kept in glucose goes up and then is kept in glucose goes up and then is kept in range. When you are hungry, When you are hungry, When you are hungry, you secrete a different hormone, and you secrete a different hormone, and you secrete a different hormone, and that's called glucagon. And glucagon's that's called glucagon. And glucagon's that's called glucagon. And glucagon's main role main role main role is to pull is to pull is to pull stores of energy out of the liver stores of energy out of the liver stores of energy out of the liver and the muscles, and once those are and the muscles, and once those are and the muscles, and once those are depleted, you'll eventually tap into body fat. So, you'll eventually tap into body fat. So, you'll eventually tap into body fat. So, the two kind of push and pull systems the two kind of push and pull systems the two kind of push and pull systems that we're going to think about now to that we're going to think about now to that we're going to think about now to keep this simple is that you have the keep this simple is that you have the keep this simple is that you have the insulin system managing glucose, insulin system managing glucose, insulin system managing glucose, and you've got the glucagon system and you've got the glucagon system and you've got the glucagon system pulling energy out of your liver and pulling energy out of your liver and pulling energy out of your liver and muscles for immediate fuel, muscles for immediate fuel, muscles for immediate fuel, and eventually and eventually and eventually you'll pull fuel out of body fat if you'll pull fuel out of body fat if you'll pull fuel out of body fat if you've been active for a very long time you've been active for a very long time you've been active for a very long time and all your glycogen stores are and all your glycogen stores are and all your glycogen stores are depleted or close to depleted. depleted or close to depleted. depleted or close to depleted. So, what does this all mean? Let's say So, what does this all mean? Let's say So, what does this all mean? Let's say you had a meal and that meal consisted you had a meal and that meal consisted you had a meal and that meal consisted of rice, a carbohydrate, of rice, a carbohydrate, of rice, a carbohydrate, some meat or fish, let's say a piece of some meat or fish, let's say a piece of some meat or fish, let's say a piece of salmon, and some vegetable, some fibrous and some vegetable, some fibrous and some vegetable, some fibrous vegetable like asparagus or cabbage or vegetable like asparagus or cabbage or vegetable like asparagus or cabbage or something like that. something like that. something like that. If you were to If you were to If you were to eat all of that at once, you know, you eat all of that at once, you know, you eat all of that at once, you know, you take a bite of one, a bite of the other, take a bite of one, a bite of the other, take a bite of one, a bite of the other, you know, you kind of mix it up, then you know, you kind of mix it up, then you know, you kind of mix it up, then you will experience an increase in you will experience an increase in you will experience an increase in insulin and increase in blood glucose insulin and increase in blood glucose insulin and increase in blood glucose that's moderately fast. It's going to increase moderately fast. It's going to increase moderately fast. It's going to increase pretty quickly. pretty quickly. pretty quickly. What's remarkable is that the order that What's remarkable is that the order that What's remarkable is that the order that you consume each macronutrient has a pretty consume each macronutrient has a pretty consume each macronutrient has a pretty profound influence on the rate of profound influence on the rate of profound influence on the rate of insulin and glucose secretion into the blood and glucose secretion into the blood and glucose secretion into the blood and how quickly those levels rise. If you how quickly those levels rise. If you how quickly those levels rise. If you were to eat the fibrous thing first, so were to eat the fibrous thing first, so were to eat the fibrous thing first, so a lot of chewing but not a big rise in a lot of chewing but not a big rise in a lot of chewing but not a big rise in blood glucose, that will actually blunt blood glucose, that will actually blunt blood glucose, that will actually blunt the release of glucose until you eat the release of glucose until you eat the release of glucose until you eat the fish and the rice, but believe it not, fish and the rice, but believe it not, fish and the rice, but believe it not, it will actually blunt the glucose it will actually blunt the glucose it will actually blunt the glucose increase that the rice would cause. Now, increase that the rice would cause. Now, increase that the rice would cause. Now, I'm not talking about neurotically I'm not talking about neurotically I'm not talking about neurotically eating each macronutrient separately in eating each macronutrient separately in eating each macronutrient separately in sequence. I'm just trying to give you a sequence. I'm just trying to give you a sequence. I'm just trying to give you a picture of what's happening ordinarily. picture of what's happening ordinarily. picture of what's happening ordinarily. So, what does this all mean? It means that what does this all mean? It means that what does this all mean? It means that if you want a steep increase in glucose, if you want a steep increase in glucose, if you want a steep increase in glucose, you are very, very hungry, then you are very, very hungry, then you are very, very hungry, then you should eat the carbohydrate laden should eat the carbohydrate laden should eat the carbohydrate laden food first or you should eat a bunch of food first or you should eat a bunch of food first or you should eat a bunch of macronutrients combined. So, that would macronutrients combined. So, that would macronutrients combined. So, that would be like the hamburger or the sandwich, be like the hamburger or the sandwich, be like the hamburger or the sandwich, the bread, the whatever's in that the bread, the whatever's in that the bread, the whatever's in that sandwich all together. Usually, that's sandwich all together. Usually, that's sandwich all together. Usually, that's protein and and, you know, vegetables as protein and and, you know, vegetables as protein and and, you know, vegetables as well. If you want to have a kind of more If you want to have a kind of more If you want to have a kind of more modest increase in glucose, so you want modest increase in glucose, so you want modest increase in glucose, so you want to blunt the increase in glucose, then to blunt the increase in glucose, then to blunt the increase in glucose, then have the have the have the at least some of the fibrous thing at least some of the fibrous thing at least some of the fibrous thing first, and then the protein, and then first, and then the protein, and then first, and then the protein, and then the carbohydrate. You will notice that the carbohydrate. You will notice that the carbohydrate. You will notice that your blood glucose will rise more your blood glucose will rise more your blood glucose will rise more steadily and that you'll achieve satiety earlier and that you'll achieve satiety earlier and that you'll achieve satiety earlier in the meal. Basically, what you're in the meal. Basically, what you're in the meal. Basically, what you're trying to avoid are steep increases in trying to avoid are steep increases in trying to avoid are steep increases in blood sugar, and the order that you eat blood sugar, and the order that you eat blood sugar, and the order that you eat foods has an enormous impact on that. foods has an enormous impact on that. foods has an enormous impact on that. The other thing that has an enormous The other thing that has an enormous The other thing that has an enormous impact on how long and shallow or how impact on how long and shallow or how impact on how long and shallow or how steep that steep that steep that curve of glucose is curve of glucose is curve of glucose is depends on whether or not you recently depends on whether or not you recently depends on whether or not you recently were moving, are moving, or start moving were moving, are moving, or start moving were moving, are moving, or start moving after you eat. So, it turns out that after you eat. So, it turns out that after you eat. So, it turns out that your blood glucose levels can be your blood glucose levels can be your blood glucose levels can be modulated very, very powerfully by modulated very, very powerfully by modulated very, very powerfully by movement. If you did any kind of intense movement. If you did any kind of intense movement. If you did any kind of intense exercise or even just walking or jogging exercise or even just walking or jogging exercise or even just walking or jogging or cycling, anything before you eat, or cycling, anything before you eat, or cycling, anything before you eat, your blood glucose levels will be your blood glucose levels will be your blood glucose levels will be dampened somewhat. And even just moving dampened somewhat. And even just moving dampened somewhat. And even just moving after a meal, even just a calm, easy after a meal, even just a calm, easy after a meal, even just a calm, easy walk, can really adjust the ways in walk, can really adjust the ways in walk, can really adjust the ways in which blood sugar regulated for the which blood sugar regulated for the which blood sugar regulated for the better. The other thing I'd like to address for The other thing I'd like to address for The other thing I'd like to address for a moment is this notion of stable blood a moment is this notion of stable blood a moment is this notion of stable blood sugar versus labile blood sugar or sugar versus labile blood sugar or sugar versus labile blood sugar or unstable blood sugar. Some people just unstable blood sugar. Some people just unstable blood sugar. Some people just have stable blood sugar. They can go have stable blood sugar. They can go have stable blood sugar. They can go long periods of time without eating and long periods of time without eating and long periods of time without eating and feel fine. Other people get really feel fine. Other people get really feel fine. Other people get really shaky, really jittery, shaky, really jittery, shaky, really jittery, and or when they do eat, they feel and or when they do eat, they feel and or when they do eat, they feel really keyed up. Sometimes they'll even really keyed up. Sometimes they'll even really keyed up. Sometimes they'll even sweat. But, whether or not your blood sweat. But, whether or not your blood sweat. But, whether or not your blood sugar is all over the place or whether sugar is all over the place or whether sugar is all over the place or whether or not stable, or not stable, or not stable, can be impacted by a number of things. can be impacted by a number of things. can be impacted by a number of things. One of those things is exercise. So, One of those things is exercise. So, One of those things is exercise. So, these days there's a lot of interest in these days there's a lot of interest in these days there's a lot of interest in what they call zone two cardio, which is what they call zone two cardio, which is what they call zone two cardio, which is that kind of steady state cardio where that kind of steady state cardio where that kind of steady state cardio where you can just nasal breathe even at you can just nasal breathe even at you can just nasal breathe even at pretty high output, um where you could pretty high output, um where you could pretty high output, um where you could maybe have a conversation. Zone two maybe have a conversation. Zone two maybe have a conversation. Zone two cardio that last anywhere from 30 minutes to an that last anywhere from 30 minutes to an that last anywhere from 30 minutes to an hour or sometimes more for you endurance hour or sometimes more for you endurance hour or sometimes more for you endurance athletes can create positive effects on blood can create positive effects on blood can create positive effects on blood sugar regulation such that sugar regulation such that sugar regulation such that you, people can sit down and enjoy you, people can sit down and enjoy you, people can sit down and enjoy whatever it is, the hot fudge sundae, or whatever it is, the hot fudge sundae, or whatever it is, the hot fudge sundae, or whatever the high sugar content food is, whatever the high sugar content food is, whatever the high sugar content food is, and blood glucose management is so good, and blood glucose management is so good, and blood glucose management is so good, your insulin sensitivity is so high, your insulin sensitivity is so high, your insulin sensitivity is so high, which is a good thing, that you can which is a good thing, that you can which is a good thing, that you can manage that blood glucose to the point manage that blood glucose to the point manage that blood glucose to the point where it doesn't really make you shaky, it uh it doesn't really make you shaky, it uh it doesn't really make you shaky, it uh doesn't disrupt you. Basically, doing doesn't disrupt you. Basically, doing doesn't disrupt you. Basically, doing zone two cardio for 30 to 60 minutes zone two cardio for 30 to 60 minutes zone two cardio for 30 to 60 minutes three to four times a week makes your three to four times a week makes your three to four times a week makes your blood sugar really stable, and that's an blood sugar really stable, and that's an blood sugar really stable, and that's an attractive thing for a variety of attractive thing for a variety of attractive thing for a variety of reasons. On the flip side, reasons. On the flip side, reasons. On the flip side, high-intensity interval training or high-intensity interval training or high-intensity interval training or resistance training, aka weight resistance training, aka weight resistance training, aka weight training, are very good at stimulating training, are very good at stimulating training, are very good at stimulating the various molecules that promote the various molecules that promote the various molecules that promote repackaging of glycogen. So, sprints, repackaging of glycogen. So, sprints, repackaging of glycogen. So, sprints, heavy weight lifting, circuit type heavy weight lifting, circuit type heavy weight lifting, circuit type weight lifting, provided there is some weight lifting, provided there is some weight lifting, provided there is some reasonable degree of resistance, those reasonable degree of resistance, those reasonable degree of resistance, those are going to trigger all sorts of are going to trigger all sorts of are going to trigger all sorts of mechanisms that are going to mechanisms that are going to mechanisms that are going to encourage the body to shuttle glucose encourage the body to shuttle glucose encourage the body to shuttle glucose back into glycogen, convert it into back into glycogen, convert it into back into glycogen, convert it into glycogen into muscle tissue, restock the glycogen into muscle tissue, restock the glycogen into muscle tissue, restock the liver, etc. And I should mention that liver, etc. And I should mention that liver, etc. And I should mention that one of the advantages of high-intensity one of the advantages of high-intensity one of the advantages of high-intensity interval training interval training interval training or weightlifting or weightlifting or weightlifting of various kinds is that it also it of various kinds is that it also it of various kinds is that it also it causes long-standing increases in basal causes long-standing increases in basal causes long-standing increases in basal metabolic rate. Now, I'd like to turn to metabolic rate. Now, I'd like to turn to metabolic rate. Now, I'd like to turn to prescription drugs that regulate the prescription drugs that regulate the prescription drugs that regulate the hormone systems hormone systems hormone systems controlling feeding and satiety. controlling feeding and satiety. controlling feeding and satiety. There's a prescription drug metformin, There's a prescription drug metformin, There's a prescription drug metformin, which was developed as a treatment for which was developed as a treatment for which was developed as a treatment for diabetes, and it works potently to diabetes, and it works potently to diabetes, and it works potently to reduce blood glucose. It has dramatic reduce blood glucose. It has dramatic reduce blood glucose. It has dramatic effects in lowering blood glucose. effects in lowering blood glucose. effects in lowering blood glucose. Metformin involves changes to mitochondrial action in the changes to mitochondrial action in the changes to mitochondrial action in the liver. That's its main way of liver. That's its main way of liver. That's its main way of depleting or reducing blood glucose, and depleting or reducing blood glucose, and depleting or reducing blood glucose, and it does so through the so-called AMPK it does so through the so-called AMPK it does so through the so-called AMPK pathway, and it increases insulin sensitivity and it increases insulin sensitivity and it increases insulin sensitivity overall. Metformin is a powerful drug. In fact, Metformin is a powerful drug. In fact, Metformin is a powerful drug. In fact, I'm surprised that so many people have I'm surprised that so many people have I'm surprised that so many people have sought it out given that most of the sought it out given that most of the sought it out given that most of the people that I'm aware of that sought it people that I'm aware of that sought it people that I'm aware of that sought it out are not diabetic. I do want to out are not diabetic. I do want to out are not diabetic. I do want to mention, because I'm sure some of you mention, because I'm sure some of you mention, because I'm sure some of you out there are curious about the out there are curious about the out there are curious about the ketogenic diet, I'm going to do an ketogenic diet, I'm going to do an ketogenic diet, I'm going to do an entire episode about ketosis and the entire episode about ketosis and the entire episode about ketosis and the brain and the body, but the The brain and the body, but the The brain and the body, but the The diet has been shown in 22 studies to diet has been shown in 22 studies to diet has been shown in 22 studies to have a notable decrease on blood have a notable decrease on blood have a notable decrease on blood glucose, and that is not surprising glucose, and that is not surprising glucose, and that is not surprising because you're the essence of the of because you're the essence of the of because you're the essence of the of the ketogenic diet is that you're the ketogenic diet is that you're the ketogenic diet is that you're consuming very little or zero of the consuming very little or zero of the consuming very little or zero of the foods that promote big spikes in insulin foods that promote big spikes in insulin foods that promote big spikes in insulin and glucose. and glucose. and glucose. If you consume enough protein, some of If you consume enough protein, some of If you consume enough protein, some of that protein can be converted into that protein can be converted into that protein can be converted into glucose, of course, through glucose, of course, through glucose, of course, through gluconeogenesis, but the ketogenic diet gluconeogenesis, but the ketogenic diet gluconeogenesis, but the ketogenic diet has very strong support as has very strong support as has very strong support as for its role in regulating blood sugar, for its role in regulating blood sugar, for its role in regulating blood sugar, which is glucose. which is glucose. which is glucose. But, the specific effects of the But, the specific effects of the But, the specific effects of the ketogenic diet ketogenic diet ketogenic diet and one particular effect that I'll and one particular effect that I'll and one particular effect that I'll address later, but I'll mention now, address later, but I'll mention now, address later, but I'll mention now, which is the ability of the which is the ability of the which is the ability of the ketogenic diet to ketogenic diet to ketogenic diet to adjust thyroid hormone levels in ways adjust thyroid hormone levels in ways adjust thyroid hormone levels in ways that make it such that if you return to that make it such that if you return to that make it such that if you return to eating carbohydrates after being in eating carbohydrates after being in eating carbohydrates after being in ketosis for too long, you don't manage ketosis for too long, you don't manage ketosis for too long, you don't manage thyroid and carbohydrates as well. That thyroid and carbohydrates as well. That thyroid and carbohydrates as well. That has been shown as well. So, we're going has been shown as well. So, we're going has been shown as well. So, we're going to dive deep into ketosis in a future to dive deep into ketosis in a future to dive deep into ketosis in a future episode. So, for you keto nistas out episode. So, for you keto nistas out episode. So, for you keto nistas out there, don't worry. I certainly have there, don't worry. I certainly have there, don't worry. I certainly have nothing against ketogenic diet. I nothing against ketogenic diet. I nothing against ketogenic diet. I actually don't have anything for or actually don't have anything for or actually don't have anything for or against any particular nutrition plan. I against any particular nutrition plan. I against any particular nutrition plan. I know what works for me, at least at this know what works for me, at least at this know what works for me, at least at this stage of my life, and I'll update it if stage of my life, and I'll update it if stage of my life, and I'll update it if I need to. I'm simply trying to get you I need to. I'm simply trying to get you I need to. I'm simply trying to get you as much information as I possibly can so as much information as I possibly can so as much information as I possibly can so that you can navigate through that you can navigate through that you can navigate through that landscape in a way that's landscape in a way that's landscape in a way that's in keeping with your particular goals. in keeping with your particular goals. in keeping with your particular goals. So, now you understand a lot about blood So, now you understand a lot about blood So, now you understand a lot about blood sugar and how it's managed and the ways sugar and how it's managed and the ways sugar and how it's managed and the ways that you can manage it better depending that you can manage it better depending that you can manage it better depending on your particular needs. on your particular needs. on your particular needs. This is also a good opportunity for us This is also a good opportunity for us This is also a good opportunity for us to look back at some of the medical to look back at some of the medical to look back at some of the medical literature because it really points to literature because it really points to literature because it really points to just how far we've come in terms of just how far we've come in terms of just how far we've come in terms of understanding these important understanding these important understanding these important mechanisms, and it points us in the mechanisms, and it points us in the mechanisms, and it points us in the direction of some actionable protocols. direction of some actionable protocols. direction of some actionable protocols. So, diabetes, which is these huge So, diabetes, which is these huge So, diabetes, which is these huge increases in blood glucose increases in blood glucose increases in blood glucose because there's no insulin because there's no insulin because there's no insulin was known about as early as 1500 BC, was known about as early as 1500 BC, was known about as early as 1500 BC, which is just incredible. which is just incredible. which is just incredible. And the way And the way And the way physicians then understood physicians then understood physicians then understood that certain people had high blood that certain people had high blood that certain people had high blood glucose without actually knowing what glucose without actually knowing what glucose without actually knowing what blood glucose was is that they would blood glucose was is that they would blood glucose was is that they would take the urine of particular patients take the urine of particular patients take the urine of particular patients and they'd find that ants preferably and they'd find that ants preferably and they'd find that ants preferably move toward and consume the urine of move toward and consume the urine of move toward and consume the urine of certain patients and not others. certain patients and not others. certain patients and not others. And they understood that there was And they understood that there was And they understood that there was something in that urine that was something in that urine that was something in that urine that was correlated with the sudden weight loss correlated with the sudden weight loss correlated with the sudden weight loss and some of the other probably very and some of the other probably very and some of the other probably very unfortunate health unfortunate health unfortunate health you know, symptoms that these people you know, symptoms that these people you know, symptoms that these people were experiencing. So, they knew that were experiencing. So, they knew that were experiencing. So, they knew that there was something in blood and there was something in blood and there was something in blood and urine. Now, this business of and urine. Now, this business of and urine. Now, this business of measuring blood sugar measuring blood sugar measuring blood sugar from the urine from the urine from the urine has been something that lasted way has been something that lasted way has been something that lasted way beyond these early stages of you know, beyond these early stages of you know, beyond these early stages of you know, 1500 BC. 1500 BC. 1500 BC. Turns out that as late as 1674 Turns out that as late as 1674 Turns out that as late as 1674 physicians at Oxford University were physicians at Oxford University were physicians at Oxford University were figuring out who had pathologically high figuring out who had pathologically high figuring out who had pathologically high levels of blood glucose levels of blood glucose levels of blood glucose by analyzing their urine. And again, by analyzing their urine. And again, by analyzing their urine. And again, they were measuring the sweetness of they were measuring the sweetness of they were measuring the sweetness of their urine. But and this is medical their urine. But and this is medical their urine. But and this is medical fact, they would do this by taking urine fact, they would do this by taking urine fact, they would do this by taking urine samples from different patients and samples from different patients and samples from different patients and tasting them. tasting them. tasting them. And they developed an intuitive sense of And they developed an intuitive sense of And they developed an intuitive sense of what excessively sweet excessively sweet excessively sweet urine was relative to the other urines urine was relative to the other urines urine was relative to the other urines that they had tasted. So, for those of that they had tasted. So, for those of that they had tasted. So, for those of you that are in the medical profession you that are in the medical profession you that are in the medical profession or those of you that are seeking out the or those of you that are seeking out the or those of you that are seeking out the medical profession do you understand medical profession do you understand medical profession do you understand this is not done anymore. this is not done anymore. this is not done anymore. And you can also just reflect on how far And you can also just reflect on how far And you can also just reflect on how far we've come in terms of the medical we've come in terms of the medical we've come in terms of the medical profession itself in our ability to profession itself in our ability to profession itself in our ability to measure things from the blood and measure things from the blood and measure things from the blood and measure things from urine without having measure things from urine without having measure things from urine without having to ask ants to ask ants to ask ants which urine is sweeter or ask oneself which urine is sweeter or ask oneself which urine is sweeter or ask oneself which urine is sweeter. So, indeed we which urine is sweeter. So, indeed we which urine is sweeter. So, indeed we are making progress as a species. Before are making progress as a species. Before are making progress as a species. Before we close out today, I want to talk about we close out today, I want to talk about we close out today, I want to talk about one tool that many of you will one tool that many of you will one tool that many of you will probably find useful. probably find useful. probably find useful. I certainly have. I'm a big consumer of I certainly have. I'm a big consumer of I certainly have. I'm a big consumer of caffeine, although I don't consume a ton caffeine, although I don't consume a ton caffeine, although I don't consume a ton of it, I consume it very consistently. of it, I consume it very consistently. of it, I consume it very consistently. So, I'm big on consuming mate, So, I'm big on consuming mate, So, I'm big on consuming mate, which is a strong caffeinated tea, and I which is a strong caffeinated tea, and I which is a strong caffeinated tea, and I generally do that early in the day. generally do that early in the day. generally do that early in the day. Although I do delay about 2 hours after Although I do delay about 2 hours after Although I do delay about 2 hours after I wake up for reasons I've talked about I wake up for reasons I've talked about I wake up for reasons I've talked about in previous episode to maintain that in previous episode to maintain that in previous episode to maintain that nice arc of alertness and focus. Mate, nice arc of alertness and focus. Mate, nice arc of alertness and focus. Mate, also called yerba mate, also called yerba mate, also called yerba mate, is an interesting compound because is an interesting compound because is an interesting compound because unlike coffee, it has been shown to unlike coffee, it has been shown to unlike coffee, it has been shown to increase something called glucagon-like increase something called glucagon-like increase something called glucagon-like peptide, GLP-1, peptide, GLP-1, peptide, GLP-1, and increase leptin levels. Now, we and increase leptin levels. Now, we and increase leptin levels. Now, we didn't talk a lot about glucagon today. didn't talk a lot about glucagon today. didn't talk a lot about glucagon today. Glucagon is really elevated in the Glucagon is really elevated in the Glucagon is really elevated in the fasting state. I mentioned that it's fasting state. I mentioned that it's fasting state. I mentioned that it's sort of the opposite of insulin in kind sort of the opposite of insulin in kind sort of the opposite of insulin in kind of rough terms, that's of rough terms, that's of rough terms, that's one way to think about it. But, one way to think about it. But, one way to think about it. But, GLP-1, or glucagon-like peptide 1, is GLP-1, or glucagon-like peptide 1, is GLP-1, or glucagon-like peptide 1, is increased by ingesting mate, and it acts increased by ingesting mate, and it acts increased by ingesting mate, and it acts as a pretty nice as a pretty nice as a pretty nice appetite suppressant. Now, I'm not appetite suppressant. Now, I'm not appetite suppressant. Now, I'm not trying to suppress my appetite. I like trying to suppress my appetite. I like trying to suppress my appetite. I like to eat, as I mentioned before, but it to eat, as I mentioned before, but it to eat, as I mentioned before, but it works really well to stimulate the brain works really well to stimulate the brain works really well to stimulate the brain and to give you a level of alertness and to give you a level of alertness and to give you a level of alertness and to do a lot of the things that coffee to do a lot of the things that coffee to do a lot of the things that coffee does. It also contains electrolytes, so does. It also contains electrolytes, so does. It also contains electrolytes, so we, meaning our neurons and our brain, run meaning our neurons and our brain, run meaning our neurons and our brain, run on a variety of factors, electrical on a variety of factors, electrical on a variety of factors, electrical activity and chemical transmission, activity and chemical transmission, activity and chemical transmission, etc., but they require adequate levels etc., but they require adequate levels etc., but they require adequate levels of sodium, potassium, and magnesium. of sodium, potassium, and magnesium. of sodium, potassium, and magnesium. So, if you were to learn the biology or So, if you were to learn the biology or So, if you were to learn the biology or the physiology of the action potential, the physiology of the action potential, the physiology of the action potential, the firing of a neuron, something we the firing of a neuron, something we the firing of a neuron, something we teach every first-year neuroscience teach every first-year neuroscience teach every first-year neuroscience student, and I'd be happy to teach you student, and I'd be happy to teach you student, and I'd be happy to teach you if you're interested, if you're interested, if you're interested, you'll hear about sodium rushing into you'll hear about sodium rushing into you'll hear about sodium rushing into cells and potassium cells and potassium cells and potassium entering and leaving cells in order to entering and leaving cells in order to entering and leaving cells in order to allow neurons to communicate. allow neurons to communicate. allow neurons to communicate. Electrolytes are critically important Electrolytes are critically important Electrolytes are critically important for the function of the nervous system. for the function of the nervous system. for the function of the nervous system. And many things that act as diuretics And many things that act as diuretics And many things that act as diuretics that promote excretion of water, like that promote excretion of water, like that promote excretion of water, like caffeine, can also take electrolytes out along can also take electrolytes out along can also take electrolytes out along with them, in particular sodium. And with them, in particular sodium. And with them, in particular sodium. And sometimes the lightheadedness or the sometimes the lightheadedness or the sometimes the lightheadedness or the brain fog that people experience isn't brain fog that people experience isn't brain fog that people experience isn't just because electrolytes are low, but just because electrolytes are low, but just because electrolytes are low, but because they're kind of out of balance. because they're kind of out of balance. because they're kind of out of balance. So, I like mate because it has So, I like mate because it has So, I like mate because it has electrolytes, it has caffeine, it electrolytes, it has caffeine, it electrolytes, it has caffeine, it stimulates the release of this stimulates the release of this stimulates the release of this glucagon-like peptide GLP-1, and it's glucagon-like peptide GLP-1, and it's glucagon-like peptide GLP-1, and it's been a big help to me in extending that been a big help to me in extending that been a big help to me in extending that early morning fasting window out to early morning fasting window out to early morning fasting window out to about noon or so when I eat my first about noon or so when I eat my first about noon or so when I eat my first meal. It also just tastes really good. meal. It also just tastes really good. meal. It also just tastes really good. And the fact that glucagon-like peptide And the fact that glucagon-like peptide And the fact that glucagon-like peptide is enriched or is released more when you is enriched or is released more when you is enriched or is released more when you drink mate, and the fact that GLP-1 can drink mate, and the fact that GLP-1 can drink mate, and the fact that GLP-1 can regulate blood sugar in ways that keep regulate blood sugar in ways that keep regulate blood sugar in ways that keep your blood sugar in that um your blood sugar in that um your blood sugar in that um we call it euglycemic, not too high, not we call it euglycemic, not too high, not we call it euglycemic, not too high, not too low, mode is one reason why too low, mode is one reason why too low, mode is one reason why ingesting mate is attractive to me. So, ingesting mate is attractive to me. So, ingesting mate is attractive to me. So, yerba mate GLP-1 yerba mate GLP-1 yerba mate GLP-1 can manage in healthy ways leptin can manage in healthy ways leptin can manage in healthy ways leptin levels, glucose levels, and glucagon levels, glucose levels, and glucagon levels, glucose levels, and glucagon levels in ways that if it serves you, levels in ways that if it serves you, levels in ways that if it serves you, you might want to try. you might want to try. you might want to try. So, once again, we covered an enormous So, once again, we covered an enormous So, once again, we covered an enormous amount of material amount of material amount of material focused on how hormones regulate focused on how hormones regulate focused on how hormones regulate feeding, hunger, and when one feels they feeding, hunger, and when one feels they feeding, hunger, and when one feels they don't need to eat, so-called satiety, don't need to eat, so-called satiety, don't need to eat, so-called satiety, that you've had enough. We've just that you've had enough. We've just that you've had enough. We've just focused today mainly on things like focused today mainly on things like focused today mainly on things like ghrelin, on things like ghrelin, on things like ghrelin, on things like melanocyte-stimulating hormone, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, incredible, powerful hormone that can incredible, powerful hormone that can incredible, powerful hormone that can suppress appetite, on things like suppress appetite, on things like suppress appetite, on things like cholecystokinin that comes from the gut cholecystokinin that comes from the gut cholecystokinin that comes from the gut and can suppress appetite, on things and can suppress appetite, on things and can suppress appetite, on things like food emulsifiers, on the fact that like food emulsifiers, on the fact that like food emulsifiers, on the fact that when you're eating you are amino acid when you're eating you are amino acid when you're eating you are amino acid seeking even though you might not seeking even though you might not seeking even though you might not realize it, that you are also seeking realize it, that you are also seeking realize it, that you are also seeking out particular fatty acids. I tried to out particular fatty acids. I tried to out particular fatty acids. I tried to give you a number of actionable tools. give you a number of actionable tools. give you a number of actionable tools. Again, always do what's best for your Again, always do what's best for your Again, always do what's best for your health and do that in company with a health and do that in company with a health and do that in company with a health care professional. I'm not a health care professional. I'm not a health care professional. I'm not a physician. I don't prescribe anything. physician. I don't prescribe anything. physician. I don't prescribe anything. I'm a professor. I'm a professor. I'm a professor. I profess a lot of things. If you know I profess a lot of things. If you know I profess a lot of things. If you know anyone that's interested in this topic anyone that's interested in this topic anyone that's interested in this topic or you think that someone could benefit or you think that someone could benefit or you think that someone could benefit from it, please suggest the podcast to from it, please suggest the podcast to from it, please suggest the podcast to them as well. And most of all, thank you them as well. And most of all, thank you them as well. And most of all, thank you for your interest in science.