Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my conversation with Dr. David Sinclair. conversation with Dr. David Sinclair. conversation with Dr. David Sinclair. Thanks for being here. I have a ton of Thanks for being here. I have a ton of Thanks for being here. I have a ton of questions for you about aging, questions for you about aging, questions for you about aging, longevity, lifespan, actionable longevity, lifespan, actionable longevity, lifespan, actionable protocols to increase how long we live, protocols to increase how long we live, protocols to increase how long we live, etc. I just want to start off with a etc. I just want to start off with a etc. I just want to start off with a very simple question. What is very simple question. What is very simple question. What is the difference between longevity, the difference between longevity, the difference between longevity, anti-aging, and aging as a disease? anti-aging, and aging as a disease? anti-aging, and aging as a disease? Because I associate you with the Because I associate you with the Because I associate you with the statement aging is a disease. Right. statement aging is a disease. Right. statement aging is a disease. Right. Well, so longevity is the more academic Well, so longevity is the more academic Well, so longevity is the more academic way we describe what we research. way we describe what we research. way we describe what we research. Anti-aging is kind of the same thing, Anti-aging is kind of the same thing, Anti-aging is kind of the same thing, but it's got a bad rap because it's been but it's got a bad rap because it's been but it's got a bad rap because it's been used by a whole bunch of people that used by a whole bunch of people that used by a whole bunch of people that don't know what they're talking about. don't know what they're talking about. don't know what they're talking about. So, I really don't like that term So, I really don't like that term So, I really don't like that term anti-aging. But, aging as a disease and anti-aging. But, aging as a disease and anti-aging. But, aging as a disease and longevity are perfectly valid ways to longevity are perfectly valid ways to longevity are perfectly valid ways to talk about this subject. Um so, let's talk about this subject. Um so, let's talk about this subject. Um so, let's talk about aging as a disease. Uh when I talk about aging as a disease. Uh when I talk about aging as a disease. Uh when I started my research disease here at started my research disease here at started my research disease here at Harvard Medical School, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Medical School, it was considered if there's something it was considered if there's something it was considered if there's something that's wrong with you. that's wrong with you. that's wrong with you. Um and it's a rare thing. Has to be less Um and it's a rare thing. Has to be less Um and it's a rare thing. Has to be less than 50% of the population. than 50% of the population. than 50% of the population. That's definitely a disease. And then That's definitely a disease. And then That's definitely a disease. And then people work their whole lives to try and people work their whole lives to try and people work their whole lives to try and cure that condition. cure that condition. cure that condition. And so, I looked up what's the And so, I looked up what's the And so, I looked up what's the definition of aging. And it says, "Well, definition of aging. And it says, "Well, definition of aging. And it says, "Well, it's a deterioration and it health and it's a deterioration and it health and it's a deterioration and it health and sickness and you can die from it. sickness and you can die from it. sickness and you can die from it. Typically, you do." Typically, you do." Typically, you do." Um so, I'm thinking that sounds pretty Um so, I'm thinking that sounds pretty Um so, I'm thinking that sounds pretty much like a disease. But, the caveat is much like a disease. But, the caveat is much like a disease. But, the caveat is that if more than half the population that if more than half the population that if more than half the population gets this condition, aging, gets this condition, aging, gets this condition, aging, uh it's put in a different bucket. Which uh it's put in a different bucket. Which uh it's put in a different bucket. Which is First of all, that's outrageous cuz is First of all, that's outrageous cuz is First of all, that's outrageous cuz it it's just a totally arbitrary cutoff. it it's just a totally arbitrary cutoff. it it's just a totally arbitrary cutoff. But, think about this, that we're But, think about this, that we're But, think about this, that we're ignoring the major cause of all these ignoring the major cause of all these ignoring the major cause of all these diseases. Aging is 80 to 90% the cause of heart Aging is 80 to 90% the cause of heart Aging is 80 to 90% the cause of heart disease, Alzheimer's. If we didn't get disease, Alzheimer's. If we didn't get disease, Alzheimer's. If we didn't get old and our bodies stayed youthful, we old and our bodies stayed youthful, we old and our bodies stayed youthful, we would not get those diseases. And would not get those diseases. And would not get those diseases. And actually, what we're showing in my lab actually, what we're showing in my lab actually, what we're showing in my lab is if you turn the clock back in is if you turn the clock back in is if you turn the clock back in tissues, those diseases go away. So, tissues, those diseases go away. So, tissues, those diseases go away. So, aging is the problem. And instead, aging is the problem. And instead, aging is the problem. And instead, through you know, most of the last 200 through you know, most of the last 200 through you know, most of the last 200 years, we've been sticking Band-Aids on years, we've been sticking Band-Aids on years, we've been sticking Band-Aids on diseases that have already occurred diseases that have already occurred diseases that have already occurred because of aging, and then it's too because of aging, and then it's too because of aging, and then it's too late. Um so, there are a couple of things. One Um so, there are a couple of things. One Um so, there are a couple of things. One is you want to slow aging down so we is you want to slow aging down so we is you want to slow aging down so we don't get those diseases. And when they don't get those diseases. And when they don't get those diseases. And when they do occur, don't just stick a Band-Aid do occur, don't just stick a Band-Aid do occur, don't just stick a Band-Aid on. Reverse the age of the body and then on. Reverse the age of the body and then on. Reverse the age of the body and then the diseases will go away. That the diseases will go away. That the diseases will go away. That clarifies a lot for me. Thank you. Can clarifies a lot for me. Thank you. Can clarifies a lot for me. Thank you. Can we point to one specific general we point to one specific general we point to one specific general phenomenon in the body that underlies phenomenon in the body that underlies phenomenon in the body that underlies aging? Fortunately, during the 2000s, aging? Fortunately, during the 2000s, aging? Fortunately, during the 2000s, we settled on eight or nine major causes we settled on eight or nine major causes we settled on eight or nine major causes of aging. These eight or nine causes, uh of aging. These eight or nine causes, uh of aging. These eight or nine causes, uh at least for the first time, allowed us at least for the first time, allowed us at least for the first time, allowed us to come around and talk together. We put to come around and talk together. We put to come around and talk together. We put them on a on a pizza. So, everyone put them on a on a pizza. So, everyone put them on a on a pizza. So, everyone got equal slices. But, I think that got equal slices. But, I think that got equal slices. But, I think that there's one slice of the pizza that is there's one slice of the pizza that is there's one slice of the pizza that is way larger than the others. Uh and we way larger than the others. Uh and we way larger than the others. Uh and we can get to that, but that's the can get to that, but that's the can get to that, but that's the information in the cell that I call we information in the cell that I call we information in the cell that I call we call the epigenome. But, tell us a call the epigenome. But, tell us a call the epigenome. But, tell us a little bit more about the epigenome. little bit more about the epigenome. little bit more about the epigenome. Frame it for us, um if you will. And Frame it for us, um if you will. And Frame it for us, um if you will. And um and then we'll get into ways that one um and then we'll get into ways that one um and then we'll get into ways that one can adjust the epigenome in positive can adjust the epigenome in positive can adjust the epigenome in positive ways. Yeah, so in science, what I like to Yeah, so in science, what I like to Yeah, so in science, what I like to do, I'm a reductionist, is to boil it do, I'm a reductionist, is to boil it do, I'm a reductionist, is to boil it down um and I actually ended up boiling down um and I actually ended up boiling down um and I actually ended up boiling aging down to an equation, which is the aging down to an equation, which is the aging down to an equation, which is the loss of information due to entropy. the loss of information due to entropy. the loss of information due to entropy. I know it's a hard thing to I know it's a hard thing to I know it's a hard thing to overcome, second law of thermodynamics. overcome, second law of thermodynamics. overcome, second law of thermodynamics. That's that's fair. But, this equation That's that's fair. But, this equation That's that's fair. But, this equation um really represents the fact that I think really represents the fact that I think really represents the fact that I think aging is a loss of information in the aging is a loss of information in the aging is a loss of information in the same way that when you Xerox something a same way that when you Xerox something a same way that when you Xerox something a thousand times, you'll lose that thousand times, you'll lose that thousand times, you'll lose that information. Or you try to copy a information. Or you try to copy a information. Or you try to copy a cassette tape. Or even if you send cassette tape. Or even if you send cassette tape. Or even if you send information across the internet, some of information across the internet, some of information across the internet, some of it will get lost. it will get lost. it will get lost. That's what I think is aging. And there That's what I think is aging. And there That's what I think is aging. And there are two types of information in the are two types of information in the are two types of information in the body. There is the genetic information, body. There is the genetic information, body. There is the genetic information, which is digital, A, T, C, G, the which is digital, A, T, C, G, the which is digital, A, T, C, G, the chemical letters of DNA. But, there's chemical letters of DNA. But, there's chemical letters of DNA. But, there's this other part of the information in this other part of the information in this other part of the information in the body that's just as important. It's the body that's just as important. It's the body that's just as important. It's essential, in fact. And that's the essential, in fact. And that's the essential, in fact. And that's the systems that control which genes are systems that control which genes are systems that control which genes are switched on and off, in what cell, at switched on and off, in what cell, at switched on and off, in what cell, at what time, in response to what we eat, what time, in response to what we eat, what time, in response to what we eat, etc. And it turns out that 80% of our future And it turns out that 80% of our future And it turns out that 80% of our future longevity and health is controlled by longevity and health is controlled by longevity and health is controlled by this second part, the epigenetic this second part, the epigenetic this second part, the epigenetic information, the control systems. Uh I information, the control systems. Uh I information, the control systems. Uh I liken the DNA to the music that's on liken the DNA to the music that's on liken the DNA to the music that's on a DVD or compact disc for the younger a DVD or compact disc for the younger a DVD or compact disc for the younger people who used to use these things. people who used to use these things. people who used to use these things. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh and then the epigenome is the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh and then the epigenome is the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh and then the epigenome is the reader that says, "Okay, in this cell, reader that says, "Okay, in this cell, reader that says, "Okay, in this cell, we need to play that set of songs. And we need to play that set of songs. And we need to play that set of songs. And in this other cell, we have to play a in this other cell, we have to play a in this other cell, we have to play a different set of songs." But, over time, different set of songs." But, over time, different set of songs." But, over time, aging is the equivalent of scratching aging is the equivalent of scratching aging is the equivalent of scratching the CD and the DVD so that you the CD and the DVD so that you the CD and the DVD so that you you're not playing the right songs. And you're not playing the right songs. And you're not playing the right songs. And cells, when they don't hear the right cells, when they don't hear the right cells, when they don't hear the right songs, they get messed up and they don't songs, they get messed up and they don't songs, they get messed up and they don't function well. And that is what I'm function well. And that is what I'm function well. And that is what I'm saying is the main driver of aging. And saying is the main driver of aging. And saying is the main driver of aging. And these other hallmarks are largely these other hallmarks are largely these other hallmarks are largely manifestations of that process. What are manifestations of that process. What are manifestations of that process. What are the scratches that you're referring to? the scratches that you're referring to? the scratches that you're referring to? So, DNA is 6-ft long. It's like if you So, DNA is 6-ft long. It's like if you So, DNA is 6-ft long. It's like if you join your chromosomes together, you get join your chromosomes together, you get join your chromosomes together, you get that 6-ft per cell. that 6-ft per cell. that 6-ft per cell. So, there's enough to go to the moon and So, there's enough to go to the moon and So, there's enough to go to the moon and back eight times in your body. And it back eight times in your body. And it back eight times in your body. And it has to be wrapped up to exist in inside has to be wrapped up to exist in inside has to be wrapped up to exist in inside us. But, it's not just wrapped up us. But, it's not just wrapped up us. But, it's not just wrapped up willy-nilly. It's not just a bundle of willy-nilly. It's not just a bundle of willy-nilly. It's not just a bundle of string. It's wrapped up very carefully string. It's wrapped up very carefully string. It's wrapped up very carefully in ways that dictates which genes are in ways that dictates which genes are in ways that dictates which genes are switched on and off. switched on and off. switched on and off. And when we're developing in the embryo, And when we're developing in the embryo, And when we're developing in the embryo, the cell marks the DNA with chemicals the cell marks the DNA with chemicals the cell marks the DNA with chemicals that says, "Okay, this gene is for a that says, "Okay, this gene is for a that says, "Okay, this gene is for a nerve cell. You you cell will stay a nerve cell. You you cell will stay a nerve cell. You you cell will stay a nerve cell for the next 100 years, if nerve cell for the next 100 years, if nerve cell for the next 100 years, if you're lucky. you're lucky. you're lucky. Don't turn into a skin cell. That would Don't turn into a skin cell. That would Don't turn into a skin cell. That would be bad." be bad." be bad." Uh and those chemicals, uh there are Uh and those chemicals, uh there are Uh and those chemicals, uh there are many different types of chemicals, but many different types of chemicals, but many different types of chemicals, but one's called methylation. Those little one's called methylation. Those little one's called methylation. Those little methyls will mark which songs get played methyls will mark which songs get played methyls will mark which songs get played for the rest of your life. for the rest of your life. for the rest of your life. And there are other marks that change And there are other marks that change And there are other marks that change daily. But, in total, what we're saying daily. But, in total, what we're saying daily. But, in total, what we're saying is that the body controls the genome is that the body controls the genome is that the body controls the genome through the ability to mark the DNA and through the ability to mark the DNA and through the ability to mark the DNA and then compact some parts of it, silence then compact some parts of it, silence then compact some parts of it, silence those genes, don't read those genes, and those genes, don't read those genes, and those genes, don't read those genes, and open others, keep others open that open others, keep others open that open others, keep others open that should stay open. And that pattern of should stay open. And that pattern of should stay open. And that pattern of genes that are silent and open, silent genes that are silent and open, silent genes that are silent and open, silent open, is what dictates the cell's type, open, is what dictates the cell's type, open, is what dictates the cell's type, the cell's function. And then the cell's function. And then the cell's function. And then the scratches are the disruption of that. scratches are the disruption of that. scratches are the disruption of that. So, genes that were once silent, So, genes that were once silent, So, genes that were once silent, and you could say it's a gene that is and you could say it's a gene that is and you could say it's a gene that is involved in skin, involved in skin, involved in skin, it's starting to come on in the brain. it's starting to come on in the brain. it's starting to come on in the brain. Shouldn't be there, but we see this Shouldn't be there, but we see this Shouldn't be there, but we see this happen. And vice versa, the gene might happen. And vice versa, the gene might happen. And vice versa, the gene might get shut off over time during aging. get shut off over time during aging. get shut off over time during aging. Cells over time lose these structures, Cells over time lose these structures, Cells over time lose these structures, lose their identity. They forget what lose their identity. They forget what lose their identity. They forget what they're supposed to do. And we get they're supposed to do. And we get they're supposed to do. And we get diseases. We call that aging. Uh and we can We call that aging. Uh and we can We call that aging. Uh and we can measure that. In fact, we can measure it measure that. In fact, we can measure it measure that. In fact, we can measure it in such a way that we can predict when in such a way that we can predict when in such a way that we can predict when somebody's going to die based on the somebody's going to die based on the somebody's going to die based on the changes in those chemicals. Are these changes in those chemicals. Are these changes in those chemicals. Are these changes the same sorts of changes that changes the same sorts of changes that changes the same sorts of changes that underlie the underlie the underlie the outward body surface manifestations of outward body surface manifestations of outward body surface manifestations of aging that most of us are familiar with? aging that most of us are familiar with? aging that most of us are familiar with? Graying of the hair, wrinkling of the Graying of the hair, wrinkling of the Graying of the hair, wrinkling of the skin, drooping of the uh of the face. Or skin, drooping of the uh of the face. Or skin, drooping of the uh of the face. Or are we talking about people that are we talking about people that are we talking about people that are potentially are going to look older, but potentially are going to look older, but potentially are going to look older, but simply live longer? Uh well, it's simply live longer? Uh well, it's simply live longer? Uh well, it's actually you are as old as you look, actually you are as old as you look, actually you are as old as you look, if you want to generalize. Um so, let's if you want to generalize. Um so, let's if you want to generalize. Um so, let's start with centenarian families. These start with centenarian families. These start with centenarian families. These are families that tend to live over 100. are families that tend to live over 100. are families that tend to live over 100. When they're 70, they still look 50 or When they're 70, they still look 50 or When they're 70, they still look 50 or less. So, it is a good indicator. less. So, it is a good indicator. less. So, it is a good indicator. It's not perfect because you can, like It's not perfect because you can, like It's not perfect because you can, like me, grow up in Australia and accelerate me, grow up in Australia and accelerate me, grow up in Australia and accelerate the aging of your skin. the aging of your skin. the aging of your skin. Uh but in general, how you look. Uh no Uh but in general, how you look. Uh no Uh but in general, how you look. Uh no one's ever died from gray hair. But, one's ever died from gray hair. But, one's ever died from gray hair. But, overall, you can get a sense just from overall, you can get a sense just from overall, you can get a sense just from the ability of skin to hold itself up, the ability of skin to hold itself up, the ability of skin to hold itself up, how thin it is, the number of wrinkles. how thin it is, the number of wrinkles. how thin it is, the number of wrinkles. Very interesting. Very interesting. Very interesting. So, I started off in developmental So, I started off in developmental So, I started off in developmental neurobiology. So, one of the things that neurobiology. So, one of the things that neurobiology. So, one of the things that I learned early on that I still believe I learned early on that I still believe I learned early on that I still believe uh wholeheartedly is that development uh wholeheartedly is that development uh wholeheartedly is that development doesn't stop at age 12 or 15 or even 25. doesn't stop at age 12 or 15 or even 25. doesn't stop at age 12 or 15 or even 25. That your entire life is one de- long That your entire life is one de- long That your entire life is one de- long developmental arc. developmental arc. developmental arc. Right. So, in thinking about different portions So, in thinking about different portions So, in thinking about different portions of that developmental arc, the early of that developmental arc, the early of that developmental arc, the early portion of infancy, and especially portion of infancy, and especially portion of infancy, and especially puberty, seem like especially rapid puberty, seem like especially rapid puberty, seem like especially rapid stages of aging. And I know we normally stages of aging. And I know we normally stages of aging. And I know we normally look at babies and children and kids in look at babies and children and kids in look at babies and children and kids in puberty, and we think, "Oh, they're so puberty, and we think, "Oh, they're so puberty, and we think, "Oh, they're so vital. They're so young." vital. They're so young." vital. They're so young." And yet, the way you describe these And yet, the way you describe these And yet, the way you describe these changes in the epigenome, and the way changes in the epigenome, and the way changes in the epigenome, and the way you have framed aging as a disease, you have framed aging as a disease, you have framed aging as a disease, leads me to ask, leads me to ask, leads me to ask, are periods of are periods of are periods of immense vitality of immense vitality of immense vitality the same periods when we're aging the same periods when we're aging the same periods when we're aging faster? Yes. Really good question. faster? Yes. Really good question. faster? Yes. Really good question. So, those chemicals we can measure. It's So, those chemicals we can measure. It's So, those chemicals we can measure. It's also known as the Horvath clock. It's also known as the Horvath clock. It's also known as the Horvath clock. It's the biological clock. It's separate It's the biological clock. It's separate It's the biological clock. It's separate from your chronological age. There are from your chronological age. There are from your chronological age. There are some people that are 10, 20 years some people that are 10, 20 years some people that are 10, 20 years younger than other people um younger than other people um younger than other people um biologically. And it turns out if you measure that And it turns out if you measure that And it turns out if you measure that clock from birth, or even before birth, clock from birth, or even before birth, clock from birth, or even before birth, if you look at animals, if you look at animals, if you look at animals, there's a massive increase in age on there's a massive increase in age on there's a massive increase in age on based on that clock early in life. based on that clock early in life. based on that clock early in life. So, [clears throat] you're right. That So, [clears throat] you're right. That So, [clears throat] you're right. That So, that's a really important point that So, that's a really important point that So, that's a really important point that you have accelerated aging during you have accelerated aging during you have accelerated aging during the first few years of life. And then it the first few years of life. And then it the first few years of life. And then it goes linear towards the rest of your goes linear towards the rest of your goes linear towards the rest of your life. But, there's another interesting life. But, there's another interesting life. But, there's another interesting thing you brought up, which is that thing you brought up, which is that thing you brought up, which is that we're finding that the genes that get we're finding that the genes that get we're finding that the genes that get messed up, that get scratched, that are messed up, that get scratched, that are messed up, that get scratched, that are leading to aging aging, are those early leading to aging aging, are those early leading to aging aging, are those early developmental genes. They come on late developmental genes. They come on late developmental genes. They come on late in life and just mess up the system. And in life and just mess up the system. And in life and just mess up the system. And they seem to be particularly susceptible they seem to be particularly susceptible they seem to be particularly susceptible to those scratches. to those scratches. to those scratches. So, what are What's causing the So, what are What's causing the So, what are What's causing the scratches? Well, we know of a couple of scratches? Well, we know of a couple of scratches? Well, we know of a couple of things. In my lab, we figured out one is things. In my lab, we figured out one is things. In my lab, we figured out one is broken chromosomes, DNA damage, broken chromosomes, DNA damage, broken chromosomes, DNA damage, particularly cuts to the DNA breaks. So, particularly cuts to the DNA breaks. So, particularly cuts to the DNA breaks. So, if you if you have an X-ray or a cosmic if you if you have an X-ray or a cosmic if you if you have an X-ray or a cosmic ray, or even if you go out in the sun, ray, or even if you go out in the sun, ray, or even if you go out in the sun, and you'll get your broken chromosomes. and you'll get your broken chromosomes. and you'll get your broken chromosomes. That accelerates the unwinding of those accelerates the unwinding of those accelerates the unwinding of those beautiful DNA loops that I mentioned. beautiful DNA loops that I mentioned. beautiful DNA loops that I mentioned. Um we can actually do this to a mouse. We we can actually do this to a mouse. We we can actually do this to a mouse. We can accelerate that process, and we get can accelerate that process, and we get can accelerate that process, and we get an old mouse, 50% older. And it has this an old mouse, 50% older. And it has this an old mouse, 50% older. And it has this bent spine, kyphosis. It has gray hair, bent spine, kyphosis. It has gray hair, bent spine, kyphosis. It has gray hair, its organs are all So, we now can its organs are all So, we now can its organs are all So, we now can control aging the forwards direction. control aging the forwards direction. control aging the forwards direction. The other thing that accelerates aging The other thing that accelerates aging The other thing that accelerates aging is massive cell is massive cell is massive cell damage or stress. So, we pinched nerves damage or stress. So, we pinched nerves damage or stress. So, we pinched nerves uh and we saw that their aging process uh and we saw that their aging process uh and we saw that their aging process was accelerated as well. Incredible. was accelerated as well. Incredible. was accelerated as well. Incredible. Yeah, the this is more of an anecdotal Yeah, the this is more of an anecdotal Yeah, the this is more of an anecdotal uh phenomenon. It is an anecdotal uh phenomenon. It is an anecdotal uh phenomenon. It is an anecdotal phenomenon, but this experience of in phenomenon, but this experience of in phenomenon, but this experience of in junior high school, you know, going home junior high school, you know, going home junior high school, you know, going home for a summer and you come back and then for a summer and you come back and then for a summer and you come back and then some of the kids some of the kids some of the kids like they grew beards over the summer or like they grew beards over the summer or like they grew beards over the summer or they completely matured quickly over the they completely matured quickly over the they completely matured quickly over the summer. Do you think there's any reason to Do you think there's any reason to Do you think there's any reason to believe that rates of entry into and believe that rates of entry into and believe that rates of entry into and through puberty through puberty through puberty have can predict overall rates of aging? have can predict overall rates of aging? have can predict overall rates of aging? Well, yeah, I don't want to scare Well, yeah, I don't want to scare Well, yeah, I don't want to scare anybody. Sure, that there are studies anybody. Sure, that there are studies anybody. Sure, that there are studies that show that the slower you take to that show that the slower you take to that show that the slower you take to develop, it also is predictive of having develop, it also is predictive of having develop, it also is predictive of having a longer healthier life. a longer healthier life. a longer healthier life. Um and it may have something to do with Um and it may have something to do with Um and it may have something to do with growth hormone. We know that growth hormone. We know that growth hormone. We know that growth hormone is pro-aging. So, hormone is pro-aging. So, hormone is pro-aging. So, anyone who's taking growth hormone, you anyone who's taking growth hormone, you anyone who's taking growth hormone, you know, for a short amount of time, you'll know, for a short amount of time, you'll know, for a short amount of time, you'll build up muscle, you feel great, but build up muscle, you feel great, but build up muscle, you feel great, but it's like burning your candle at both it's like burning your candle at both it's like burning your candle at both ends. Ultimately, if you want to live ends. Ultimately, if you want to live ends. Ultimately, if you want to live longer, you want less of that. And the longer, you want less of that. And the longer, you want less of that. And the animals that have been generated animals that have been generated animals that have been generated um and mutants that have low growth um and mutants that have low growth um and mutants that have low growth hormone, sometimes these are dwarfs, hormone, sometimes these are dwarfs, hormone, sometimes these are dwarfs, um they live the longest by far. Can we um they live the longest by far. Can we um they live the longest by far. Can we say that there's a direct relationship say that there's a direct relationship say that there's a direct relationship between body size and longevity or it between body size and longevity or it between body size and longevity or it duration of life? duration of life? duration of life? &gt;&gt; Well, that there is, uh but that doesn't &gt;&gt; Well, that there is, uh but that doesn't &gt;&gt; Well, that there is, uh but that doesn't mean that you're a slave to your mean that you're a slave to your mean that you're a slave to your early epigenome nor to your genome. The early epigenome nor to your genome. The early epigenome nor to your genome. The good news is that the epigenome can good news is that the epigenome can good news is that the epigenome can change. Those loops and structures can change. Those loops and structures can change. Those loops and structures can be modified by how you live your life. be modified by how you live your life. be modified by how you live your life. No matter what size you are, you can No matter what size you are, you can No matter what size you are, you can have a bigger impact on your life than have a bigger impact on your life than have a bigger impact on your life than anything your genes give you. 80% is anything your genes give you. 80% is anything your genes give you. 80% is epigenetic, not genetic. epigenetic, not genetic. epigenetic, not genetic. So, let's talk about some of the things So, let's talk about some of the things So, let's talk about some of the things that people can do. And uh I've kind of that people can do. And uh I've kind of that people can do. And uh I've kind of batch these into categories um batch these into categories um batch these into categories um rather than just diving right into rather than just diving right into rather than just diving right into actionable protocols. So, the first one actionable protocols. So, the first one actionable protocols. So, the first one relates to food, blood sugar, relates to food, blood sugar, relates to food, blood sugar, insulin. This is something I hear a lot insulin. This is something I hear a lot insulin. This is something I hear a lot about that fasting is good for us. about that fasting is good for us. about that fasting is good for us. But rarely do I hear why it's good for But rarely do I hear why it's good for But rarely do I hear why it's good for us. I think understanding the mechanism us. I think understanding the mechanism us. I think understanding the mechanism will allow people to make better choices will allow people to make better choices will allow people to make better choices and not simply to just decide whether or and not simply to just decide whether or and not simply to just decide whether or not they're going to fast or not fast or not they're going to fast or not fast or not they're going to fast or not fast or how long they're going to fast. I think how long they're going to fast. I think how long they're going to fast. I think should be dictated by someone's should be dictated by someone's should be dictated by someone's understanding of the mechanism. So, why understanding of the mechanism. So, why understanding of the mechanism. So, why is it that having elevated blood sugar, is it that having elevated blood sugar, is it that having elevated blood sugar, glucose, and insulin ages us more glucose, and insulin ages us more glucose, and insulin ages us more quickly and/or why is it that and/or why is it that and/or why is it that having periods of time each day or having periods of time each day or having periods of time each day or perhaps longer can extend our lifespan? perhaps longer can extend our lifespan? perhaps longer can extend our lifespan? Well, let's start with what I think Well, let's start with what I think Well, let's start with what I think was a big mistake was the idea that was a big mistake was the idea that was a big mistake was the idea that people should never be hungry. Some people should never be hungry. Some people should never be hungry. Some people never experience hunger in their people never experience hunger in their people never experience hunger in their whole lives. It's really, really bad for whole lives. It's really, really bad for whole lives. It's really, really bad for them. It was based, I believe, on the them. It was based, I believe, on the them. It was based, I believe, on the 20th century view that you don't want to 20th century view that you don't want to 20th century view that you don't want to stress out the pancreas stress out the pancreas stress out the pancreas uh and you try to keep insulin levels uh and you try to keep insulin levels uh and you try to keep insulin levels pretty steady um and not have this pretty steady um and not have this pretty steady um and not have this fluctuation. What we actually found uh What we actually found uh What we actually found uh my colleagues and I my colleagues and I my colleagues and I uh across this field of longevity uh across this field of longevity uh across this field of longevity is that when you look at first of all, is that when you look at first of all, is that when you look at first of all, animals, whether it's a dog or a mouse animals, whether it's a dog or a mouse animals, whether it's a dog or a mouse or a monkey, or a monkey, or a monkey, the ones that live the longest by far, the ones that live the longest by far, the ones that live the longest by far, 30% longer, and stay healthy 30% longer, and stay healthy 30% longer, and stay healthy are the ones that don't eat all the are the ones that don't eat all the are the ones that don't eat all the time. Um actually, it was first discovered Um actually, it was first discovered Um actually, it was first discovered back in the early 20th century, but back in the early 20th century, but back in the early 20th century, but people ignored it. people ignored it. people ignored it. And then it was rediscovered in uh the And then it was rediscovered in uh the And then it was rediscovered in uh the 1930s. Clive McCay did caloric 1930s. Clive McCay did caloric 1930s. Clive McCay did caloric restriction. He put cellulose in the restriction. He put cellulose in the restriction. He put cellulose in the food of rats so they couldn't get as food of rats so they couldn't get as food of rats so they couldn't get as many calories even though they ate. And many calories even though they ate. And many calories even though they ate. And those rats lived 30% longer. those rats lived 30% longer. those rats lived 30% longer. But then it went away and then it But then it went away and then it But then it went away and then it came back in the 2000s in a big way when came back in the 2000s in a big way when came back in the 2000s in a big way when a couple of things happened. One is that a couple of things happened. One is that a couple of things happened. One is that uh my lab and others showed that uh my lab and others showed that uh my lab and others showed that there are longevity genes in the body there are longevity genes in the body there are longevity genes in the body that come on and protect us from aging that come on and protect us from aging that come on and protect us from aging and disease. and disease. and disease. The group of genes that I work on are The group of genes that I work on are The group of genes that I work on are called sirtuins. There's seven of them. called sirtuins. There's seven of them. called sirtuins. There's seven of them. And we showed in 2005 And we showed in 2005 And we showed in 2005 uh in a science paper that uh in a science paper that uh in a science paper that if you have low levels of insulin and if you have low levels of insulin and if you have low levels of insulin and another molecule called insulin-like another molecule called insulin-like another molecule called insulin-like growth factor, growth factor, growth factor, those low levels turn on the longevity those low levels turn on the longevity those low levels turn on the longevity genes. One of them that's really important is One of them that's really important is One of them that's really important is called sirtuin called sirtuin called sirtuin and but by having high levels of insulin and but by having high levels of insulin and but by having high levels of insulin all day, all day, all day, being fed means your longevity genes are being fed means your longevity genes are being fed means your longevity genes are not switched on. not switched on. not switched on. So, you're falling apart, your So, you're falling apart, your So, you're falling apart, your epigenome, your information that keeps epigenome, your information that keeps epigenome, your information that keeps your cells functioning over time your cells functioning over time your cells functioning over time degrades quickly. Your clock is ticking degrades quickly. Your clock is ticking degrades quickly. Your clock is ticking faster by always being fed. by always being fed. by always being fed. Okay? Um the other thing that I think Okay? Um the other thing that I think Okay? Um the other thing that I think might be happening might be happening might be happening by always having food around by always having food around by always having food around is that it's not allowing the cell to is that it's not allowing the cell to is that it's not allowing the cell to have periods of rest and reestablish have periods of rest and reestablish have periods of rest and reestablish the epigenome. the epigenome. the epigenome. And so, it also is accelerating in that And so, it also is accelerating in that And so, it also is accelerating in that direction. There's plenty of other reasons as well There's plenty of other reasons as well There's plenty of other reasons as well that are not as profound such as that are not as profound such as that are not as profound such as um having low levels of glucose in your um having low levels of glucose in your um having low levels of glucose in your body will trigger your major muscles and body will trigger your major muscles and body will trigger your major muscles and your brain to become more uh sensitive your brain to become more uh sensitive your brain to become more uh sensitive to insulin and suck the glucose out of to insulin and suck the glucose out of to insulin and suck the glucose out of your bloodstream, which is very good. your bloodstream, which is very good. your bloodstream, which is very good. You don't want to have glucose flowing You don't want to have glucose flowing You don't want to have glucose flowing around too much. And that will ward off around too much. And that will ward off around too much. And that will ward off type 2 diabetes. What is the protocol type 2 diabetes. What is the protocol type 2 diabetes. What is the protocol that people can extrapolate from that? that people can extrapolate from that? that people can extrapolate from that? Well, if there's one thing I could Well, if there's one thing I could Well, if there's one thing I could say, if say, if say, if I would say definitely try to skip a I would say definitely try to skip a I would say definitely try to skip a meal a day. meal a day. meal a day. That's the best thing. Does it matter That's the best thing. Does it matter That's the best thing. Does it matter which meal or are they essentially which meal or are they essentially which meal or are they essentially equivalent? &gt;&gt; Well, as long as it's at the end or the &gt;&gt; Well, as long as it's at the end or the &gt;&gt; Well, as long as it's at the end or the beginning of the day because then you beginning of the day because then you beginning of the day because then you add that to the sleep period where you add that to the sleep period where you add that to the sleep period where you're hopefully not eating. Be aware you're hopefully not eating. Be aware you're hopefully not eating. Be aware that the first two to three weeks when that the first two to three weeks when that the first two to three weeks when you try that, you will feel hungry and you try that, you will feel hungry and you try that, you will feel hungry and you also have a habit of wanting to chew you also have a habit of wanting to chew you also have a habit of wanting to chew on something. There's a lot of physical on something. There's a lot of physical on something. There's a lot of physical parts to it. parts to it. parts to it. But try to make it through the first But try to make it through the first But try to make it through the first three weeks and do without breakfast or three weeks and do without breakfast or three weeks and do without breakfast or do without dinner. do without dinner. do without dinner. Uh and I you'll get through it. Do you Uh and I you'll get through it. Do you Uh and I you'll get through it. Do you ever do longer fasts like 48 hours or 72 ever do longer fasts like 48 hours or 72 ever do longer fasts like 48 hours or 72 hours or week-long fasts? Not very hours or week-long fasts? Not very hours or week-long fasts? Not very often. I find it often. I find it often. I find it quite difficult to go more than 24 quite difficult to go more than 24 quite difficult to go more than 24 hours. Uh but when I do it, maybe it's once a Uh but when I do it, maybe it's once a Uh but when I do it, maybe it's once a month I'll go for two days. month I'll go for two days. month I'll go for two days. Um after two and actually even better if after two and actually even better if after two and actually even better if you go for three days without eating, it you go for three days without eating, it you go for three days without eating, it kicks in even greater kicks in even greater kicks in even greater uh longevity benefits. Um so, there's a uh longevity benefits. Um so, there's a uh longevity benefits. Um so, there's a system called the autophagy system, system called the autophagy system, system called the autophagy system, which digests old and misfolded proteins which digests old and misfolded proteins which digests old and misfolded proteins in the body. in the body. in the body. And there's a natural cleansing that And there's a natural cleansing that And there's a natural cleansing that happens when you're hungry. happens when you're hungry. happens when you're hungry. Um macroautophagy it's name is. But a Um macroautophagy it's name is. But a Um macroautophagy it's name is. But a good friend of mine uh Ana Maria Cuervo good friend of mine uh Ana Maria Cuervo good friend of mine uh Ana Maria Cuervo at Albert Einstein College of Medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine discovered a deep cleanse called the discovered a deep cleanse called the discovered a deep cleanse called the chaperone-mediated autophagy, which chaperone-mediated autophagy, which chaperone-mediated autophagy, which kicks in day two, day three, kicks in day two, day three, kicks in day two, day three, uh which really gets rid of the uh which really gets rid of the uh which really gets rid of the deep proteins. And what excites the deep proteins. And what excites the deep proteins. And what excites me is she just put out a big paper me is she just put out a big paper me is she just put out a big paper that said, if you trigger this process that said, if you trigger this process that said, if you trigger this process in an in an old mouse, it lives 35% in an in an old mouse, it lives 35% in an in an old mouse, it lives 35% longer. When you are fasting, regardless longer. When you are fasting, regardless longer. When you are fasting, regardless of how long. I know you're ingesting of how long. I know you're ingesting of how long. I know you're ingesting fluids like water and uh presumably some fluids like water and uh presumably some fluids like water and uh presumably some caffeine. I heard you had several or caffeine. I heard you had several or caffeine. I heard you had several or more espresso today. Are you also more espresso today. Are you also more espresso today. Are you also ingesting electrolytes? Like I know some ingesting electrolytes? Like I know some ingesting electrolytes? Like I know some people get light-headed, they start to people get light-headed, they start to people get light-headed, they start to feel shaky when they fast um and that feel shaky when they fast um and that feel shaky when they fast um and that the addition of sodium to their water or the addition of sodium to their water or the addition of sodium to their water or potassium, magnesium, potassium, magnesium, potassium, magnesium, something that's becoming a little more something that's becoming a little more something that's becoming a little more in vogue now. Is that something that you in vogue now. Is that something that you in vogue now. Is that something that you do or that you see a need for people to do or that you see a need for people to do or that you see a need for people to do? Well, it makes sense um but I do? Well, it makes sense um but I do? Well, it makes sense um but I haven't had a need to do it. haven't had a need to do it. haven't had a need to do it. Um so, I don't. I just I drink tea Um so, I don't. I just I drink tea Um so, I don't. I just I drink tea during the day and coffee when I'm first during the day and coffee when I'm first during the day and coffee when I'm first awake. And I don't get the shakes. So, you And I don't get the shakes. So, you And I don't get the shakes. So, you know, I don't fix what's not broken. know, I don't fix what's not broken. know, I don't fix what's not broken. Okay. You've told us that there is ample Okay. You've told us that there is ample Okay. You've told us that there is ample evidence that keeping your blood sugar evidence that keeping your blood sugar evidence that keeping your blood sugar low for a period of time each 24 hours low for a period of time each 24 hours low for a period of time each 24 hours can help trigger some of these pro- can help trigger some of these pro- can help trigger some of these pro- longevity, anti-aging mechanisms. And longevity, anti-aging mechanisms. And longevity, anti-aging mechanisms. And that extending them out two or three that extending them out two or three that extending them out two or three days can trigger yet additional days can trigger yet additional days can trigger yet additional mechanisms of mechanisms of mechanisms of eat gobbling up of dead cells and eat gobbling up of dead cells and eat gobbling up of dead cells and things of that sort. things of that sort. things of that sort. How is it that blood glucose triggers How is it that blood glucose triggers How is it that blood glucose triggers these mechanisms? Cuz we've said, okay, these mechanisms? Cuz we've said, okay, these mechanisms? Cuz we've said, okay, remove glucose and things get better. Uh remove glucose and things get better. Uh remove glucose and things get better. Uh you've uh talked before, maybe we could you've uh talked before, maybe we could you've uh talked before, maybe we could talk more now about some of the talk more now about some of the talk more now about some of the underlying cellular and genetic underlying cellular and genetic underlying cellular and genetic mechanisms, things like the sirtuins. mechanisms, things like the sirtuins. mechanisms, things like the sirtuins. But how are glucose and the sirtuins But how are glucose and the sirtuins But how are glucose and the sirtuins actually tethered to one another actually tethered to one another actually tethered to one another mechanistically? Uh there's a really good question. Uh there's a really good question. Uh there's a really good question. That proves you're a scientist. Uh That proves you're a scientist. Uh That proves you're a scientist. Uh a world leading one. So, what we what a world leading one. So, what we what a world leading one. So, what we what we've now know is that these longevity we've now know is that these longevity we've now know is that these longevity pathways, we call them these longevity pathways, we call them these longevity pathways, we call them these longevity genes, talk to each other. genes, talk to each other. genes, talk to each other. And we used to say, "Oh, my longevity And we used to say, "Oh, my longevity And we used to say, "Oh, my longevity gene is more important than yours." It gene is more important than yours." It gene is more important than yours." It was ridiculous cuz they're all talking was ridiculous cuz they're all talking was ridiculous cuz they're all talking to each other. You pull one lever and to each other. You pull one lever and to each other. You pull one lever and the other one moves. the other one moves. the other one moves. And the way to think of it is that there And the way to think of it is that there And the way to think of it is that there are systems set up to detect what you're are systems set up to detect what you're are systems set up to detect what you're eating. So, the sirtuins will mainly eating. So, the sirtuins will mainly eating. So, the sirtuins will mainly respond to sugar and insulin. respond to sugar and insulin. respond to sugar and insulin. And then there's this other system And then there's this other system And then there's this other system called mTOR, called mTOR, called mTOR, which is sensing how much protein or which is sensing how much protein or which is sensing how much protein or amino acids are coming into your body. amino acids are coming into your body. amino acids are coming into your body. And they talk to each other. We can pull And they talk to each other. We can pull And they talk to each other. We can pull one and affect the other and vice versa. one and affect the other and vice versa. one and affect the other and vice versa. But together, when you're fasting, But together, when you're fasting, But together, when you're fasting, you'll get the sirtuin activation, which you'll get the sirtuin activation, which you'll get the sirtuin activation, which is good for you, and you you'll also, is good for you, and you you'll also, is good for you, and you you'll also, through lack of amino acids, through lack of amino acids, through lack of amino acids, particularly three of them, leucine, particularly three of them, leucine, particularly three of them, leucine, isoleucine, valine, the body will isoleucine, valine, the body will isoleucine, valine, the body will downregulate mTOR. And it's that up downregulate mTOR. And it's that up downregulate mTOR. And it's that up sirtuin, down mTOR sirtuin, down mTOR sirtuin, down mTOR that is hugely beneficial and turns on that is hugely beneficial and turns on that is hugely beneficial and turns on all of the body's defenses, the pro all of the body's defenses, the pro all of the body's defenses, the pro chewing up the old proteins, improving chewing up the old proteins, improving chewing up the old proteins, improving insulin sensitivity, giving us more insulin sensitivity, giving us more insulin sensitivity, giving us more energy, repairing cells. energy, repairing cells. energy, repairing cells. All of that. And and so, these two All of that. And and so, these two All of that. And and so, these two pathways I think are the most important pathways I think are the most important pathways I think are the most important for longevity. You mentioned leucine. for longevity. You mentioned leucine. for longevity. You mentioned leucine. It's clear that because of leucine's It's clear that because of leucine's It's clear that because of leucine's effects on the mTOR pathway, that there effects on the mTOR pathway, that there effects on the mTOR pathway, that there are many people, not just people in are many people, not just people in are many people, not just people in these particular fitness communities, these particular fitness communities, these particular fitness communities, that are actively trying to ingest more that are actively trying to ingest more that are actively trying to ingest more leucine on a regular basis in order to leucine on a regular basis in order to leucine on a regular basis in order to maximize their wellness and fitness and maximize their wellness and fitness and maximize their wellness and fitness and in some cases muscle growth, but also in some cases muscle growth, but also in some cases muscle growth, but also just wellness. But what just wellness. But what just wellness. But what I interpret your last statement to mean I interpret your last statement to mean I interpret your last statement to mean is that leucine, because it triggers is that leucine, because it triggers is that leucine, because it triggers cellular growth, is actually pro-aging cellular growth, is actually pro-aging cellular growth, is actually pro-aging in some sense. Is that right? That's in some sense. Is that right? That's in some sense. Is that right? That's what the evidence suggests. And again, what the evidence suggests. And again, what the evidence suggests. And again, it goes back to the debate, should you it goes back to the debate, should you it goes back to the debate, should you supplement with growth hormone or supplement with growth hormone or supplement with growth hormone or testosterone? All of these activities will give you All of these activities will give you All of these activities will give you immediate benefits. You'll you'll bulk immediate benefits. You'll you'll bulk immediate benefits. You'll you'll bulk up more, you'll feel better immediately. up more, you'll feel better immediately. up more, you'll feel better immediately. But based on the research, it's at the But based on the research, it's at the But based on the research, it's at the expense of long-term health. expense of long-term health. expense of long-term health. So my So my So my view of longevity, the way I treat my view of longevity, the way I treat my view of longevity, the way I treat my body is body is body is um I don't burn both candles. I have one um I don't burn both candles. I have one um I don't burn both candles. I have one end of the candle lit. I I'm very end of the candle lit. I I'm very end of the candle lit. I I'm very careful. I don't blow on it. careful. I don't blow on it. careful. I don't blow on it. Um but I also do enough exercise that Um but I also do enough exercise that Um but I also do enough exercise that I'm building up my muscle, but I'm building up my muscle, but I'm building up my muscle, but I'm not huge. Anyone who's seen me, you not huge. Anyone who's seen me, you not huge. Anyone who's seen me, you know, knows that I'm not a know, knows that I'm not a know, knows that I'm not a professional bodybuilder. professional bodybuilder. professional bodybuilder. But I tried to actually Here's the key, But I tried to actually Here's the key, But I tried to actually Here's the key, and I haven't said this publicly that I and I haven't said this publicly that I and I haven't said this publicly that I can remember. can remember. can remember. I pulse things so that I get periods of I pulse things so that I get periods of I pulse things so that I get periods of fasting, and then I eat. fasting, and then I eat. fasting, and then I eat. Then I take a supplement. Then I take a supplement. Then I take a supplement. Then I fast. Then I exercise. And I'm Then I fast. Then I exercise. And I'm Then I fast. Then I exercise. And I'm taking the supplements and eating I'm taking the supplements and eating I'm taking the supplements and eating in the right timing to allow me to build in the right timing to allow me to build in the right timing to allow me to build up muscle sometimes. up muscle sometimes. up muscle sometimes. Because you can't just expect to take something you can't just expect to take something you can't just expect to take something constantly and do something constantly and do something constantly and do something constantly for it to work. And that's why for it to work. And that's why for it to work. And that's why it's taken me about 15 years to develop it's taken me about 15 years to develop it's taken me about 15 years to develop my protocol. And there's a there's a lot my protocol. And there's a there's a lot my protocol. And there's a there's a lot of subtlety to it. What you want to do of subtlety to it. What you want to do of subtlety to it. What you want to do is to get the cells to be is to get the cells to be is to get the cells to be perceiving adversity. perceiving adversity. perceiving adversity. Okay? Cuz our modern life, we're sitting Okay? Cuz our modern life, we're sitting Okay? Cuz our modern life, we're sitting around, we're eating too much. around, we're eating too much. around, we're eating too much. Uh we're not exercising. Uh we're not exercising. Uh we're not exercising. Our cells respond. They go, "Hey, Our cells respond. They go, "Hey, Our cells respond. They go, "Hey, everything's cool. No problem." everything's cool. No problem." everything's cool. No problem." And they become relaxed and they're And they become relaxed and they're And they become relaxed and they're going to turn on their defenses, and we going to turn on their defenses, and we going to turn on their defenses, and we age rapidly. We can see it in the clock. age rapidly. We can see it in the clock. age rapidly. We can see it in the clock. People who exercise and eat less have a People who exercise and eat less have a People who exercise and eat less have a slower ticking clock. It's a fact. slower ticking clock. It's a fact. slower ticking clock. It's a fact. One of the questions I get asked all the One of the questions I get asked all the One of the questions I get asked all the time is, "Does ingesting blank break the time is, "Does ingesting blank break the time is, "Does ingesting blank break the fast? Does eating this or drinking this, fast? Does eating this or drinking this, fast? Does eating this or drinking this, coffee, you know, if I walk in the room coffee, you know, if I walk in the room coffee, you know, if I walk in the room and someone else is eating a cracker, and someone else is eating a cracker, and someone else is eating a cracker, does it break my fast?" You know, people does it break my fast?" You know, people does it break my fast?" You know, people get pretty extreme with this. My sense, get pretty extreme with this. My sense, get pretty extreme with this. My sense, and please tell me if I'm wrong, and please tell me if I'm wrong, and please tell me if I'm wrong, but my sense is that it depends on the but my sense is that it depends on the but my sense is that it depends on the context of what you did the night context of what you did the night context of what you did the night before, whether or not you're diabetic, before, whether or not you're diabetic, before, whether or not you're diabetic, lots of things. So for instance, if I lots of things. So for instance, if I lots of things. So for instance, if I eat an enormous meal at midnight, eat an enormous meal at midnight, eat an enormous meal at midnight, go to sleep, wake up at 6:00 a.m., go to sleep, wake up at 6:00 a.m., go to sleep, wake up at 6:00 a.m., I could imagine that black coffee I could imagine that black coffee I could imagine that black coffee or coffee with a little bit of cream or coffee with a little bit of cream or coffee with a little bit of cream might, quote unquote, break my fast, but might, quote unquote, break my fast, but might, quote unquote, break my fast, but the body doesn't have a breaking the body doesn't have a breaking the body doesn't have a breaking the fast switch. The body only speaks in the fast switch. The body only speaks in the fast switch. The body only speaks in the language of glucose, AMPK, mTOR, etc. language of glucose, AMPK, mTOR, etc. language of glucose, AMPK, mTOR, etc. So, do you worry that ingesting these do you worry that ingesting these do you worry that ingesting these calories is going to, quote unquote, calories is going to, quote unquote, calories is going to, quote unquote, break your fast? And more generally, how break your fast? And more generally, how break your fast? And more generally, how do you think about the issue of whether do you think about the issue of whether do you think about the issue of whether or not you're fasting enough to get or not you're fasting enough to get or not you're fasting enough to get these positive effects? Because I Not these positive effects? Because I Not these positive effects? Because I Not everybody can manage on just water. can manage on just water. can manage on just water. Or just tea. Or we should say not Or just tea. Or we should say not Or just tea. Or we should say not everybody is willing to manage on just everybody is willing to manage on just everybody is willing to manage on just water or just tea for certain part of water or just tea for certain part of water or just tea for certain part of the day. the day. the day. Well, the my first answer is not Well, the my first answer is not Well, the my first answer is not scientific. It's philosophical. If you scientific. It's philosophical. If you scientific. It's philosophical. If you don't enjoy life, what's the point? Um don't enjoy life, what's the point? Um don't enjoy life, what's the point? Um and so I I'd like a cup of coffee in the and so I I'd like a cup of coffee in the and so I I'd like a cup of coffee in the morning, little bit of milk. morning, little bit of milk. morning, little bit of milk. Spoonful of yogurt's not going to kill Spoonful of yogurt's not going to kill Spoonful of yogurt's not going to kill me. Um olive oil doesn't have protein or Um olive oil doesn't have protein or Um olive oil doesn't have protein or carbs in it, not many. carbs in it, not many. carbs in it, not many. And so I'm probably not affecting those And so I'm probably not affecting those And so I'm probably not affecting those longevity pathways negatively. longevity pathways negatively. longevity pathways negatively. Um but without that, uh first of all, I but without that, uh first of all, I but without that, uh first of all, I wouldn't enjoy my life as much. Second, wouldn't enjoy my life as much. Second, wouldn't enjoy my life as much. Second, well, the olive oil isn't is not as well, the olive oil isn't is not as well, the olive oil isn't is not as great as the yogurt, but great as the yogurt, but great as the yogurt, but uh I'm trying to optimize, and there's uh I'm trying to optimize, and there's uh I'm trying to optimize, and there's no perfect solution to what we're doing, no perfect solution to what we're doing, no perfect solution to what we're doing, and we're still learning. We don't know and we're still learning. We don't know and we're still learning. We don't know what's optimal for me, let alone what's optimal for me, let alone what's optimal for me, let alone everybody else. everybody else. everybody else. But I I'm with you. I don't believe But I I'm with you. I don't believe But I I'm with you. I don't believe that taking a couple of spoonfuls of that taking a couple of spoonfuls of that taking a couple of spoonfuls of something, unless it's high fructose something, unless it's high fructose something, unless it's high fructose corn syrup, is going to hurt you. The corn syrup, is going to hurt you. The corn syrup, is going to hurt you. The point about doing this is that you try point about doing this is that you try point about doing this is that you try to do your best. to do your best. to do your best. If you go from regular living to If you go from regular living to If you go from regular living to don't eat the whole day, you're going to don't eat the whole day, you're going to don't eat the whole day, you're going to fail. Like quitting smoking cold turkey, fail. Like quitting smoking cold turkey, fail. Like quitting smoking cold turkey, it's easier to chew gum and stick the it's easier to chew gum and stick the it's easier to chew gum and stick the patch on. patch on. patch on. Cuz your body has to get used to all Cuz your body has to get used to all Cuz your body has to get used to all sorts of habits. And it's social, it's sorts of habits. And it's social, it's sorts of habits. And it's social, it's physical, putting stuff in your mouth, physical, putting stuff in your mouth, physical, putting stuff in your mouth, chewing, not just the low blood sugar chewing, not just the low blood sugar chewing, not just the low blood sugar levels. And your brain will fight it. levels. And your brain will fight it. levels. And your brain will fight it. Your limbic system is going to go, "Hey, Your limbic system is going to go, "Hey, Your limbic system is going to go, "Hey, do it, do it, do it." And you're going do it, do it, do it." And you're going do it, do it, do it." And you're going to have to fight it. Once you But once to have to fight it. Once you But once to have to fight it. Once you But once you get through it, you get through it, you get through it, you'll be better, but you do it in you'll be better, but you do it in you'll be better, but you do it in stages. Don't go cold turkey, cuz stages. Don't go cold turkey, cuz stages. Don't go cold turkey, cuz everyone knows it's a fact that if you everyone knows it's a fact that if you everyone knows it's a fact that if you try to do a strict diet right out of the try to do a strict diet right out of the try to do a strict diet right out of the gates, you'll almost always fail. That gates, you'll almost always fail. That gates, you'll almost always fail. That captures the essence of fasting captures the essence of fasting captures the essence of fasting rationally, an irrational approach to it rationally, an irrational approach to it rationally, an irrational approach to it to supplementation very well. Along the to supplementation very well. Along the to supplementation very well. Along the lines of supplementation, what about lines of supplementation, what about lines of supplementation, what about NMN? How does one incorporate that into NMN? How does one incorporate that into NMN? How does one incorporate that into a supplementation protocol should they supplementation protocol should they supplementation protocol should they choose to do that? All right. choose to do that? All right. choose to do that? All right. Well, disclaimer is that I don't Well, disclaimer is that I don't Well, disclaimer is that I don't recommend anything, but I talk about recommend anything, but I talk about recommend anything, but I talk about what I do. So a bit of scientific what I do. So a bit of scientific what I do. So a bit of scientific background, these sirtuin genes that we background, these sirtuin genes that we background, these sirtuin genes that we discovered first in yeast cells when I discovered first in yeast cells when I discovered first in yeast cells when I was at MIT, was at MIT, was at MIT, and then in animals as I moved to and then in animals as I moved to and then in animals as I moved to Harvard in the 2000s, Harvard in the 2000s, Harvard in the 2000s, um and one of my one of my first um and one of my one of my first um and one of my one of my first postdocs, actually literally my first postdocs, actually literally my first postdocs, actually literally my first postdoc, Haim Cohen, published a great postdoc, Haim Cohen, published a great postdoc, Haim Cohen, published a great paper and found that turning on the paper and found that turning on the paper and found that turning on the sirtuin 6 gene, remember there's seven. sirtuin 6 gene, remember there's seven. sirtuin 6 gene, remember there's seven. Number 6 gene is very potent. It Number 6 gene is very potent. It Number 6 gene is very potent. It extended the lifespan dramatically of extended the lifespan dramatically of extended the lifespan dramatically of mice that he engineered, both males and mice that he engineered, both males and mice that he engineered, both males and females, which is great. females, which is great. females, which is great. So what you want to do is naturally So what you want to do is naturally So what you want to do is naturally boost the activity of these sirtuins. boost the activity of these sirtuins. boost the activity of these sirtuins. They are genes, but they also make They are genes, but they also make They are genes, but they also make proteins. That's what genes typically proteins. That's what genes typically proteins. That's what genes typically make uh or encode. And then those make uh or encode. And then those make uh or encode. And then those proteins take care of the body in many proteins take care of the body in many proteins take care of the body in many different ways. NAD levels are really different ways. NAD levels are really different ways. NAD levels are really important for keeping those sirtuin important for keeping those sirtuin important for keeping those sirtuin defenses at a youthful level. I take a precursor at a youthful level. I take a precursor at a youthful level. I take a precursor to NAD called NMN, to NAD called NMN, to NAD called NMN, and the body uses that to make and the body uses that to make and the body uses that to make the NAD molecule in one step. the NAD molecule in one step. the NAD molecule in one step. And so I know from measuring dozens of And so I know from measuring dozens of And so I know from measuring dozens of human beings human beings human beings that if you take NMN that if you take NMN that if you take NMN for the time period that I do, I've been for the time period that I do, I've been for the time period that I do, I've been taking it for years, but if you take it taking it for years, but if you take it taking it for years, but if you take it for about 2 weeks, you'll double for about 2 weeks, you'll double for about 2 weeks, you'll double on average double your NAD levels in the on average double your NAD levels in the on average double your NAD levels in the blood. So I just want to be people to be blood. So I just want to be people to be blood. So I just want to be people to be aware that aware that aware that what I do may not perfectly or work at what I do may not perfectly or work at what I do may not perfectly or work at all for others. all for others. all for others. But I have studied, as I said, dozens of But I have studied, as I said, dozens of But I have studied, as I said, dozens of people who take NMN people who take NMN people who take NMN at a gram, at a gram, at a gram, sometimes 2 g, and I know by looking at sometimes 2 g, and I know by looking at sometimes 2 g, and I know by looking at all those people that without any all those people that without any all those people that without any exceptions, that if you do what I do, exceptions, that if you do what I do, exceptions, that if you do what I do, your NAD levels go up by about twofold your NAD levels go up by about twofold your NAD levels go up by about twofold or more. or more. or more. Anecdotally, cuz I've been taking this Anecdotally, cuz I've been taking this Anecdotally, cuz I've been taking this for a long time, if I don't take it, I for a long time, if I don't take it, I for a long time, if I don't take it, I start to feel 50 years old. It's start to feel 50 years old. It's start to feel 50 years old. It's horrible. Um I can't think straight. I horrible. Um I can't think straight. I horrible. Um I can't think straight. I It may be placebo, but who knows? It may be placebo, but who knows? It may be placebo, but who knows? But what we're doing now are very But what we're doing now are very But what we're doing now are very careful clinical trials. I want to talk careful clinical trials. I want to talk careful clinical trials. I want to talk about iron about iron about iron and iron load. I don't think we can get and iron load. I don't think we can get and iron load. I don't think we can get right down into how much iron somebody right down into how much iron somebody right down into how much iron somebody needs, because it'll vary person to needs, because it'll vary person to needs, because it'll vary person to person. But I was surprised to learn person. But I was surprised to learn person. But I was surprised to learn that iron is actually going to that iron is actually going to that iron is actually going to accelerate the aging process uh in accelerate the aging process uh in accelerate the aging process uh in various contexts. This is new finding a various contexts. This is new finding a various contexts. This is new finding a new finding out of Spain. Manuel new finding out of Spain. Manuel new finding out of Spain. Manuel Serrano's lab has found that Serrano's lab has found that Serrano's lab has found that uh excess iron will increase the number uh excess iron will increase the number uh excess iron will increase the number of senescent cells in the body. of senescent cells in the body. of senescent cells in the body. Uh and senescent cells are these zombie Uh and senescent cells are these zombie Uh and senescent cells are these zombie cells that accumulate as you get older, cells that accumulate as you get older, cells that accumulate as you get older, and they sit there, and they cause and they sit there, and they cause and they sit there, and they cause inflammation mainly, and also can cause inflammation mainly, and also can cause inflammation mainly, and also can cause cancer. Uh and it's found that if you get rid of Uh and it's found that if you get rid of Uh and it's found that if you get rid of these cells or never accumulate them, um these cells or never accumulate them, um these cells or never accumulate them, um you stay younger. you stay younger. you stay younger. Uh in animals, and there's Uh in animals, and there's Uh in animals, and there's some really interesting studies out of some really interesting studies out of some really interesting studies out of Mayo Clinic in humans as well. Mayo Clinic in humans as well. Mayo Clinic in humans as well. And what I find, for example, is people And what I find, for example, is people And what I find, for example, is people who are really healthy and live the way who are really healthy and live the way who are really healthy and live the way I do, and have a diet that's I do, and have a diet that's I do, and have a diet that's um fairly vegetarian, but not strict, um fairly vegetarian, but not strict, um fairly vegetarian, but not strict, uh still have slightly low hemoglobin uh still have slightly low hemoglobin uh still have slightly low hemoglobin levels, slightly low iron, slightly low levels, slightly low iron, slightly low levels, slightly low iron, slightly low ferritin. But we have super amounts of energy. But we have super amounts of energy. But we have super amounts of energy. We're not anemic. We're not anemic. We're not anemic. And we're getting along with great in And we're getting along with great in And we're getting along with great in life. But a doctor who just looks at that But a doctor who just looks at that But a doctor who just looks at that might say, "Oh, we need to give you more might say, "Oh, we need to give you more might say, "Oh, we need to give you more iron." All right. So what I'm getting at is an All right. So what I'm getting at is an All right. So what I'm getting at is an example of we need to personalize an example of we need to personalize an example of we need to personalize medicine and look at people over the medicine and look at people over the medicine and look at people over the long run to know what works for them and long run to know what works for them and long run to know what works for them and what's healthy for them. And not what's healthy for them. And not what's healthy for them. And not just work towards the average human, but just work towards the average human, but just work towards the average human, but work towards what's optimal for human. work towards what's optimal for human. work towards what's optimal for human. I love that answer. I You mentioned I love that answer. I You mentioned I love that answer. I You mentioned tracking and tracking over time, and tracking and tracking over time, and tracking and tracking over time, and this is a really interesting area that I this is a really interesting area that I this is a really interesting area that I know you have been focused on for a long know you have been focused on for a long know you have been focused on for a long time. I've been getting blood work done time. I've been getting blood work done time. I've been getting blood work done about every 6 months since I frankly about every 6 months since I frankly about every 6 months since I frankly since I was in college. I just got I since I was in college. I just got I since I was in college. I just got I like data. Are there any things that you like data. Are there any things that you like data. Are there any things that you pay attention to that you think are pay attention to that you think are pay attention to that you think are particularly interesting for people to particularly interesting for people to particularly interesting for people to just take note of? I mean, we're not just take note of? I mean, we're not just take note of? I mean, we're not asking you to go against anybody's asking you to go against anybody's asking you to go against anybody's physician, but what sorts of things physician, but what sorts of things physician, but what sorts of things should people start to educate should people start to educate should people start to educate themselves about in terms of what these themselves about in terms of what these themselves about in terms of what these molecules are on their charts if they molecules are on their charts if they molecules are on their charts if they choose to get them? And what do you what choose to get them? And what do you what choose to get them? And what do you what do you look at? Yeah. Um the first do you look at? Yeah. Um the first do you look at? Yeah. Um the first is that you should be tracking things um is that you should be tracking things um is that you should be tracking things um because one measurement isn't enough. because one measurement isn't enough. because one measurement isn't enough. These things vary and over time, and you These things vary and over time, and you These things vary and over time, and you If you can have a decade or more of If you can have a decade or more of If you can have a decade or more of data, it's super informative, as you data, it's super informative, as you data, it's super informative, as you know. But there are some main ones. I know. But there are some main ones. I know. But there are some main ones. I would say uh your blood sugar levels. would say uh your blood sugar levels. would say uh your blood sugar levels. You want to do your HbA1c, which is your You want to do your HbA1c, which is your You want to do your HbA1c, which is your average glucose levels over the month. average glucose levels over the month. average glucose levels over the month. There's uh CRP, which I mentioned for There's uh CRP, which I mentioned for There's uh CRP, which I mentioned for inflammation. Yeah, let's talk about inflammation. Yeah, let's talk about inflammation. Yeah, let's talk about C-reactive protein for a second, cuz I C-reactive protein for a second, cuz I C-reactive protein for a second, cuz I think um it's been shown to be an early think um it's been shown to be an early think um it's been shown to be an early marker of macular degeneration, of uh marker of macular degeneration, of uh marker of macular degeneration, of uh heart disease, a variety of different heart disease, a variety of different heart disease, a variety of different things. Um CRP is something that we things. Um CRP is something that we things. Um CRP is something that we don't hear enough about, I think. It is don't hear enough about, I think. It is don't hear enough about, I think. It is a the best marker for cardiovascular a the best marker for cardiovascular a the best marker for cardiovascular inflammation, and is also we use it as a inflammation, and is also we use it as a inflammation, and is also we use it as a predictor of longevity. predictor of longevity. predictor of longevity. And its levels go up at with And its levels go up at with And its levels go up at with mortality. Um and so there's an association, but Um and so there's an association, but Um and so there's an association, but there's enough data that I would say if there's enough data that I would say if there's enough data that I would say if you have high levels of CRP, you need to you have high levels of CRP, you need to you have high levels of CRP, you need to get your levels down quickly. And the get your levels down quickly. And the get your levels down quickly. And the levels usually go up with age levels usually go up with age levels usually go up with age uh and with levels of inflammation. So uh and with levels of inflammation. So uh and with levels of inflammation. So the ways to get it down would be to the ways to get it down would be to the ways to get it down would be to switch the diet, eat less, uh try to eat switch the diet, eat less, uh try to eat switch the diet, eat less, uh try to eat more vegetables, you'll find it will more vegetables, you'll find it will more vegetables, you'll find it will come down. There are also drugs that can come down. There are also drugs that can come down. There are also drugs that can do it. do it. do it. Uh anti-inflammatories um can do it as Uh anti-inflammatories um can do it as Uh anti-inflammatories um can do it as well. But CRP is It's actually HCRP. There's a But CRP is It's actually HCRP. There's a But CRP is It's actually HCRP. There's a high sensitive or HSCRP. Your doctor high sensitive or HSCRP. Your doctor high sensitive or HSCRP. Your doctor will know. Get one of those readings, will know. Get one of those readings, will know. Get one of those readings, cuz if you've got normal blood sugar cuz if you've got normal blood sugar cuz if you've got normal blood sugar levels, your doctor or fasting blood levels, your doctor or fasting blood levels, your doctor or fasting blood sugar levels, um sugar levels, um sugar levels, um your doctor might say you're fine. your doctor might say you're fine. your doctor might say you're fine. But a lot of people have normal blood But a lot of people have normal blood But a lot of people have normal blood sugar but have high CRP, which is just sugar but have high CRP, which is just sugar but have high CRP, which is just as bad for you long-term and can predict as bad for you long-term and can predict as bad for you long-term and can predict a future heart attack. a future heart attack. a future heart attack. Zooming way out, what are the behavioral Zooming way out, what are the behavioral Zooming way out, what are the behavioral tools that one can start to think about tools that one can start to think about tools that one can start to think about in terms of ways to modulate these, in terms of ways to modulate these, in terms of ways to modulate these, uh, you know, basically the way that DNA uh, you know, basically the way that DNA uh, you know, basically the way that DNA is being expressed and functioning. is being expressed and functioning. is being expressed and functioning. In other words, what are the sorts of In other words, what are the sorts of In other words, what are the sorts of things that people can do to improve the things that people can do to improve the things that people can do to improve the sirtuin pathway? And I realize that sirtuin pathway? And I realize that sirtuin pathway? And I realize that there are caveats. We can't go directly there are caveats. We can't go directly there are caveats. We can't go directly from a behavior to sirtuins, but in the from a behavior to sirtuins, but in the from a behavior to sirtuins, but in the general theme, what can people do? general theme, what can people do? general theme, what can people do? What do you do? Well, we know that What do you do? Well, we know that What do you do? Well, we know that aerobic exercise in mice and rats raises aerobic exercise in mice and rats raises aerobic exercise in mice and rats raises their NAD levels and their levels of their NAD levels and their levels of their NAD levels and their levels of sirt one of the genes goes up, uh, two one of the genes goes up, uh, two one of the genes goes up, uh, two actually, number one and number three. I actually, number one and number three. I actually, number one and number three. I base my exercise on the scientific I base my exercise on the scientific I base my exercise on the scientific literature, which literature, which literature, which has shown that has shown that has shown that uh, maintaining muscle mass is very uh, maintaining muscle mass is very uh, maintaining muscle mass is very important for a number of reasons. The important for a number of reasons. The important for a number of reasons. The two main ones are two main ones are two main ones are uh, you want to maintain your hormone uh, you want to maintain your hormone uh, you want to maintain your hormone levels. I'm an older male, losing my levels. I'm an older male, losing my levels. I'm an older male, losing my testosterone and muscle mass over time. testosterone and muscle mass over time. testosterone and muscle mass over time. And by exercising, I will maintain that And by exercising, I will maintain that And by exercising, I will maintain that and have uh, in fact, I've I and have uh, in fact, I've I and have uh, in fact, I've I probably haven't had a body like this probably haven't had a body like this probably haven't had a body like this since I was 20. So, that's since I was 20. So, that's since I was 20. So, that's one of the benefits of having this one of the benefits of having this one of the benefits of having this lifestyle. What about estrogen? Because lifestyle. What about estrogen? Because lifestyle. What about estrogen? Because women are different in the sense that women are different in the sense that women are different in the sense that they do, they do, they do, uh, the number of eggs that they in the uh, the number of eggs that they in the uh, the number of eggs that they in the ovaries change over time, right? ovaries change over time, right? ovaries change over time, right? Uh, do you think that they can maintain Uh, do you think that they can maintain Uh, do you think that they can maintain estrogen levels at in uh, over longer estrogen levels at in uh, over longer estrogen levels at in uh, over longer periods of time using some of these same periods of time using some of these same periods of time using some of these same protocols? I don't want to get too protocols? I don't want to get too protocols? I don't want to get too much into the anecdotes, but I'll tell much into the anecdotes, but I'll tell much into the anecdotes, but I'll tell you the science, which is you the science, which is you the science, which is uh, that uh, that uh, that if you take a mouse and put it on if you take a mouse and put it on if you take a mouse and put it on fasting or caloric restriction fasting or caloric restriction fasting or caloric restriction for up until the point where it should be up until the point where it should be up until the point where it should be infertile. So, that's about it at a year infertile. So, that's about it at a year infertile. So, that's about it at a year of age, a mouse gets infertile female of age, a mouse gets infertile female of age, a mouse gets infertile female mouse due to due to fasting. Or due to mouse due to due to fasting. Or due to mouse due to due to fasting. Or due to simply to aging. Due to aging. Due to simply to aging. Due to aging. Due to simply to aging. Due to aging. Due to aging. The fasting, it's not a aging. The fasting, it's not a aging. The fasting, it's not a extreme fast. It's just less calories. extreme fast. It's just less calories. extreme fast. It's just less calories. &gt;&gt; Then you put them back on a regular food &gt;&gt; Then you put them back on a regular food &gt;&gt; Then you put them back on a regular food and they become fertile again and they become fertile again and they become fertile again for a many, many months afterwards. So, for a many, many months afterwards. So, for a many, many months afterwards. So, the effect on slowing down aging is the effect on slowing down aging is the effect on slowing down aging is also on the reproductive system. also on the reproductive system. also on the reproductive system. Interesting. And so, that I wouldn't say Interesting. And so, that I wouldn't say Interesting. And so, that I wouldn't say to any woman, I wouldn't think that they to any woman, I wouldn't think that they to any woman, I wouldn't think that they should become super skinny to try and should become super skinny to try and should become super skinny to try and preserve fertility. That's not what I'm preserve fertility. That's not what I'm preserve fertility. That's not what I'm saying. But these pathways that we work saying. But these pathways that we work saying. But these pathways that we work on, these sirtuins, are known to delay on, these sirtuins, are known to delay on, these sirtuins, are known to delay infertility in female animals. infertility in female animals. infertility in female animals. Case in point, um, I'm one of the lead Case in point, um, I'm one of the lead Case in point, um, I'm one of the lead authors on a paper where we used NMN. authors on a paper where we used NMN. authors on a paper where we used NMN. Remember, this is the gas, the fuel, the Remember, this is the gas, the fuel, the Remember, this is the gas, the fuel, the petrol for the sirtuins. petrol for the sirtuins. petrol for the sirtuins. We gave old mice, uh, one group of mice We gave old mice, uh, one group of mice We gave old mice, uh, one group of mice was 16 months old. Remember, they became was 16 months old. Remember, they became was 16 months old. Remember, they became infertile at 12. infertile at 12. infertile at 12. Gave them NMN Gave them NMN Gave them NMN and I think it was only 6 weeks later, and I think it was only 6 weeks later, and I think it was only 6 weeks later, they had they had they had offspring. They became fertile again, which They became fertile again, which They became fertile again, which goes against biology, a textbook goes against biology, a textbook goes against biology, a textbook biology, which is that female mammals biology, which is that female mammals biology, which is that female mammals run out of eggs. Turns out that's not run out of eggs. Turns out that's not run out of eggs. Turns out that's not true. You can rejuvenate the female true. You can rejuvenate the female true. You can rejuvenate the female reproductive system and even get them to reproductive system and even get them to reproductive system and even get them to come out of menopause, as we call it. come out of menopause, as we call it. come out of menopause, as we call it. So, that's a whole new paradigm in So, that's a whole new paradigm in So, that's a whole new paradigm in biology as well. What I think is really biology as well. What I think is really biology as well. What I think is really interesting is that what we're learning interesting is that what we're learning interesting is that what we're learning from work that you and your colleagues from work that you and your colleagues from work that you and your colleagues have done and in my lab as well is that have done and in my lab as well is that have done and in my lab as well is that the body has remarkable powers of the body has remarkable powers of the body has remarkable powers of healing and recovering from illness and injury. and recovering from illness and injury. and recovering from illness and injury. And what we once thought was a one-way And what we once thought was a one-way And what we once thought was a one-way street and you just can't repair, you street and you just can't repair, you street and you just can't repair, you can't get over these diseases, you can can't get over these diseases, you can can't get over these diseases, you can reset the system and the body can really reset the system and the body can really reset the system and the body can really get rejuvenated in ways that in the get rejuvenated in ways that in the get rejuvenated in ways that in the future we'll wonder why didn't we future we'll wonder why didn't we future we'll wonder why didn't we work on this earlier. And thank you for work on this earlier. And thank you for work on this earlier. And thank you for talking to us today. I realize I took talking to us today. I realize I took talking to us today. I realize I took us down deep into the guts of mechanism down deep into the guts of mechanism down deep into the guts of mechanism and as well talking about global and as well talking about global and as well talking about global protocols, everything from what one can protocols, everything from what one can protocols, everything from what one can do and take if they choose that's right do and take if they choose that's right do and take if they choose that's right for them, for them, for them, um, to how to think about this whole um, to how to think about this whole um, to how to think about this whole process that we, process that we, process that we, uh, talk about when we talk about uh, talk about when we talk about uh, talk about when we talk about lifespan is, um, as always an in lifespan is, um, as always an in lifespan is, um, as always an in incredibly illuminating. Thank you, incredibly illuminating. Thank you, incredibly illuminating. Thank you, David. Thanks, Andrew.