Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live event at the Meridian Theater in event at the Meridian Theater in event at the Meridian Theater in Toronto, Ontario. The event consisted of Toronto, Ontario. The event consisted of Toronto, Ontario. The event consisted of a lecture entitled The Brain-Body a lecture entitled The Brain-Body a lecture entitled The Brain-Body Contract, followed by a question and Contract, followed by a question and Contract, followed by a question and answer session. We wanted to make sure answer session. We wanted to make sure answer session. We wanted to make sure that the question and answer session was that the question and answer session was that the question and answer session was available to everybody, regardless of available to everybody, regardless of available to everybody, regardless of who could attend in person. I also want who could attend in person. I also want who could attend in person. I also want to make sure to thank the sponsors of to make sure to thank the sponsors of to make sure to thank the sponsors of that event, which were Eight Sleep One that event, which were Eight Sleep One that event, which were Eight Sleep One and Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart and Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart and Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, mattress covers with cooling, heating, mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the and sleep tracking capacity. One of the and sleep tracking capacity. One of the key things to getting a great night's key things to getting a great night's key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the sleep is to make sure that the sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order is correct. And that's because in order is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your to fall and stay deeply asleep, your to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by body temperature actually has to drop by body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. With Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. With Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. With Eight Sleep, you can program the temperature Sleep, you can program the temperature Sleep, you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the of your sleeping environment in the of your sleeping environment in the beginning, middle, and end of your beginning, middle, and end of your beginning, middle, and end of your night. It has a number of other features night. It has a number of other features night. It has a number of other features like tracking the amount of rapid eye like tracking the amount of rapid eye like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you movement and slow wave sleep that you movement and slow wave sleep that you get, things that are essential to really get, things that are essential to really get, things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for dialing in the perfect night's sleep for dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight you. I've been sleeping on an Eight you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over 2 Sleep mattress cover for well over 2 Sleep mattress cover for well over 2 years now, and it has greatly improved years now, and it has greatly improved years now, and it has greatly improved my sleep. I fall asleep far more my sleep. I fall asleep far more my sleep. I fall asleep far more quickly, I wake up far less often in the quickly, I wake up far less often in the quickly, I wake up far less often in the middle of the night, and I wake up middle of the night, and I wake up middle of the night, and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever feeling far more refreshed than I ever feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an Eight Sleep did prior to using an Eight Sleep did prior to using an Eight Sleep mattress cover. mattress cover. mattress cover. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman can go to eightsleep.com/huberman can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Canada, UK, select EU countries, and Canada, UK, select EU countries, and Canada, UK, select EU countries, and Australia. Again, that's Australia. Again, that's Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 since 2012, so I'm delighted that they since 2012, so I'm delighted that they since 2012, so I'm delighted that they sponsored the live event. sponsored the live event. sponsored the live event. The reason I started taking AG1 and the The reason I started taking AG1 and the The reason I started taking AG1 and the reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my day is that it provides all of my day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, foundational nutritional needs. That is, foundational nutritional needs. That is, it provides insurance that I get the it provides insurance that I get the it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins, proper amounts of those vitamins, proper amounts of those vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and fiber to minerals, probiotics, and fiber to minerals, probiotics, and fiber to ensure optimal mental health, physical ensure optimal mental health, physical ensure optimal mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving to claim a special offer. They're giving to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a away five free travel packs plus a away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, year's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, year's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman that's drinkAG1.com/huberman that's drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. And now, to claim that special offer. And now, to claim that special offer. And now, without further ado, the question and without further ado, the question and without further ado, the question and answer session from our live event at answer session from our live event at answer session from our live event at the Meridian Theatre in Toronto, the Meridian Theatre in Toronto, the Meridian Theatre in Toronto, Ontario. Okay, um what motivated me to do the Okay, um what motivated me to do the Okay, um what motivated me to do the guest series with Paul Conti? Okay, so guest series with Paul Conti? Okay, so guest series with Paul Conti? Okay, so first of all, for those of you that first of all, for those of you that first of all, for those of you that don't know, Paul Conti is a don't know, Paul Conti is a don't know, Paul Conti is a psychiatrist. He's a Stanford and psychiatrist. He's a Stanford and psychiatrist. He's a Stanford and Harvard-trained psychiatrist. Um Harvard-trained psychiatrist. Um Harvard-trained psychiatrist. Um and I wanted to do the series with Paul and I wanted to do the series with Paul and I wanted to do the series with Paul for several reasons. Um and we for several reasons. Um and we for several reasons. Um and we initiated that series uh first of all, initiated that series uh first of all, initiated that series uh first of all, um he's incredibly talented as a um he's incredibly talented as a um he's incredibly talented as a clinician. And yet, um despite having written an And yet, um despite having written an And yet, um despite having written an excellent book about trauma, excellent book about trauma, excellent book about trauma, I felt that I felt that I felt that uh two things were true for sure. One is uh two things were true for sure. One is uh two things were true for sure. One is that most people won't get the that most people won't get the that most people won't get the opportunity to work with Paul, sadly, is opportunity to work with Paul, sadly, is opportunity to work with Paul, sadly, is he's time limited. And second, that um he's time limited. And second, that um he's time limited. And second, that um his expertise is incredibly vast, not his expertise is incredibly vast, not his expertise is incredibly vast, not just restricted to trauma. Trauma's, if just restricted to trauma. Trauma's, if just restricted to trauma. Trauma's, if understood, can be transmuted into, you understood, can be transmuted into, you understood, can be transmuted into, you know, deep sources of knowledge that know, deep sources of knowledge that know, deep sources of knowledge that other people can benefit from. And other people can benefit from. And other people can benefit from. And indeed, um what I found in Paul as I got indeed, um what I found in Paul as I got indeed, um what I found in Paul as I got to know him is that he has just profound to know him is that he has just profound to know him is that he has just profound insight into the unconscious mind. And insight into the unconscious mind. And insight into the unconscious mind. And people had long asked me, uh you know, people had long asked me, uh you know, people had long asked me, uh you know, around in and around the podcast, "What around in and around the podcast, "What around in and around the podcast, "What about the subconscious? What about the about the subconscious? What about the about the subconscious? What about the unconscious?" And unconscious?" And unconscious?" And I was of the mind that the supercomputer I was of the mind that the supercomputer I was of the mind that the supercomputer of the human brain is the forebrain, the of the human brain is the forebrain, the of the human brain is the forebrain, the thinking, planning, context setting thinking, planning, context setting thinking, planning, context setting piece right behind our forehead. So, piece right behind our forehead. So, piece right behind our forehead. So, there you know, it's the reason that there you know, it's the reason that there you know, it's the reason that we're not the house cats. That the house we're not the house cats. That the house we're not the house cats. That the house cats are the house cats and that's the cats are the house cats and that's the cats are the house cats and that's the reason. We're the curators of the reason. We're the curators of the reason. We're the curators of the planet. But, Paul said, "Oh, no, planet. But, Paul said, "Oh, no, planet. But, Paul said, "Oh, no, no. No, no, no. The no, no. No, no, no. The no, no. No, no, no. The unconscious mind is the supercomputer of unconscious mind is the supercomputer of unconscious mind is the supercomputer of the mind." I'm like, "Well, that sounds the mind." I'm like, "Well, that sounds the mind." I'm like, "Well, that sounds great. But, how do we understand the great. But, how do we understand the great. But, how do we understand the unconscious mind?" And, he has a really unconscious mind?" And, he has a really unconscious mind?" And, he has a really biological and psychological and biological and psychological and biological and psychological and psychiatric understanding of the psychiatric understanding of the psychiatric understanding of the unconscious. And, in that series, he unconscious. And, in that series, he unconscious. And, in that series, he talks about these so-called cupboards talks about these so-called cupboards talks about these so-called cupboards that we can look that we can look that we can look into in order to better understand our into in order to better understand our into in order to better understand our own conscious unconscious mind in order own conscious unconscious mind in order own conscious unconscious mind in order to allow our unconscious mind to teach to allow our unconscious mind to teach to allow our unconscious mind to teach us things about ourselves that are us things about ourselves that are us things about ourselves that are useful. And, useful. And, useful. And, there are three main places where our there are three main places where our there are three main places where our unconscious teaches us useful things unconscious teaches us useful things unconscious teaches us useful things that allow us to be more conscious of that allow us to be more conscious of that allow us to be more conscious of the way that our brain is working in the way that our brain is working in the way that our brain is working in useful ways. useful ways. useful ways. Um, the first is in these liminal states Um, the first is in these liminal states Um, the first is in these liminal states between waking and sleep. between waking and sleep. between waking and sleep. It really does seem to be the case that It really does seem to be the case that It really does seem to be the case that when surprise, we're completely surprise, we're completely surprise, we're completely still, and we're emerging still, and we're emerging still, and we're emerging from where we're dropping into states of from where we're dropping into states of from where we're dropping into states of reduced autonomic arousal, but our level reduced autonomic arousal, but our level reduced autonomic arousal, but our level of thought, if you will, is still active thought, if you will, is still active thought, if you will, is still active enough that we are aware, maybe even enough that we are aware, maybe even enough that we are aware, maybe even lucid dreams. And, also in dreams, our lucid dreams. And, also in dreams, our lucid dreams. And, also in dreams, our unconscious mind uses, as I think Young unconscious mind uses, as I think Young unconscious mind uses, as I think Young and Freud pretty well understood, and Freud pretty well understood, and Freud pretty well understood, symbols to teach us things. But, symbols to teach us things. But, symbols to teach us things. But, everything's flipped in there. Gender's everything's flipped in there. Gender's everything's flipped in there. Gender's flipped. Like like the like just cuz flipped. Like like the like just cuz flipped. Like like the like just cuz you're having a conflict with you're having a conflict with you're having a conflict with somebody in your life who's a man somebody in your life who's a man somebody in your life who's a man doesn't mean that person shows up doesn't mean that person shows up doesn't mean that person shows up as a man. They could show up as an as a man. They could show up as an as a man. They could show up as an animal. So, species are flipped. The animal. So, species are flipped. The animal. So, species are flipped. The symbols become mishmashed. But, Paul symbols become mishmashed. But, Paul symbols become mishmashed. But, Paul made it very clear that all this can be made it very clear that all this can be made it very clear that all this can be parsed if you do a certain kind of parsed if you do a certain kind of parsed if you do a certain kind of introspective work. And, I thought that introspective work. And, I thought that introspective work. And, I thought that would mean a lot of talk therapy, that would mean a lot of talk therapy, that would mean a lot of talk therapy, that people would And, how are we going to people would And, how are we going to people would And, how are we going to get people to learn how to do talk get people to learn how to do talk get people to learn how to do talk therapy by themselves? We want to keep therapy by themselves? We want to keep therapy by themselves? We want to keep things as much you know, things as much you know, things as much you know, independent of cost and things like independent of cost and things like independent of cost and things like that. And, the practices he started that. And, the practices he started that. And, the practices he started talking about were incredibly simple. talking about were incredibly simple. talking about were incredibly simple. Things like mirror work. This Some of Things like mirror work. This Some of Things like mirror work. This Some of the psychologists in the room will be the psychologists in the room will be the psychologists in the room will be familiar with this. I thought mirror familiar with this. I thought mirror familiar with this. I thought mirror work, what is that? He said literally work, what is that? He said literally work, what is that? He said literally people trying to people trying to people trying to activate their unconscious activate their unconscious activate their unconscious you know or excuse me access their you know or excuse me access their you know or excuse me access their unconscious in sleep by a practice of unconscious in sleep by a practice of unconscious in sleep by a practice of staring into the mirror for some period staring into the mirror for some period staring into the mirror for some period of time while awake and reflecting on of time while awake and reflecting on of time while awake and reflecting on self and aspirations and the idea of the self and aspirations and the idea of the self and aspirations and the idea of the body as a container. All this stuff even body as a container. All this stuff even body as a container. All this stuff even for a kid from Northern California sound for a kid from Northern California sound for a kid from Northern California sound really woo new agey. really woo new agey. really woo new agey. But here it's scripted by Paul into a But here it's scripted by Paul into a But here it's scripted by Paul into a formal structure that one can use to formal structure that one can use to formal structure that one can use to parse your own mental health and enhance parse your own mental health and enhance parse your own mental health and enhance mental health. So that was the reason mental health. So that was the reason mental health. So that was the reason for doing the series and especially for doing the series and especially for doing the series and especially that the episode on relationships not that the episode on relationships not that the episode on relationships not just romantic relationships I found just romantic relationships I found just romantic relationships I found hasn't come out yet incredibly hasn't come out yet incredibly hasn't come out yet incredibly interesting because interesting because interesting because he talked about how in his clinical he talked about how in his clinical he talked about how in his clinical experience all virtually all the stuff that people all virtually all the stuff that people all virtually all the stuff that people pay attention to in relational stuff is pay attention to in relational stuff is pay attention to in relational stuff is are they a narcissist? Are they are they a narcissist? Are they are they a narcissist? Are they obsessive? Is this person a musician obsessive? Is this person a musician obsessive? Is this person a musician versus whether or not I'm an accountant? versus whether or not I'm an accountant? versus whether or not I'm an accountant? Would are we compatible? That none of Would are we compatible? That none of Would are we compatible? That none of that stuff predicts anything as well as that stuff predicts anything as well as that stuff predicts anything as well as the balance of these three drives, the balance of these three drives, the balance of these three drives, the aggressive drive, the pleasure drive and aggressive drive, the pleasure drive and aggressive drive, the pleasure drive and the so-called generative drive. And I the so-called generative drive. And I the so-called generative drive. And I found it to be fascinating and I'm found it to be fascinating and I'm found it to be fascinating and I'm excited for that episode and the other excited for that episode and the other excited for that episode and the other episodes to come out but basically episodes to come out but basically episodes to come out but basically because Paul's brilliant and he makes because Paul's brilliant and he makes because Paul's brilliant and he makes the what I consider pretty obscure and the what I consider pretty obscure and the what I consider pretty obscure and opaque very clear and concrete and there opaque very clear and concrete and there opaque very clear and concrete and there are a bunch of worksheets. Again, all are a bunch of worksheets. Again, all are a bunch of worksheets. Again, all available at zero cost and none of them available at zero cost and none of them available at zero cost and none of them requiring that you do therapy with requiring that you do therapy with requiring that you do therapy with anybody if that if you choose not to. anybody if that if you choose not to. anybody if that if you choose not to. This is all the kind of work one could This is all the kind of work one could This is all the kind of work one could do on oneself. And the last thing I'll do on oneself. And the last thing I'll do on oneself. And the last thing I'll say about this is that and I should have say about this is that and I should have say about this is that and I should have said this first is that the primary said this first is that the primary said this first is that the primary motivation was we did a series of Dr. motivation was we did a series of Dr. motivation was we did a series of Dr. Andy Galpin on Andy Galpin on Andy Galpin on physical fitness. Why isn't there a physical fitness. Why isn't there a physical fitness. Why isn't there a series on mental fitness? Right? Like series on mental fitness? Right? Like series on mental fitness? Right? Like what is that? Why do we talk so much what is that? Why do we talk so much what is that? Why do we talk so much about mental health when we're and it's about mental health when we're and it's about mental health when we're and it's usually a conversation about mental usually a conversation about mental usually a conversation about mental illness. What people should have tools illness. What people should have tools illness. What people should have tools and practices that are zero cost, I and practices that are zero cost, I and practices that are zero cost, I believe, to be able to introspect in a believe, to be able to introspect in a believe, to be able to introspect in a structured way and enhance their mental structured way and enhance their mental structured way and enhance their mental health independent of, you know, their level of independent of, you know, their level of independent of, you know, their level of income. And I think Paul was the guy to income. And I think Paul was the guy to income. And I think Paul was the guy to do it. And we'll do more of that with do it. And we'll do more of that with do it. And we'll do more of that with other people as well because no single other people as well because no single other people as well because no single episode about any topic or series can episode about any topic or series can episode about any topic or series can exhaustively cover any topic, although exhaustively cover any topic, although exhaustively cover any topic, although Lord knows we will try. Lord knows we will try. Lord knows we will try. Okay, next question. What are the Okay, next question. What are the Okay, next question. What are the recommended protocols and best practices recommended protocols and best practices recommended protocols and best practices to enhance emotional resilience and to enhance emotional resilience and to enhance emotional resilience and develop effective responses during develop effective responses during develop effective responses during highly triggering situations? You're highly triggering situations? You're highly triggering situations? You're asking the wrong guy. Yeah. I mean, I don't snap. I don't snap. I mean, I don't snap. I don't snap. I mean, I don't snap. I don't snap. I was a wild teenager, but I don't snap. was a wild teenager, but I don't snap. was a wild teenager, but I don't snap. I'm not the aggressor, but I do have a I'm not the aggressor, but I do have a I'm not the aggressor, but I do have a snap button and it's been pushed uh snap button and it's been pushed uh snap button and it's been pushed uh before and I have to say when that before and I have to say when that before and I have to say when that happens, it's really kind of a scary happens, it's really kind of a scary happens, it's really kind of a scary thing. Not to me, right? Um and it's thing. Not to me, right? Um and it's thing. Not to me, right? Um and it's been many years, but I think anyone been many years, but I think anyone been many years, but I think anyone who's hit that threshold where you who's hit that threshold where you who's hit that threshold where you just you try not to say something, you just you try not to say something, you just you try not to say something, you say it anyway. You know, that that's say it anyway. You know, that that's say it anyway. You know, that that's usually how it shows up for people. usually how it shows up for people. usually how it shows up for people. Um I think I think I think we hear we hear we hear the statements like be responsive, not the statements like be responsive, not the statements like be responsive, not reactive. Okay, that's why I became a reactive. Okay, that's why I became a reactive. Okay, that's why I became a biologist cuz stuff like that makes no biologist cuz stuff like that makes no biologist cuz stuff like that makes no sense to me. sense to me. sense to me. Like in that moment, how are you Like in that moment, how are you Like in that moment, how are you responsive, not reactive? So, to me it responsive, not reactive? So, to me it responsive, not reactive? So, to me it was like, what are the tools? Clearly, was like, what are the tools? Clearly, was like, what are the tools? Clearly, as you go up that continuum of autonomic as you go up that continuum of autonomic as you go up that continuum of autonomic arousal, it becomes much harder to do arousal, it becomes much harder to do arousal, it becomes much harder to do whatever that means, whatever that means, whatever that means, right? So, that hence the tools for So, that hence the tools for So, that hence the tools for reducing stress in real time. I think reducing stress in real time. I think reducing stress in real time. I think the one that we haven't emphasized so the one that we haven't emphasized so the one that we haven't emphasized so much on the podcast, much on the podcast, much on the podcast, um and by the way, thanks to some great and by the way, thanks to some great and by the way, thanks to some great therapy and that was not voluntary. I therapy and that was not voluntary. I therapy and that was not voluntary. I was able to, you know, I was a wild kid, was able to, you know, I was a wild kid, was able to, you know, I was a wild kid, a wild kid, hung around wild kids a wild kid, hung around wild kids a wild kid, hung around wild kids and things were pretty different then and we things were pretty different then and we things were pretty different then and we worked it out, you know, but I think worked it out, you know, but I think worked it out, you know, but I think nowadays it's wonderful because I think nowadays it's wonderful because I think nowadays it's wonderful because I think people are more conscious of um the need people are more conscious of um the need people are more conscious of um the need to understand their nervous system, to understand their nervous system, to understand their nervous system, their own psychology. That wasn't as their own psychology. That wasn't as their own psychology. That wasn't as common back then. Um in fact, I hid common back then. Um in fact, I hid common back then. Um in fact, I hid the fact that I had to do therapy for a the fact that I had to do therapy for a the fact that I had to do therapy for a long time thinking, "Wow, like long time thinking, "Wow, like long time thinking, "Wow, like everyone's going to think I'm crazy." everyone's going to think I'm crazy." everyone's going to think I'm crazy." They did call me crazy. You know, I They did call me crazy. You know, I They did call me crazy. You know, I think things have really changed. I think things have really changed. I think things have really changed. I think the last 20 years have brought think the last 20 years have brought think the last 20 years have brought about a profound shift in the way that about a profound shift in the way that about a profound shift in the way that we think about our own species and what we think about our own species and what we think about our own species and what are useful tools and practices. And what are useful tools and practices. And what are useful tools and practices. And I think that I think that I think that one of the things that is abundantly one of the things that is abundantly one of the things that is abundantly clear is that is that is that threshold for a stress response that threshold for a stress response that threshold for a stress response really is really is really is different for different people, different for different people, different for different people, different in different situations, but different in different situations, but different in different situations, but that it is something that can be um that it is something that can be um that it is something that can be um practiced and elevated. And um practiced and elevated. And um practiced and elevated. And um it in terms of not getting near that it in terms of not getting near that it in terms of not getting near that trigger point uh through the types of trigger point uh through the types of trigger point uh through the types of practices I talked about earlier, practices I talked about earlier, practices I talked about earlier, getting more comfortable with adrenaline getting more comfortable with adrenaline getting more comfortable with adrenaline circulating in your system is what it's circulating in your system is what it's circulating in your system is what it's really about, frankly. But of course, it really about, frankly. But of course, it really about, frankly. But of course, it all starts with a good night's sleep, all starts with a good night's sleep, all starts with a good night's sleep, right? It's going to make you far less right? It's going to make you far less right? It's going to make you far less reactive. But of course, when you're reactive. But of course, when you're reactive. But of course, when you're stressed, that's stressed, that's stressed, that's often when you're not getting good often when you're not getting good often when you're not getting good sleep. So, I think that ultimately that sleep. So, I think that ultimately that sleep. So, I think that ultimately that our ability to our ability to our ability to as you know, as you know, as you know, more emotional resilience and effective more emotional resilience and effective more emotional resilience and effective responses during triggering situations responses during triggering situations responses during triggering situations is really the consequence of practices is really the consequence of practices is really the consequence of practices of taking good care outside of those of taking good care outside of those of taking good care outside of those situations. And then of course, situations. And then of course, situations. And then of course, inevitably there will be situations inevitably there will be situations inevitably there will be situations where people get triggered. And uh it's where people get triggered. And uh it's where people get triggered. And uh it's actually interesting to see the way that actually interesting to see the way that actually interesting to see the way that people behave online and the fact that, people behave online and the fact that, people behave online and the fact that, you know, many people, in fact, in you know, many people, in fact, in you know, many people, in fact, in science as well, have literally lost science as well, have literally lost science as well, have literally lost their jobs for having, you know, not their jobs for having, you know, not their jobs for having, you know, not being able to control their thumbs. being able to control their thumbs. being able to control their thumbs. It's kind of we're in an odd time where It's kind of we're in an odd time where It's kind of we're in an odd time where there's the distancing of doing there's the distancing of doing there's the distancing of doing things online as opposed to in person things online as opposed to in person things online as opposed to in person where people somehow engage in saying where people somehow engage in saying where people somehow engage in saying things and doing things that they things and doing things that they things and doing things that they wouldn't in person. But I think that wouldn't in person. But I think that wouldn't in person. But I think that ultimately it's the consequence of ultimately it's the consequence of ultimately it's the consequence of good self-care. And this gets actually good self-care. And this gets actually good self-care. And this gets actually back to some of the things that are back to some of the things that are back to some of the things that are covered in the Contemplative Series. You covered in the Contemplative Series. You covered in the Contemplative Series. You know, we hear about self-care as we know, we hear about self-care as we know, we hear about self-care as we think that means massages, which are think that means massages, which are think that means massages, which are great, by the way, and we think that great, by the way, and we think that great, by the way, and we think that is about exercise, and that's that is about exercise, and that's that is about exercise, and that's wonderful. But, much of self-care is wonderful. But, much of self-care is wonderful. But, much of self-care is about really making sure that our about really making sure that our about really making sure that our nervous system is in the state that we nervous system is in the state that we nervous system is in the state that we need it to be in order to go about need it to be in order to go about need it to be in order to go about our day. And I think this is why morning our day. And I think this is why morning our day. And I think this is why morning routines and practices are so vital. I routines and practices are so vital. I routines and practices are so vital. I think that those set the stage for the think that those set the stage for the think that those set the stage for the emotional resilience. Those set the emotional resilience. Those set the emotional resilience. Those set the stage for avoiding getting triggered, so stage for avoiding getting triggered, so stage for avoiding getting triggered, so to speak. I don't think there's a lot to speak. I don't think there's a lot to speak. I don't think there's a lot that one can do in real time, except that one can do in real time, except that one can do in real time, except perhaps physiological sighs. perhaps physiological sighs. perhaps physiological sighs. So, sorry to give you a sort of empty So, sorry to give you a sort of empty So, sorry to give you a sort of empty answer. I'm not a pessimist on this answer. I'm not a pessimist on this answer. I'm not a pessimist on this front, but it's I think that ultimately, front, but it's I think that ultimately, front, but it's I think that ultimately, it's like saying, "Well, what if you it's like saying, "Well, what if you it's like saying, "Well, what if you have to scale the side of a building to have to scale the side of a building to have to scale the side of a building to get in?" You locked yourself out. You get in?" You locked yourself out. You get in?" You locked yourself out. You know, what can you do to prepare for know, what can you do to prepare for know, what can you do to prepare for that? Well, you can buy a ladder, but if that? Well, you can buy a ladder, but if that? Well, you can buy a ladder, but if you don't have a ladder, you know, what you don't have a ladder, you know, what you don't have a ladder, you know, what cuz what you probably should do is be cuz what you probably should do is be cuz what you probably should do is be able to climb up a railing or something able to climb up a railing or something able to climb up a railing or something like that, and know how to pick a lock like that, and know how to pick a lock like that, and know how to pick a lock or something like that. So, or something like that. So, or something like that. So, I think ultimately, that it's the I think ultimately, that it's the I think ultimately, that it's the consequence of stuff that's done away consequence of stuff that's done away consequence of stuff that's done away from those triggering situations. Next question, please. How would you describe the brain How would you describe the brain How would you describe the brain activity of somebody when they're activity of somebody when they're activity of somebody when they're suddenly inspired, and how to foster suddenly inspired, and how to foster suddenly inspired, and how to foster inspiration in your life? Well, I talked inspiration in your life? Well, I talked inspiration in your life? Well, I talked a little bit about this, but I will a little bit about this, but I will a little bit about this, but I will say that the best way to foster say that the best way to foster say that the best way to foster inspiration is, in the words of the inspiration is, in the words of the inspiration is, in the words of the great Joe Strummer, they actually call great Joe Strummer, they actually call great Joe Strummer, they actually call it Strummer's Law, no joke. it Strummer's Law, no joke. it Strummer's Law, no joke. No input, no output. I think one of the No input, no output. I think one of the No input, no output. I think one of the things that I've observed over and over things that I've observed over and over things that I've observed over and over again is that again is that again is that as much as we need to dedicate ourselves as much as we need to dedicate ourselves as much as we need to dedicate ourselves to our craft, to our families, to our to our craft, to our families, to our to our craft, to our families, to our friends, that ultimately, our friends, that ultimately, our friends, that ultimately, our best ideas come from disparate best ideas come from disparate best ideas come from disparate experiences, when we're not seeking a experiences, when we're not seeking a experiences, when we're not seeking a particular kind of input to get ideas. particular kind of input to get ideas. particular kind of input to get ideas. Now, maybe this practice of being Now, maybe this practice of being Now, maybe this practice of being completely still while being alert completely still while being alert completely still while being alert fosters a lot of fosters a lot of fosters a lot of I think the way I understand it is I think the way I understand it is I think the way I understand it is more of a geysering up of more of a geysering up of more of a geysering up of stored information in the of stored information in the of stored information in the unconscious. That's how I think Rick would talk about That's how I think Rick would talk about That's how I think Rick would talk about it or Paul Conti would talk about it as it or Paul Conti would talk about it as it or Paul Conti would talk about it as geysering up from the unconscious geysering up from the unconscious geysering up from the unconscious because when we are because when we are because when we are focused on the outside world, we're focused on the outside world, we're focused on the outside world, we're taking in sensory information or taking in sensory information or taking in sensory information or exteroception as opposed to exteroception as opposed to exteroception as opposed to interoception. And of course, that external inform- of course, that external inform- of course, that external inform- sensory information, that no input, no sensory information, that no input, no sensory information, that no input, no output, is that those are the raw output, is that those are the raw output, is that those are the raw materials that our nervous system uses materials that our nervous system uses materials that our nervous system uses to construct ideas about anything. So, to construct ideas about anything. So, to construct ideas about anything. So, my belief, and this is a practice I do belief, and this is a practice I do belief, and this is a practice I do every week, is I make sure that at least every week, is I make sure that at least every week, is I make sure that at least once a week I either walk or hike or run once a week I either walk or hike or run once a week I either walk or hike or run without any earphones, and I'm trying to without any earphones, and I'm trying to without any earphones, and I'm trying to get into states of wordlessness, states get into states of wordlessness, states get into states of wordlessness, states where I'm not where I'm not where I'm not digesting a podcast, where I'm not digesting a podcast, where I'm not digesting a podcast, where I'm not reading a book, where I'm not listening reading a book, where I'm not listening reading a book, where I'm not listening to a lecture, where I'm not in to a lecture, where I'm not in to a lecture, where I'm not in conversation, and essentially trying to conversation, and essentially trying to conversation, and essentially trying to turn off the linguistic narrative. turn off the linguistic narrative. turn off the linguistic narrative. All right, we are a storytelling All right, we are a storytelling All right, we are a storytelling species. We tend to take all our all of our We tend to take all our all of our We tend to take all our all of our internal and external experience and internal and external experience and internal and external experience and construct things around language, but construct things around language, but construct things around language, but language is not spoken language is not language is not spoken language is not language is not spoken language is not the language of the nervous system. the language of the nervous system. the language of the nervous system. The language of the nervous system still The language of the nervous system still The language of the nervous system still remains to be identified. It's something remains to be identified. It's something remains to be identified. It's something else. For people that think in feels, it else. For people that think in feels, it else. For people that think in feels, it will certainly incorporate that. Spoken will certainly incorporate that. Spoken will certainly incorporate that. Spoken language, which of course is important, language, which of course is important, language, which of course is important, and we have some core structures to and we have some core structures to and we have some core structures to spoken language. We covered this in the spoken language. We covered this in the spoken language. We covered this in the podcast episode with my friend Eddie podcast episode with my friend Eddie podcast episode with my friend Eddie Chang. But, ultimately But, ultimately But, ultimately the way to come up with the way to come up with the way to come up with new ideas or inspiration is going to be new ideas or inspiration is going to be new ideas or inspiration is going to be to collect the raw materials of to collect the raw materials of to collect the raw materials of experience and then give ourselves these experience and then give ourselves these experience and then give ourselves these periods, maybe even just 5, 10 minutes. periods, maybe even just 5, 10 minutes. periods, maybe even just 5, 10 minutes. You don't have to lay around half the You don't have to lay around half the You don't have to lay around half the day doing nothing, still wide awake, and day doing nothing, still wide awake, and day doing nothing, still wide awake, and give that give that give that those raw materials the opportunity to those raw materials the opportunity to those raw materials the opportunity to marinate and combine in whatever ways to marinate and combine in whatever ways to marinate and combine in whatever ways that are unique to you and then to that are unique to you and then to that are unique to you and then to geyser up. geyser up. geyser up. What inspiration looks like in the brain What inspiration looks like in the brain What inspiration looks like in the brain we don't really know. we don't really know. we don't really know. There's awe. There's some studies about There's awe. There's some studies about There's awe. There's some studies about awe, but that's different. I the awe, but that's different. I the awe, but that's different. I the word that better comes to mind is word that better comes to mind is word that better comes to mind is delight. Awe ten in my mind is something delight. Awe ten in my mind is something delight. Awe ten in my mind is something that we witness that sort of that we witness that sort of that we witness that sort of overwhelms our attention. Like wow. overwhelms our attention. Like wow. overwhelms our attention. Like wow. Delight is when it somehow links up with Delight is when it somehow links up with Delight is when it somehow links up with our own internal narrative. Like I have our own internal narrative. Like I have our own internal narrative. Like I have something to do with what's happening. something to do with what's happening. something to do with what's happening. I'm not just here to witness it. You I'm not just here to witness it. You I'm not just here to witness it. You know, a firework show, really impressive know, a firework show, really impressive know, a firework show, really impressive firework show is like awe. But there's firework show is like awe. But there's firework show is like awe. But there's nothing to do about it. nothing to do about it. nothing to do about it. It doesn't relate to anything about you It doesn't relate to anything about you It doesn't relate to anything about you really. You're a purely a spectator. really. You're a purely a spectator. really. You're a purely a spectator. Whereas delight is when you see Whereas delight is when you see Whereas delight is when you see something and it somehow links to something and it somehow links to something and it somehow links to something in your emotional or personal something in your emotional or personal something in your emotional or personal history or history or history or how you're wired. But now there's how you're wired. But now there's how you're wired. But now there's something to do about it. That's something to do about it. That's something to do about it. That's inspiration. And we don't understand inspiration. And we don't understand inspiration. And we don't understand where that exists in the brain or what where that exists in the brain or what where that exists in the brain or what that looks like. But I think we all that looks like. But I think we all that looks like. But I think we all recognize that feeling when it happens recognize that feeling when it happens recognize that feeling when it happens and it's oh so wonderful. and it's oh so wonderful. and it's oh so wonderful. Okay. Next question, please. How can Okay. Next question, please. How can Okay. Next question, please. How can Canadians fight the seasonal depression? Canadians fight the seasonal depression? Canadians fight the seasonal depression? Winters are too long here. Winters are too long here. Winters are too long here. Okay. Well, this gives me an opportunity to Well, this gives me an opportunity to Well, this gives me an opportunity to share with you what I think is one of share with you what I think is one of share with you what I think is one of the coolest things about our species. the coolest things about our species. the coolest things about our species. Um notice I say that about many things. Um notice I say that about many things. Um notice I say that about many things. Um so we've talked about circadian Um so we've talked about circadian Um so we've talked about circadian rhythms, right? Sun rises, sun sets. And rhythms, right? Sun rises, sun sets. And rhythms, right? Sun rises, sun sets. And we get that information transmitted into we get that information transmitted into we get that information transmitted into our nervous system by looking at the our nervous system by looking at the our nervous system by looking at the sunrise. By the way, you don't have to sunrise. By the way, you don't have to sunrise. By the way, you don't have to watch the sun cross the horizon. It just watch the sun cross the horizon. It just watch the sun cross the horizon. It just needs to be low solar angle. needs to be low solar angle. needs to be low solar angle. Low in the sky. Once it's overhead, it's Low in the sky. Once it's overhead, it's Low in the sky. Once it's overhead, it's a different signal. So low solar angle. a different signal. So low solar angle. a different signal. So low solar angle. That's what it's about. It's not That's what it's about. It's not That's what it's about. It's not necessarily about seeing the sun cross necessarily about seeing the sun cross necessarily about seeing the sun cross the horizon. By the way, someone the horizon. By the way, someone the horizon. By the way, someone the other day on my team said, "Wait, won't other day on my team said, "Wait, won't other day on my team said, "Wait, won't you get cataracts if you look at the you get cataracts if you look at the you get cataracts if you look at the sun?" Low solar angle sunlight is very sun?" Low solar angle sunlight is very sun?" Low solar angle sunlight is very unlikely to cause cataracts, especially unlikely to cause cataracts, especially unlikely to cause cataracts, especially if you're just doing it 10 to 30 if you're just doing it 10 to 30 if you're just doing it 10 to 30 minutes. That solar, you know, the sun minutes. That solar, you know, the sun minutes. That solar, you know, the sun overhead is when it's quite bright. Yes, overhead is when it's quite bright. Yes, overhead is when it's quite bright. Yes, indeed, some people are going to be at indeed, some people are going to be at indeed, some people are going to be at risk for cataracts. So, risk for cataracts. So, risk for cataracts. So, um ophthalmologists in the audience can um ophthalmologists in the audience can um ophthalmologists in the audience can attack me for that one, but it was our attack me for that one, but it was our attack me for that one, but it was our chair of ophthalmology at Stanford that chair of ophthalmology at Stanford that chair of ophthalmology at Stanford that said it, so I'm going to trust him. said it, so I'm going to trust him. said it, so I'm going to trust him. Okay. That's circadian 24-hour rhythms, but That's circadian 24-hour rhythms, but That's circadian 24-hour rhythms, but there's also these circannual rhythms. there's also these circannual rhythms. there's also these circannual rhythms. So, if you're at a fairly northern So, if you're at a fairly northern So, if you're at a fairly northern location on the planet, location on the planet, location on the planet, nights get very long, days get short in nights get very long, days get short in nights get very long, days get short in winter. What happens then? Well, melatonin, the What happens then? Well, melatonin, the What happens then? Well, melatonin, the hormone of darkness, right, is hormone of darkness, right, is hormone of darkness, right, is essentially obliterated by light, by essentially obliterated by light, by essentially obliterated by light, by sunlight. So, what's happening when days sunlight. So, what's happening when days sunlight. So, what's happening when days are, you know, 12 hours long, are, you know, 12 hours long, are, you know, 12 hours long, you have very little melatonin. The you have very little melatonin. The you have very little melatonin. The duration of the melatonin signal is very duration of the melatonin signal is very duration of the melatonin signal is very short. Then as you proceed into the short. Then as you proceed into the short. Then as you proceed into the fall, days are getting shorter, nights fall, days are getting shorter, nights fall, days are getting shorter, nights are getting longer, the duration of the are getting longer, the duration of the are getting longer, the duration of the melatonin signal is getting longer and melatonin signal is getting longer and melatonin signal is getting longer and longer. Then is, of course, in winter, there's a Then is, of course, in winter, there's a Then is, of course, in winter, there's a lot more darkness. lot more darkness. lot more darkness. Melatonin signals are very long. Melatonin signals are very long. Melatonin signals are very long. Daylight signals are very short because Daylight signals are very short because Daylight signals are very short because the days are short. So, you could say, the days are short. So, you could say, the days are short. So, you could say, "Okay, well, that's obvious. Thank "Okay, well, that's obvious. Thank "Okay, well, that's obvious. Thank goodness." But, what that means is incredible. What that what that means is incredible. What that what that means is incredible. What that means is that you have a hormone, means is that you have a hormone, means is that you have a hormone, melatonin, that's secreted from your melatonin, that's secreted from your melatonin, that's secreted from your pineal gland, which Descartes called the pineal gland, which Descartes called the pineal gland, which Descartes called the seat of the soul, seat of the soul, seat of the soul, cuz there's only one of them in the cuz there's only one of them in the cuz there's only one of them in the brain. I don't know how he came up with that I don't know how he came up with that I don't know how he came up with that one, but one, but one, but the pineal secretes melatonin, and it the pineal secretes melatonin, and it the pineal secretes melatonin, and it sec- and it you suppress melatonin sec- and it you suppress melatonin sec- and it you suppress melatonin secretion with sunlight viewing. There's secretion with sunlight viewing. There's secretion with sunlight viewing. There's a couple of synapses in between the eye a couple of synapses in between the eye a couple of synapses in between the eye and the pineal, but it gets there, up and the pineal, but it gets there, up and the pineal, but it gets there, up through the neck, basically, the through the neck, basically, the through the neck, basically, the cervical ganglia. cervical ganglia. cervical ganglia. What's wild, What's wild, What's wild, therefore, is that the location of the therefore, is that the location of the therefore, is that the location of the Earth around the Sun and the tilt of the Earth around the Sun and the tilt of the Earth around the Sun and the tilt of the Earth is translated Earth is translated Earth is translated into a neural and then a hormonal signal into a neural and then a hormonal signal into a neural and then a hormonal signal in your brain, which to me is amazing. in your brain, which to me is amazing. in your brain, which to me is amazing. That literally means that the That literally means that the That literally means that the position of the Earth around the Sun and position of the Earth around the Sun and position of the Earth around the Sun and its tilt its tilt its tilt are translated into a physiological are translated into a physiological are translated into a physiological signal that's working unconsciously to signal that's working unconsciously to signal that's working unconsciously to tell your tell your tell your brain and body what time of year it is, brain and body what time of year it is, brain and body what time of year it is, but it doesn't care what time of year it but it doesn't care what time of year it but it doesn't care what time of year it is. It cares about where you are in this is. It cares about where you are in this is. It cares about where you are in this orbit about the Sun. orbit about the Sun. orbit about the Sun. So, if you think about when days are say 8 if you think about when days are say 8 if you think about when days are say 8 hours long hours long hours long in the fall in the fall in the fall versus 8 hours long in the spring, versus 8 hours long in the spring, versus 8 hours long in the spring, what's different? what's different? what's different? What's different is how long the signal What's different is how long the signal What's different is how long the signal was the day before. So, the seasonal was the day before. So, the seasonal was the day before. So, the seasonal depression we now know is the depression we now know is the depression we now know is the consequence of the melatonin signal consequence of the melatonin signal consequence of the melatonin signal getting longer, not an absolute duration getting longer, not an absolute duration getting longer, not an absolute duration of the melatonin signal. In other words, of the melatonin signal. In other words, of the melatonin signal. In other words, in the spring when a day is 8 hours long, the spring when a day is 8 hours long, the spring when a day is 8 hours long, but yesterday the day was 7 hours and 48 but yesterday the day was 7 hours and 48 but yesterday the day was 7 hours and 48 minutes long, minutes long, minutes long, your brain has a memory of how much your brain has a memory of how much your brain has a memory of how much melatonin was released the day before, melatonin was released the day before, melatonin was released the day before, much more than that particular day. So, much more than that particular day. So, much more than that particular day. So, it's a slow integrating clock. So, this it's a slow integrating clock. So, this it's a slow integrating clock. So, this is a very roundabout way for me to teach is a very roundabout way for me to teach is a very roundabout way for me to teach you about the melatonin seasonal rhythm you about the melatonin seasonal rhythm you about the melatonin seasonal rhythm cycle and answer the question directly cycle and answer the question directly cycle and answer the question directly by saying, if you want to offset by saying, if you want to offset by saying, if you want to offset seasonal depression, what you want to do seasonal depression, what you want to do seasonal depression, what you want to do is extend the amount of bright light is extend the amount of bright light is extend the amount of bright light that you're getting in the morning that you're getting in the morning that you're getting in the morning slightly as days get shorter. But, it's slightly as days get shorter. But, it's slightly as days get shorter. But, it's the extension of the bright light the extension of the bright light the extension of the bright light exposure, and if you can't do that with exposure, and if you can't do that with exposure, and if you can't do that with sunlight because there's no sunlight cuz sunlight because there's no sunlight cuz sunlight because there's no sunlight cuz you live in Toronto, not Toronto, you live in Toronto, not Toronto, you live in Toronto, not Toronto, what you want to do is find some what you want to do is find some what you want to do is find some artificial source that you can look at artificial source that you can look at artificial source that you can look at in the morning before you leave your in the morning before you leave your in the morning before you leave your home. And I haven't talked too much home. And I haven't talked too much home. And I haven't talked too much about this on the podcast because our about this on the podcast because our about this on the podcast because our listeners are extended around the globe listeners are extended around the globe listeners are extended around the globe and not just in and not just in and not just in um northern locations, but what this northern locations, but what this northern locations, but what this essentially means is getting maybe essentially means is getting maybe essentially means is getting maybe two to three minutes of bright light two to three minutes of bright light two to three minutes of bright light exposure as you're heading from fall exposure as you're heading from fall exposure as you're heading from fall into winter. Bright light from an into winter. Bright light from an into winter. Bright light from an artificial source. You do not need to artificial source. You do not need to artificial source. You do not need to purchase a so-called SAD lamp, one of purchase a so-called SAD lamp, one of purchase a so-called SAD lamp, one of these very expensive seasonal affect these very expensive seasonal affect these very expensive seasonal affect depression lamps. You can what I did was I lamps. You can what I did was I lamps. You can what I did was I purchased because I'm very sensitive to purchased because I'm very sensitive to purchased because I'm very sensitive to seasonal changes in light even though I seasonal changes in light even though I seasonal changes in light even though I don't live very far north is you can get don't live very far north is you can get don't live very far north is you can get a 900 lux drawing tablet. These are a 900 lux drawing tablet. These are a 900 lux drawing tablet. These are quite inexpensive. They're not zero cost quite inexpensive. They're not zero cost quite inexpensive. They're not zero cost but quite inexpensive and just put that but quite inexpensive and just put that but quite inexpensive and just put that on your desk or on your wherever you on your desk or on your wherever you on your desk or on your wherever you make your coffee in the morning 90 make your coffee in the morning 90 make your coffee in the morning 90 minutes after you wake up. minutes after you wake up. minutes after you wake up. This sort of thing and just get five or This sort of thing and just get five or This sort of thing and just get five or so minutes before you leave the house. so minutes before you leave the house. so minutes before you leave the house. And then as you extend into the winter, And then as you extend into the winter, And then as you extend into the winter, you don't have to be neurotic about you don't have to be neurotic about you don't have to be neurotic about increasing the duration every day. increasing the duration every day. increasing the duration every day. You could actually the way these You could actually the way these You could actually the way these slow integrating clocks work, you could slow integrating clocks work, you could slow integrating clocks work, you could actually even just hold it a little bit actually even just hold it a little bit actually even just hold it a little bit closer each day. Don't burn your closer each day. Don't burn your closer each day. Don't burn your eyeballs out. eyeballs out. eyeballs out. Um a little bit closer each day, but Um a little bit closer each day, but Um a little bit closer each day, but essentially if you just dose yourself essentially if you just dose yourself essentially if you just dose yourself with a little bit more bright light with a little bit more bright light with a little bit more bright light early in the day as you extend into early in the day as you extend into early in the day as you extend into winter, that will essentially trick the winter, that will essentially trick the winter, that will essentially trick the melatonin system into thinking that the melatonin system into thinking that the melatonin system into thinking that you're going from 8 hours into 10 hours you're going from 8 hours into 10 hours you're going from 8 hours into 10 hours of light as opposed to 8 hours into 6 of light as opposed to 8 hours into 6 of light as opposed to 8 hours into 6 hours of light. Okay? Very simple and if hours of light. Okay? Very simple and if hours of light. Okay? Very simple and if you can't get one of these 900 lux you can't get one of these 900 lux you can't get one of these 900 lux tablets or something off a website, then tablets or something off a website, then tablets or something off a website, then you could do this with any bright you could do this with any bright you could do this with any bright incandescent bulb incandescent bulb incandescent bulb should work. should work. should work. Again, just be careful not to put it Again, just be careful not to put it Again, just be careful not to put it directly against your eyeball. directly against your eyeball. directly against your eyeball. Okay, next question, please. Okay, next question, please. Okay, next question, please. How do you increase neuroplasticity? How do you increase neuroplasticity? How do you increase neuroplasticity? Well, this is an opportunity to Well, this is an opportunity to Well, this is an opportunity to talk about something talk about something talk about something I should have said earlier, which is I should have said earlier, which is I should have said earlier, which is that ultimately whether or not you are that ultimately whether or not you are that ultimately whether or not you are triggering neuroplasticity through triggering neuroplasticity through triggering neuroplasticity through elevated focus or whether or not you're elevated focus or whether or not you're elevated focus or whether or not you're taking high-dose psilocybin, taking high-dose psilocybin, taking high-dose psilocybin, your business, not mine. your business, not mine. your business, not mine. Um and we can talk about psychedelics if Um and we can talk about psychedelics if Um and we can talk about psychedelics if you want. you want. you want. Um, just decriminalized in California or Um, just decriminalized in California or Um, just decriminalized in California or soon to be decriminalized. soon to be decriminalized. soon to be decriminalized. Cool. People are enthusiastic. Yeah, the Cool. People are enthusiastic. Yeah, the Cool. People are enthusiastic. Yeah, the one thing one thing one thing I've been pretty um vocal about my I've been pretty um vocal about my I've been pretty um vocal about my belief that the data are really belief that the data are really belief that the data are really interesting, to say the least, about um, interesting, to say the least, about um, interesting, to say the least, about um, not microdosing. By the way, there not microdosing. By the way, there not microdosing. By the way, there there's not a lot of evidence that there's not a lot of evidence that there's not a lot of evidence that microdosing is useful. I'm not saying microdosing is useful. I'm not saying microdosing is useful. I'm not saying it's not, but there are not a lot of it's not, but there are not a lot of it's not, but there are not a lot of clinical trials so showing that. But the clinical trials so showing that. But the clinical trials so showing that. But the two macrodose with effective two macrodose with effective two macrodose with effective therapeutic support um, therapeutic support um, therapeutic support um, trials are very encouraging not just for trials are very encouraging not just for trials are very encouraging not just for major depression, but also for various major depression, but also for various major depression, but also for various eating disorders, alcohol uh, use eating disorders, alcohol uh, use eating disorders, alcohol uh, use disorder, which is by the way that the disorder, which is by the way that the disorder, which is by the way that the term that people are starting to shift term that people are starting to shift term that people are starting to shift to as opposed to alcoholism or alcoholic to as opposed to alcoholism or alcoholic to as opposed to alcoholism or alcoholic is now alcohol use disorder. is now alcohol use disorder. is now alcohol use disorder. Um, which is not to be politically correct, which is not to be politically correct, which is not to be politically correct, but just so you understand what they're but just so you understand what they're but just so you understand what they're talking about when they're talking about talking about when they're talking about talking about when they're talking about alcohol use disorder. alcohol use disorder. alcohol use disorder. Uh, whether or not psilocybin, whether or whether or not psilocybin, whether or whether or not psilocybin, whether or not it's MDMA, whether or not it's not it's MDMA, whether or not it's not it's MDMA, whether or not it's frustration brought about by your frustration brought about by your frustration brought about by your inability to play an instrument and, inability to play an instrument and, inability to play an instrument and, you know, your determination to do you know, your determination to do you know, your determination to do so, it's in the end it's all about so, it's in the end it's all about so, it's in the end it's all about deployment of these neuromodulators. deployment of these neuromodulators. deployment of these neuromodulators. Neuromodulators being some combination Neuromodulators being some combination Neuromodulators being some combination of dopamine, serotonin, of dopamine, serotonin, of dopamine, serotonin, uh, acetylcholine, or epinephrine. uh, acetylcholine, or epinephrine. uh, acetylcholine, or epinephrine. Again, usually in combination. What's Again, usually in combination. What's Again, usually in combination. What's very clear is that the neuroplastic very clear is that the neuroplastic very clear is that the neuroplastic effects of MDMA, the neuroplastic effects of MDMA, the neuroplastic effects of MDMA, the neuroplastic effects of psilocybin are brought about effects of psilocybin are brought about effects of psilocybin are brought about by huge increases in serotonin. by huge increases in serotonin. by huge increases in serotonin. This is also can help us understand why This is also can help us understand why This is also can help us understand why for some years, and to some extent still for some years, and to some extent still for some years, and to some extent still now, it was thought that the SSRIs, the now, it was thought that the SSRIs, the now, it was thought that the SSRIs, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, would be good treatments for depression. would be good treatments for depression. would be good treatments for depression. I think some people, by the way, have I think some people, by the way, have I think some people, by the way, have experienced tremendous relief from the experienced tremendous relief from the experienced tremendous relief from the SSRIs. We don't want to demonize them. SSRIs. We don't want to demonize them. SSRIs. We don't want to demonize them. Uh, at the same time, it's very clear Uh, at the same time, it's very clear Uh, at the same time, it's very clear that depression is not simply low levels that depression is not simply low levels that depression is not simply low levels of serotonin. That's also not true. of serotonin. That's also not true. of serotonin. That's also not true. Um, hence why there are effective Um, hence why there are effective Um, hence why there are effective in some people antidepressants like in some people antidepressants like in some people antidepressants like bupropion that increase bupropion that increase bupropion that increase dopamine and epinephrine and not dopamine and epinephrine and not dopamine and epinephrine and not serotonin. The point here is that these serotonin. The point here is that these serotonin. The point here is that these neuromodulators, as they're called, neuromodulators, as they're called, neuromodulators, as they're called, allow for what? They allow for allow for what? They allow for allow for what? They allow for modulation of synapses, which modulation of synapses, which modulation of synapses, which effectively allows for neuroplasticity. effectively allows for neuroplasticity. effectively allows for neuroplasticity. I mean, ultimately, whether or not it's I mean, ultimately, whether or not it's I mean, ultimately, whether or not it's through talk therapy, Kundalini through talk therapy, Kundalini through talk therapy, Kundalini breathing, uh you know, high-dose psilocybin, MDMA, or you know, high-dose psilocybin, MDMA, or you know, high-dose psilocybin, MDMA, or the combination, which I think is called the combination, which I think is called the combination, which I think is called a hippie flip. Um a hippie flip. Um a hippie flip. Um Never done them together. I confess, Never done them together. I confess, Never done them together. I confess, never done them together. never done them together. never done them together. Um but have done them. but have done them. but have done them. Um it with a clinician, by the way, in Um it with a clinician, by the way, in Um it with a clinician, by the way, in legal circumstances, and not a lot, um legal circumstances, and not a lot, um legal circumstances, and not a lot, um not often, that is. Um not often, that is. Um not often, that is. Um it it's very clear that it's opening it it's very clear that it's opening it it's very clear that it's opening windows for plasticity. Now, what's windows for plasticity. Now, what's windows for plasticity. Now, what's intriguing, if we're going to just talk intriguing, if we're going to just talk intriguing, if we're going to just talk about psychedelics for a second, is why about psychedelics for a second, is why about psychedelics for a second, is why a drug like MDMA, which increases a drug like MDMA, which increases a drug like MDMA, which increases dopamine, which by the way, MDMA is dopamine, which by the way, MDMA is dopamine, which by the way, MDMA is methylenedioxy-methamphetamine. Don't let anybody tell you it's Don't let anybody tell you it's Don't let anybody tell you it's something there. It's meth. something there. It's meth. something there. It's meth. It's meth, but it's meth with a lot of It's meth, but it's meth with a lot of It's meth, but it's meth with a lot of serotonin thrown in there, too. serotonin thrown in there, too. serotonin thrown in there, too. But it's meth. But it's meth. But it's meth. And it's clear that for the treatment of And it's clear that for the treatment of And it's clear that for the treatment of PTSD, it holds promise. It's not PTSD, it holds promise. It's not PTSD, it holds promise. It's not absolutely safe, uh especially for absolutely safe, uh especially for absolutely safe, uh especially for people with cardiac conditions. And you people with cardiac conditions. And you people with cardiac conditions. And you If you're going to go down that path, If you're going to go down that path, If you're going to go down that path, you want and need a skilled guide, and you want and need a skilled guide, and you want and need a skilled guide, and this is where I think the laws are this is where I think the laws are this is where I think the laws are really going to have to really going to have to really going to have to um pay careful attention to what who and um pay careful attention to what who and um pay careful attention to what who and what is a skilled guide. Okay? Um and what is a skilled guide. Okay? Um and what is a skilled guide. Okay? Um and when it comes to psilocybin, when it comes to psilocybin, when it comes to psilocybin, the serotonin increase is what the serotonin increase is what the serotonin increase is what effectively causes broader connectivity effectively causes broader connectivity effectively causes broader connectivity in the brain. And what's interesting is in the brain. And what's interesting is in the brain. And what's interesting is that both of those drugs increase that both of those drugs increase that both of those drugs increase plasticity mainly through increases in plasticity mainly through increases in plasticity mainly through increases in serotonin, but working on very different serotonin, but working on very different serotonin, but working on very different receptors. So, they have different types receptors. So, they have different types receptors. So, they have different types and outputs of plasticity. What's and outputs of plasticity. What's and outputs of plasticity. What's interesting to me is that, because I'm a interesting to me is that, because I'm a interesting to me is that, because I'm a strong believer that children should not strong believer that children should not strong believer that children should not be doing psychedelics, nor should we be doing psychedelics, nor should we be doing psychedelics, nor should we be giving children psychedelics is that the giving children psychedelics is that the giving children psychedelics is that the increases in connectivity in the increases in connectivity in the increases in connectivity in the brain that are the consequence of brain that are the consequence of brain that are the consequence of playing a musical instrument or ideally playing a musical instrument or ideally playing a musical instrument or ideally an instrument with others as a child an instrument with others as a child an instrument with others as a child mimic a lot of the broader scale mimic a lot of the broader scale mimic a lot of the broader scale connectivity sort of called so-called connectivity sort of called so-called connectivity sort of called so-called resting network connectivity that occurs resting network connectivity that occurs resting network connectivity that occurs when people take psychedelics as adults. when people take psychedelics as adults. when people take psychedelics as adults. In other words, and I can't emphasize In other words, and I can't emphasize In other words, and I can't emphasize this enough, and again, I failed at this enough, and again, I failed at this enough, and again, I failed at music miserably. I'll tell you the story music miserably. I'll tell you the story music miserably. I'll tell you the story about that in a second. But so about that in a second. But so about that in a second. But so getting kids to play an instrument getting kids to play an instrument getting kids to play an instrument is it's very clear and improves their is it's very clear and improves their is it's very clear and improves their ability to learn all sorts of things for ability to learn all sorts of things for ability to learn all sorts of things for their entire life. It's just so their entire life. It's just so their entire life. It's just so important. I don't really know what to important. I don't really know what to important. I don't really know what to do about this or who to shout out or do about this or who to shout out or do about this or who to shout out or talk to about keeping the arts active in talk to about keeping the arts active in talk to about keeping the arts active in schools as and physical education, in schools as and physical education, in schools as and physical education, but the idea that we would just train but the idea that we would just train but the idea that we would just train kids in math is just frightening because kids in math is just frightening because kids in math is just frightening because if you want them to be truly good at if you want them to be truly good at if you want them to be truly good at math and science, you'd also have them math and science, you'd also have them math and science, you'd also have them play instruments. By the way, when I was play instruments. By the way, when I was play instruments. By the way, when I was a kid, I played the violin. My parents a kid, I played the violin. My parents a kid, I played the violin. My parents made me. made me. made me. It was not the instrument I wanted to It was not the instrument I wanted to It was not the instrument I wanted to play, and we have only one picture, and play, and we have only one picture, and play, and we have only one picture, and it was a they taught me the Suzuki it was a they taught me the Suzuki it was a they taught me the Suzuki method. You're supposed to learn by ear, method. You're supposed to learn by ear, method. You're supposed to learn by ear, and there's one picture, and all the and there's one picture, and all the and there's one picture, and all the other kids have their bows up, and my other kids have their bows up, and my other kids have their bows up, and my bow is down, and I'm standing here on bow is down, and I'm standing here on bow is down, and I'm standing here on the stage, and my fly is down. the stage, and my fly is down. the stage, and my fly is down. And I And that and literally the And I And that and literally the And I And that and literally the neighbor's dog howled, and I quit after neighbor's dog howled, and I quit after neighbor's dog howled, and I quit after that concert. So, I was traumatized by that concert. So, I was traumatized by that concert. So, I was traumatized by They showed me the picture. My sister They showed me the picture. My sister They showed me the picture. My sister teased me relentlessly. teased me relentlessly. teased me relentlessly. Um so, neuroplasticity Um so, neuroplasticity Um so, neuroplasticity figure out your choice way to increase a figure out your choice way to increase a figure out your choice way to increase a neuromodulator like serotonin or neuromodulator like serotonin or neuromodulator like serotonin or epinephrine acetylcholine or dopamine. I epinephrine acetylcholine or dopamine. I epinephrine acetylcholine or dopamine. I honestly would not encourage honestly would not encourage honestly would not encourage pharmacologic or psychedelic approaches as your or psychedelic approaches as your or psychedelic approaches as your primary entry point. I really don't. I primary entry point. I really don't. I primary entry point. I really don't. I think that there's a place for that in think that there's a place for that in think that there's a place for that in certain circumstances, but that would certain circumstances, but that would certain circumstances, but that would not be the primary entry point. not be the primary entry point. not be the primary entry point. Next question, please. Next question, please. Next question, please. What type of movement protocol do you What type of movement protocol do you What type of movement protocol do you recommend for somebody who's working recommend for somebody who's working recommend for somebody who's working from home, sitting behind the computer from home, sitting behind the computer from home, sitting behind the computer from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.? Oh. Um from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.? Oh. Um from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.? Oh. Um okay, well, a couple things. okay, well, a couple things. okay, well, a couple things. I mean, I can make all sorts of I mean, I can make all sorts of I mean, I can make all sorts of recommendations like get up early and, recommendations like get up early and, recommendations like get up early and, you know, move and if you can take you know, move and if you can take you know, move and if you can take breaks and walk, this sort of thing. But breaks and walk, this sort of thing. But breaks and walk, this sort of thing. But but let's assume that all of that but let's assume that all of that but let's assume that all of that is kind of an understood that there is kind of an understood that there is kind of an understood that there are certain forms of exercise that we are certain forms of exercise that we are certain forms of exercise that we should all be doing. Three I think now should all be doing. Three I think now should all be doing. Three I think now it's very clear based on the beautiful it's very clear based on the beautiful it's very clear based on the beautiful work of Peter Attia, whose brother is in work of Peter Attia, whose brother is in work of Peter Attia, whose brother is in the audience, by the way, tonight. Yeah. the audience, by the way, tonight. Yeah. the audience, by the way, tonight. Yeah. He's got a younger brother. Yeah. He's got a younger brother. Yeah. He's got a younger brother. He's got a younger brother. Can you He's got a younger brother. Can you He's got a younger brother. Can you imagine Peter Attia was your older imagine Peter Attia was your older imagine Peter Attia was your older brother? Can you imagine? Can you imagine? Can you imagine? Be pretty cool. The um Be pretty cool. The um Be pretty cool. The um I sort of adopt people as siblings. They I sort of adopt people as siblings. They I sort of adopt people as siblings. They don't know it, but I do it. But I just don't know it, but I do it. But I just don't know it, but I do it. But I just assumed Peter was my older brother, but assumed Peter was my older brother, but assumed Peter was my older brother, but it turns out he has a younger brother it turns out he has a younger brother it turns out he has a younger brother already. Um and Peter has essentially um already. Um and Peter has essentially um already. Um and Peter has essentially um hammered home the truth, which is that hammered home the truth, which is that hammered home the truth, which is that we should all be getting somewhere we should all be getting somewhere we should all be getting somewhere between 150 to 200 minutes of so-called between 150 to 200 minutes of so-called between 150 to 200 minutes of so-called zone two cardio, where we're walking a zone two cardio, where we're walking a zone two cardio, where we're walking a lot and or moving about where we can lot and or moving about where we can lot and or moving about where we can just barely hold a conversation. just barely hold a conversation. just barely hold a conversation. I notice people in Toronto seem to walk I notice people in Toronto seem to walk I notice people in Toronto seem to walk a lot, so that's great. Um a lot, so that's great. Um a lot, so that's great. Um and then 3 days a week or so resistance and then 3 days a week or so resistance and then 3 days a week or so resistance training and there are a bunch of other training and there are a bunch of other training and there are a bunch of other mobility things that we should all do so mobility things that we should all do so mobility things that we should all do so that we don't fall and break our hips, that we don't fall and break our hips, that we don't fall and break our hips, cuz that's where another bone cuz that's cuz that's where another bone cuz that's cuz that's where another bone cuz that's another way that people really limit another way that people really limit another way that people really limit their health span and life span and so their health span and life span and so their health span and life span and so on and so forth. But on and so forth. But on and so forth. But two things that can make two things that can make two things that can make being at a desk, which I loathe, even being at a desk, which I loathe, even being at a desk, which I loathe, even though I like to learn, I hate sitting though I like to learn, I hate sitting though I like to learn, I hate sitting still. Um you can do the standing desk still. Um you can do the standing desk still. Um you can do the standing desk thing. I do that by stacking boxes. The thing. I do that by stacking boxes. The thing. I do that by stacking boxes. The other thing that was interesting, did other thing that was interesting, did other thing that was interesting, did anyone see this study out of the anyone see this study out of the anyone see this study out of the University of Texas, I think it was in University of Texas, I think it was in University of Texas, I think it was in Houston, this last year about the soleus Houston, this last year about the soleus Houston, this last year about the soleus push-up? Did anyone see this? This is push-up? Did anyone see this? This is push-up? Did anyone see this? This is pretty interesting. So, the soleus, pretty interesting. So, the soleus, pretty interesting. So, the soleus, this, you know, wider, flat muscle below this, you know, wider, flat muscle below this, you know, wider, flat muscle below the gastrocnemius of the calf, is a the gastrocnemius of the calf, is a the gastrocnemius of the calf, is a really unique muscle in the human body. really unique muscle in the human body. really unique muscle in the human body. It's 1% of the total human musculature, It's 1% of the total human musculature, It's 1% of the total human musculature, but it has an ability but it has an ability but it has an ability what will soon be for obvious reasons, will soon be for obvious reasons, will soon be for obvious reasons, to um dramatically shift fuel to um dramatically shift fuel to um dramatically shift fuel utilization in the body. What they did utilization in the body. What they did utilization in the body. What they did in this study was they had people who in this study was they had people who in this study was they had people who were sitting for, you know, 3 or 4 hours were sitting for, you know, 3 or 4 hours were sitting for, you know, 3 or 4 hours a day just simply raise their heel. a day just simply raise their heel. a day just simply raise their heel. Seems almost silly, right? They called Seems almost silly, right? They called Seems almost silly, right? They called it soleus push-up. When I called it that it soleus push-up. When I called it that it soleus push-up. When I called it that online, I literally got attacked by the online, I literally got attacked by the online, I literally got attacked by the gym bros telling me that's a seated calf gym bros telling me that's a seated calf gym bros telling me that's a seated calf raise. Okay? You know, I mean, I Okay? You know, I mean, I Okay? You know, I mean, I like, "Okay." No wonder they, you know, like, "Okay." No wonder they, you know, like, "Okay." No wonder they, you know, this whole bro science thing gets kind this whole bro science thing gets kind this whole bro science thing gets kind of, you know, people get really of, you know, people get really of, you know, people get really aggressive. They lift their heel and they put They lift their heel and they put They lift their heel and they put they're pushing their toe down, and some they're pushing their toe down, and some they're pushing their toe down, and some people think of it as bouncing the knee, people think of it as bouncing the knee, people think of it as bouncing the knee, but it's really about pushing the toe but it's really about pushing the toe but it's really about pushing the toe down and lifting the heel. So, they just down and lifting the heel. So, they just down and lifting the heel. So, they just simply had these sedentary people do simply had these sedentary people do simply had these sedentary people do this heel raise. And what they saw was this heel raise. And what they saw was this heel raise. And what they saw was that there was a dramatic that there was a dramatic that there was a dramatic highly statistically significant highly statistically significant highly statistically significant increase in blood glucose utilization increase in blood glucose utilization increase in blood glucose utilization and reduction in both and reduction in both and reduction in both insulin levels during that activity and insulin levels during that activity and insulin levels during that activity and around the clock. Really interesting. around the clock. Really interesting. around the clock. Really interesting. What they were doing was mimicking some What they were doing was mimicking some What they were doing was mimicking some aspect of walking. Now, is it as good as aspect of walking. Now, is it as good as aspect of walking. Now, is it as good as walking? No. But if you are stuck behind walking? No. But if you are stuck behind walking? No. But if you are stuck behind a, you know, working from home, sitting a, you know, working from home, sitting a, you know, working from home, sitting behind the computer from 8:00 a.m. to behind the computer from 8:00 a.m. to behind the computer from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., get it What they found was 5:00 p.m., get it What they found was 5:00 p.m., get it What they found was that people getting into this that people getting into this that people getting into this unconscious pattern of lifting their unconscious pattern of lifting their unconscious pattern of lifting their heel over and over and shifting back and heel over and over and shifting back and heel over and over and shifting back and forth mimicked a lot of the effects of forth mimicked a lot of the effects of forth mimicked a lot of the effects of walking. It's not a replacement for walking. It's not a replacement for walking. It's not a replacement for exercise, but the shifts in glucose and exercise, but the shifts in glucose and exercise, but the shifts in glucose and insulin output and utilization, excuse me, output and utilization, excuse me, output and utilization, excuse me, utilization and output, respectively, uh utilization and output, respectively, uh utilization and output, respectively, uh were very impressive. And this uh were very impressive. And this uh were very impressive. And this uh group down at the University of Houston group down at the University of Houston group down at the University of Houston uh University of Texas in Houston is uh University of Texas in Houston is uh University of Texas in Houston is starting to incorporate this into people starting to incorporate this into people starting to incorporate this into people who have limited mobility. who have limited mobility. who have limited mobility. Uh and it doesn't seem like other limb and it doesn't seem like other limb and it doesn't seem like other limb movements can do this. There's something movements can do this. There's something movements can do this. There's something special about the soleus. It was special about the soleus. It was special about the soleus. It was designed, in air quotes, um in air quotes, um in air quotes, um to be a muscle that's used repeatedly to be a muscle that's used repeatedly to be a muscle that's used repeatedly over, you know, extended hours of time, over, you know, extended hours of time, over, you know, extended hours of time, and it has this unique pathway of fuel and it has this unique pathway of fuel and it has this unique pathway of fuel utilization. So, is it going to cure utilization. So, is it going to cure utilization. So, is it going to cure obesity? No. But if you're stuck behind obesity? No. But if you're stuck behind obesity? No. But if you're stuck behind a desk, that would be something useful. a desk, that would be something useful. a desk, that would be something useful. I have this little fidget thing. Um I have this little fidget thing. Um I have this little fidget thing. Um I was too lazy to build one, but I found was too lazy to build one, but I found was too lazy to build one, but I found one online for a couple bucks where you one online for a couple bucks where you one online for a couple bucks where you just when you stand at your desk, it just when you stand at your desk, it just when you stand at your desk, it just you kind of kick it back and forth. just you kind of kick it back and forth. just you kind of kick it back and forth. Anyone seen these? They're kind of cool. Anyone seen these? They're kind of cool. Anyone seen these? They're kind of cool. Then you just got to kick them back and Then you just got to kick them back and Then you just got to kick them back and forth. And then some people will forth. And then some people will forth. And then some people will treadmill at the desk. I can't do that. treadmill at the desk. I can't do that. treadmill at the desk. I can't do that. I can't do that many things, but I also I can't do that many things, but I also I can't do that many things, but I also I'm still like working on this one. I I'm still like working on this one. I I'm still like working on this one. I can't quite do that. Uh next can't quite do that. Uh next can't quite do that. Uh next question, please. question, please. question, please. My morning meditation consists of Okay, My morning meditation consists of Okay, My morning meditation consists of Okay, and then I think we're about out of and then I think we're about out of and then I think we're about out of time, but the um yeah, so my morning uh time, but the um yeah, so my morning uh time, but the um yeah, so my morning uh meditation is not really a meditation. meditation is not really a meditation. meditation is not really a meditation. It's a perceptual exercise. And um that It's a perceptual exercise. And um that It's a perceptual exercise. And um that perceptual exercise is has a weird name perceptual exercise is has a weird name perceptual exercise is has a weird name cuz I gave it a weird name. Um I and I cuz I gave it a weird name. Um I and I cuz I gave it a weird name. Um I and I didn't intend to sound mystical, and I didn't intend to sound mystical, and I didn't intend to sound mystical, and I don't want credit for it, but I call it don't want credit for it, but I call it don't want credit for it, but I call it space-time bridging, but it's not that. space-time bridging, but it's not that. space-time bridging, but it's not that. What it really is that the To me, one What it really is that the To me, one What it really is that the To me, one of the most interesting things about the of the most interesting things about the of the most interesting things about the nervous system is our ability to orient nervous system is our ability to orient nervous system is our ability to orient in different time domains. This gets a in different time domains. This gets a in different time domains. This gets a little bit abstract, but we know from little bit abstract, but we know from little bit abstract, but we know from states of high stress that we start fine states of high stress that we start fine states of high stress that we start fine slicing time. slicing time. slicing time. We know this, right? The world becomes We know this, right? The world becomes We know this, right? The world becomes like a slow-motion video because frame like a slow-motion video because frame like a slow-motion video because frame rate has increased. We know As a visual rate has increased. We know As a visual rate has increased. We know As a visual vision neuroscientist, I can tell you vision neuroscientist, I can tell you vision neuroscientist, I can tell you that in my laboratory, we were doing that in my laboratory, we were doing that in my laboratory, we were doing studies with virtual reality where we studies with virtual reality where we studies with virtual reality where we can crank up people's level of stress by can crank up people's level of stress by can crank up people's level of stress by giving them certain visual stimuli, and giving them certain visual stimuli, and giving them certain visual stimuli, and then their ability to parse then their ability to parse then their ability to parse information is clearly increasing in the information is clearly increasing in the information is clearly increasing in the time domain. They're fine slicing, much time domain. They're fine slicing, much time domain. They're fine slicing, much in the same way that when you look at a in the same way that when you look at a in the same way that when you look at a slow-motion video somebody dunking a slow-motion video somebody dunking a slow-motion video somebody dunking a basketball or something of that sort is basketball or something of that sort is basketball or something of that sort is because the frame rate went up, right? because the frame rate went up, right? because the frame rate went up, right? So, when we are in high alertness So, when we are in high alertness So, when we are in high alertness states, our frame rate states, our frame rate states, our frame rate increases. When we're very relaxed, our increases. When we're very relaxed, our increases. When we're very relaxed, our frame rate decreases. So, if you're Rick frame rate decreases. So, if you're Rick frame rate decreases. So, if you're Rick Rubining and you're lying there looking Rubining and you're lying there looking Rubining and you're lying there looking at the sky, you your frame rate is at the sky, you your frame rate is at the sky, you your frame rate is probably slower than if you're probably slower than if you're probably slower than if you're hyper-focused on Oh my goodness, you hyper-focused on Oh my goodness, you hyper-focused on Oh my goodness, you know, um like you said like imagine a dreadful um like you said like imagine a dreadful um like you said like imagine a dreadful situation where somebody sends you a situation where somebody sends you a situation where somebody sends you a text message. Well, let's make it text message. Well, let's make it text message. Well, let's make it positive. Somebody's having a child in positive. Somebody's having a child in positive. Somebody's having a child in your family and you're like, you know, your family and you're like, you know, your family and you're like, you know, is it a healthy Are mom and baby okay? is it a healthy Are mom and baby okay? is it a healthy Are mom and baby okay? Dot dot dot. Dot dot dot. Dot dot dot. It I mean, seconds feel like minutes. It I mean, seconds feel like minutes. It I mean, seconds feel like minutes. Minutes feel like hours because you're Minutes feel like hours because you're Minutes feel like hours because you're fine-slicing time. Okay? And then, mom fine-slicing time. Okay? And then, mom fine-slicing time. Okay? And then, mom and baby are fine. Okay, great. Happy and baby are fine. Okay, great. Happy and baby are fine. Okay, great. Happy story ending. Great. So, when we're very story ending. Great. So, when we're very story ending. Great. So, when we're very relaxed, we tend to bend time more relaxed, we tend to bend time more relaxed, we tend to bend time more broadly. Now, it's also true that your broadly. Now, it's also true that your broadly. Now, it's also true that your visual system and your perception of visual system and your perception of visual system and your perception of time are inextricably linked. time are inextricably linked. time are inextricably linked. So, that if you close your eyes and you So, that if you close your eyes and you So, that if you close your eyes and you focused on your internal state, focused on your internal state, focused on your internal state, you are fine-slicing time and the second you are fine-slicing time and the second you are fine-slicing time and the second hand, if you will, is more or less that hand, if you will, is more or less that hand, if you will, is more or less that the metronome, rather, is your the metronome, rather, is your the metronome, rather, is your breathing. Or your and your heart rate from Or your and your heart rate from Or your and your heart rate from combined. When you open your eyes and you look at When you open your eyes and you look at When you open your eyes and you look at something in your immediate environment, something in your immediate environment, something in your immediate environment, when you move from so-called when you move from so-called when you move from so-called interoception to exteroception, you interoception to exteroception, you interoception to exteroception, you start your perception of time shifts start your perception of time shifts start your perception of time shifts fairly dramatically. fairly dramatically. fairly dramatically. And you now perceive time according to, And you now perceive time according to, And you now perceive time according to, believe it or not, the speed of images believe it or not, the speed of images believe it or not, the speed of images moving in your environment relative to moving in your environment relative to moving in your environment relative to you. And then, as you look out further you. And then, as you look out further you. And then, as you look out further onto, say, the horizon, you extend the onto, say, the horizon, you extend the onto, say, the horizon, you extend the time domain even more. If you then time domain even more. If you then time domain even more. If you then imagine yourself kind of in the whole imagine yourself kind of in the whole imagine yourself kind of in the whole globe, you extend your time domain even more. you extend your time domain even more. you extend your time domain even more. So, my morning meditation, if you will, it's my morning meditation, if you will, it's my morning meditation, if you will, it's more of a perceptual exercise, is to more of a perceptual exercise, is to more of a perceptual exercise, is to step through these different time step through these different time step through these different time domains to close my eyes and focus on my to close my eyes and focus on my to close my eyes and focus on my internal state, open my eyes and focus internal state, open my eyes and focus internal state, open my eyes and focus on something close by, on something close by, on something close by, look a little bit further, look a bit look a little bit further, look a bit look a little bit further, look a bit further, think about sort of myself on a further, think about sort of myself on a further, think about sort of myself on a on the globe, the whole world moving, so on the globe, the whole world moving, so on the globe, the whole world moving, so you're really extending your space you're really extending your space you're really extending your space domain, and then the time domain expands domain, and then the time domain expands domain, and then the time domain expands with it. You know, and this is comes up with it. You know, and this is comes up with it. You know, and this is comes up when you see these little memes of, you when you see these little memes of, you when you see these little memes of, you know, anytime you're worried, just know, anytime you're worried, just know, anytime you're worried, just remember you're a little dot on a little remember you're a little dot on a little remember you're a little dot on a little blue dot spinning in the universe. You blue dot spinning in the universe. You blue dot spinning in the universe. You know, this kind of thing. But you don't know, this kind of thing. But you don't know, this kind of thing. But you don't think that way when you're stressed. think that way when you're stressed. think that way when you're stressed. You're thinking, I'm the blue dot. You're thinking, I'm the blue dot. You're thinking, I'm the blue dot. You're the problem, whatever, you know, You're the problem, whatever, you know, You're the problem, whatever, you know, or I want that, you know, you're not or I want that, you know, you're not or I want that, you know, you're not thinking. So, this perceptual exercise thinking. So, this perceptual exercise thinking. So, this perceptual exercise is a way of training the nervous system is a way of training the nervous system is a way of training the nervous system my nervous system to shift deliberately my nervous system to shift deliberately my nervous system to shift deliberately between these different time domains. between these different time domains. between these different time domains. And for me, it's been very useful for And for me, it's been very useful for And for me, it's been very useful for improving task switching. Something improving task switching. Something improving task switching. Something that, as you probably have noticed, I'm that, as you probably have noticed, I'm that, as you probably have noticed, I'm not very good at. I go into the trench, not very good at. I go into the trench, not very good at. I go into the trench, I don't leave the trench very easily. I don't leave the trench very easily. I don't leave the trench very easily. Um so, that's been very useful. And if Um so, that's been very useful. And if Um so, that's been very useful. And if you are interested in this in more you are interested in this in more you are interested in this in more detail, there's a wonderful book detail, there's a wonderful book detail, there's a wonderful book um called uh called uh called uh The Secret Pulse of Time. And there's a The Secret Pulse of Time. And there's a The Secret Pulse of Time. And there's a Hitchcock movie that's discussed in that Hitchcock movie that's discussed in that Hitchcock movie that's discussed in that book, which the movie is about 75 book, which the movie is about 75 book, which the movie is about 75 minutes long. And during the course of minutes long. And during the course of minutes long. And during the course of that movie, the background actually that movie, the background actually that movie, the background actually includes rising and setting of the sun includes rising and setting of the sun includes rising and setting of the sun and a bunch of different speeds of and a bunch of different speeds of and a bunch of different speeds of movement and interplay between the movement and interplay between the movement and interplay between the characters. And your perception at the characters. And your perception at the characters. And your perception at the end of the movie is that a much, much end of the movie is that a much, much end of the movie is that a much, much longer period of time occurred because longer period of time occurred because longer period of time occurred because of sub unconsciously, your brain was of sub unconsciously, your brain was of sub unconsciously, your brain was paying attention to these circadian paying attention to these circadian paying attention to these circadian signals and these other signals. And signals and these other signals. And signals and these other signals. And it's absolutely fascinating. Hitchcock, it's absolutely fascinating. Hitchcock, it's absolutely fascinating. Hitchcock, not a huge Hitchcock fan, but now I not a huge Hitchcock fan, but now I not a huge Hitchcock fan, but now I after seeing that, I was like, "Wow, after seeing that, I was like, "Wow, after seeing that, I was like, "Wow, that's genius." He captured this that's genius." He captured this that's genius." He captured this space-time thing. What you see out the space-time thing. What you see out the space-time thing. What you see out the window is in one time domain, in the window is in one time domain, in the window is in one time domain, in the room is a different time domain. I won't room is a different time domain. I won't room is a different time domain. I won't tell you who killed who, but it's very, tell you who killed who, but it's very, tell you who killed who, but it's very, very interesting. And so, the point very interesting. And so, the point very interesting. And so, the point being that when your visual system is up being that when your visual system is up being that when your visual system is up close, focusing on things up close or close, focusing on things up close or close, focusing on things up close or internally, you're fine slicing. internally, you're fine slicing. internally, you're fine slicing. When you focus on things further away, When you focus on things further away, When you focus on things further away, you're more broadly focusing and so on you're more broadly focusing and so on you're more broadly focusing and so on and so forth. So, that's a morning and so forth. So, that's a morning and so forth. So, that's a morning meditation I do. It only perceptual meditation I do. It only perceptual meditation I do. It only perceptual exercise, it only takes about a minute exercise, it only takes about a minute exercise, it only takes about a minute or so. or so. or so. And the other thing is that on the monitors, the other thing is that on the monitors, the other thing is that on the monitors, they're flashing out. That was your last they're flashing out. That was your last they're flashing out. That was your last question. So, I wanted to just say a question. So, I wanted to just say a question. So, I wanted to just say a couple of things before we go. First of couple of things before we go. First of couple of things before we go. First of all, thanks to all of you who um stood all, thanks to all of you who um stood all, thanks to all of you who um stood out the night uh for the long duration. out the night uh for the long duration. out the night uh for the long duration. I realize this stuff is like nerdy I realize this stuff is like nerdy I realize this stuff is like nerdy detailed and there are a lot of other detailed and there are a lot of other detailed and there are a lot of other things you could be doing with your things you could be doing with your things you could be doing with your evening and your time. evening and your time. evening and your time. And so, I'm very uh grateful that uh And so, I'm very uh grateful that uh And so, I'm very uh grateful that uh you all came together tonight for this you all came together tonight for this you all came together tonight for this uh what I like to think was a discussion what I like to think was a discussion what I like to think was a discussion and I also just want to thank everyone and I also just want to thank everyone and I also just want to thank everyone for your interest in the podcast. I you for your interest in the podcast. I you for your interest in the podcast. I you know it is a labor of love. I'm highly know it is a labor of love. I'm highly know it is a labor of love. I'm highly dependent on my team for doing all of dependent on my team for doing all of dependent on my team for doing all of it. I don't do it alone by any stretch, it. I don't do it alone by any stretch, it. I don't do it alone by any stretch, but as much as it might seem like it's but as much as it might seem like it's but as much as it might seem like it's me talking to all of you, it really is me talking to all of you, it really is me talking to all of you, it really is about all of you. That's the reason I do about all of you. That's the reason I do about all of you. That's the reason I do it and I'm ever so grateful and I'd it and I'm ever so grateful and I'd it and I'm ever so grateful and I'd certainly be remiss if I didn't say certainly be remiss if I didn't say certainly be remiss if I didn't say thank you for your interest in science. Thank you. Thank you.