As a woman, if I honestly thought there As a woman, if I honestly thought there As a woman, if I honestly thought there were things we should do differently to were things we should do differently to were things we should do differently to optimize our results, of course, I would optimize our results, of course, I would optimize our results, of course, I would be doing them myself and telling other be doing them myself and telling other be doing them myself and telling other women to do them, too. The narrative women to do them, too. The narrative women to do them, too. The narrative that women need a sexspecific that women need a sexspecific that women need a sexspecific program or nutrient timing guidance or a program or nutrient timing guidance or a program or nutrient timing guidance or a particular intensity of exercise or rep particular intensity of exercise or rep particular intensity of exercise or rep range or all of it. range or all of it. range or all of it. It makes women feel like they're being It makes women feel like they're being It makes women feel like they're being spoken to and being considered and then spoken to and being considered and then spoken to and being considered and then they're part of this community instead they're part of this community instead they're part of this community instead of oh, you know, just do what your of oh, you know, just do what your of oh, you know, just do what your boyfriend does or what your husband does boyfriend does or what your husband does boyfriend does or what your husband does or so the narrative is very much women or so the narrative is very much women or so the narrative is very much women are not men. And so obviously women need are not men. And so obviously women need are not men. And so obviously women need something different. The data says something different. The data says something different. The data says men and women respond to exercise very men and women respond to exercise very men and women respond to exercise very similarly. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools [music] for everyday science-based tools [music] for everyday science-based tools [music] for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Lauren Kenzo Simple. She today is Dr. Lauren Kenzo Simple. She today is Dr. Lauren Kenzo Simple. She holds a PhD in integrative physiology holds a PhD in integrative physiology holds a PhD in integrative physiology and is a certified strength and is a certified strength and is a certified strength and conditioning specialist. She is an conditioning specialist. She is an conditioning specialist. She is an expert in both the science and practice expert in both the science and practice expert in both the science and practice of building muscle and strength, of building muscle and strength, of building muscle and strength, cardiovascular fitness, and the cardiovascular fitness, and the cardiovascular fitness, and the relationship between hormones and relationship between hormones and relationship between hormones and exercise. Today's discussion is focused exercise. Today's discussion is focused exercise. Today's discussion is focused on fitness for women, and how it on fitness for women, and how it on fitness for women, and how it overlaps directly with the same things overlaps directly with the same things overlaps directly with the same things that men should do for their fitness. that men should do for their fitness. that men should do for their fitness. Therefore, today's discussion is Therefore, today's discussion is Therefore, today's discussion is relevant to both women and men. Dr. Keno relevant to both women and men. Dr. Keno relevant to both women and men. Dr. Keno Simple explains how to structure your Simple explains how to structure your Simple explains how to structure your ideal training routine according to the ideal training routine according to the ideal training routine according to the time you have available and your health time you have available and your health time you have available and your health and fitness goals. She also clearly and fitness goals. She also clearly and fitness goals. She also clearly explains what the science says about if explains what the science says about if explains what the science says about if and when women's hormone cycles, life and when women's hormone cycles, life and when women's hormone cycles, life stages such as menopause, and things stages such as menopause, and things stages such as menopause, and things like birth control should actually like birth control should actually like birth control should actually impact how women should train and when. impact how women should train and when. impact how women should train and when. As we all know, information about best As we all know, information about best As we all know, information about best practices for fitness, nutrition, and practices for fitness, nutrition, and practices for fitness, nutrition, and health are hotly debated online. Dr. health are hotly debated online. Dr. health are hotly debated online. Dr. Kenzo Simple has become one of the most Kenzo Simple has become one of the most Kenzo Simple has become one of the most trusted voices for explaining what the trusted voices for explaining what the trusted voices for explaining what the science says about women's specific science says about women's specific science says about women's specific fitness as well as for delivering clear fitness as well as for delivering clear fitness as well as for delivering clear actionable evidence for protocols that actionable evidence for protocols that actionable evidence for protocols that work in the real world. It was a true work in the real world. It was a true work in the real world. It was a true honor and pleasure to host her on the honor and pleasure to host her on the honor and pleasure to host her on the podcast. Before we begin, I'd like to podcast. Before we begin, I'd like to podcast. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. And now for my discussion with Dr. And now for my discussion with Dr. Lauren Kenso, Simple. Dr. Lauren Kenzo Lauren Kenso, Simple. Dr. Lauren Kenzo Lauren Kenso, Simple. Dr. Lauren Kenzo Simple, welcome. Simple, welcome. Simple, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Very excited to have you here. To kick &gt;&gt; Very excited to have you here. To kick &gt;&gt; Very excited to have you here. To kick things off, is there anything things off, is there anything things off, is there anything fundamentally different about muscle fundamentally different about muscle fundamentally different about muscle tissue in men and women? tissue in men and women? tissue in men and women? And if not at the cellular level in And if not at the cellular level in And if not at the cellular level in terms of the hormone receptors that they terms of the hormone receptors that they terms of the hormone receptors that they express or the hormones that they're express or the hormones that they're express or the hormones that they're exposed to in a way that should change exposed to in a way that should change exposed to in a way that should change people's behavior about how to exercise people's behavior about how to exercise people's behavior about how to exercise &gt;&gt; when we look at how the muscle responds. &gt;&gt; when we look at how the muscle responds. &gt;&gt; when we look at how the muscle responds. So we look at muscle protein synthesis So we look at muscle protein synthesis So we look at muscle protein synthesis in response to exercise or nutrition. in response to exercise or nutrition. in response to exercise or nutrition. There are no differences. Very similar There are no differences. Very similar There are no differences. Very similar protein metabolism response, very protein metabolism response, very protein metabolism response, very similar growth response. The major similar growth response. The major similar growth response. The major difference and this is hormone related difference and this is hormone related difference and this is hormone related is that the baseline muscularity because is that the baseline muscularity because is that the baseline muscularity because during puberty when men experience a during puberty when men experience a during puberty when men experience a surge in testosterone that coincides surge in testosterone that coincides surge in testosterone that coincides with an increase in muscle mass. So if with an increase in muscle mass. So if with an increase in muscle mass. So if you take an untrained adult man and an you take an untrained adult man and an you take an untrained adult man and an untrained adult woman there will be a untrained adult woman there will be a untrained adult woman there will be a disparity in their baseline muscle mass disparity in their baseline muscle mass disparity in their baseline muscle mass and that is due to differences in and that is due to differences in and that is due to differences in testosterone. However, once they start testosterone. However, once they start testosterone. However, once they start training, they will gain similar training, they will gain similar training, they will gain similar relative size. relative size. relative size. &gt;&gt; So, not that I'm suggesting uh people &gt;&gt; So, not that I'm suggesting uh people &gt;&gt; So, not that I'm suggesting uh people get into competitive bodybuilding and get into competitive bodybuilding and get into competitive bodybuilding and use steroids, although some people might use steroids, although some people might use steroids, although some people might make that their life choice. The vast make that their life choice. The vast make that their life choice. The vast majority of people won't. But if we were majority of people won't. But if we were majority of people won't. But if we were to look at female bodybuilders at any to look at female bodybuilders at any to look at female bodybuilders at any point in the last 30 years or so, it's point in the last 30 years or so, it's point in the last 30 years or so, it's very clear that with chemical very clear that with chemical very clear that with chemical augmentation, which is typically augmentation, which is typically augmentation, which is typically increasing testosterone or some increasing testosterone or some increasing testosterone or some testosterone like uh derivative, that testosterone like uh derivative, that testosterone like uh derivative, that women can achieve a very impressive women can achieve a very impressive women can achieve a very impressive level of muscularity that in many ways level of muscularity that in many ways level of muscularity that in many ways rivals what certainly men who are not rivals what certainly men who are not rivals what certainly men who are not taking anabolic steroids can achieve. taking anabolic steroids can achieve. taking anabolic steroids can achieve. What does that tell us? the fact that What does that tell us? the fact that What does that tell us? the fact that the addition of androgens, testosterone the addition of androgens, testosterone the addition of androgens, testosterone and testosterone like derivatives can and testosterone like derivatives can and testosterone like derivatives can take female musculature and make it look take female musculature and make it look take female musculature and make it look essentially like male musculature. Does essentially like male musculature. Does essentially like male musculature. Does that tell us anything interesting that tell us anything interesting that tell us anything interesting that informs the non-steroid user, the informs the non-steroid user, the informs the non-steroid user, the non-bodybuilder? &gt;&gt; Not so much because we're talking about &gt;&gt; Not so much because we're talking about &gt;&gt; Not so much because we're talking about those suprahysiological levels and those suprahysiological levels and those suprahysiological levels and that's the real gamecher. So if we think that's the real gamecher. So if we think that's the real gamecher. So if we think about even with men what is the normal about even with men what is the normal about even with men what is the normal range of testosterone we don't see this range of testosterone we don't see this range of testosterone we don't see this relationship between oh you know you're relationship between oh you know you're relationship between oh you know you're closer to 900 and you are going to closer to 900 and you are going to closer to 900 and you are going to respond better to resistance training. respond better to resistance training. respond better to resistance training. So as long as you're within what that So as long as you're within what that So as long as you're within what that wide normal range there doesn't seem to wide normal range there doesn't seem to wide normal range there doesn't seem to be a predictability of your response to be a predictability of your response to be a predictability of your response to training. However, once we get into training. However, once we get into training. However, once we get into those supraphysiological levels and those supraphysiological levels and those supraphysiological levels and we're taking that exogenous hormone, we're taking that exogenous hormone, we're taking that exogenous hormone, then yes, we are going to develop levels then yes, we are going to develop levels then yes, we are going to develop levels of muscularity that wouldn't necessarily of muscularity that wouldn't necessarily of muscularity that wouldn't necessarily be possible. be possible. be possible. &gt;&gt; You said something several things uh &gt;&gt; You said something several things uh &gt;&gt; You said something several things uh very interesting. Um if I understood very interesting. Um if I understood very interesting. Um if I understood correctly, if a male is somewhere in the correctly, if a male is somewhere in the correctly, if a male is somewhere in the reference range, so typically I believe reference range, so typically I believe reference range, so typically I believe that's somewhere between 300 NOGS per that's somewhere between 300 NOGS per that's somewhere between 300 NOGS per deciliter and 900 NOGS per deciliter. deciliter and 900 NOGS per deciliter. deciliter and 900 NOGS per deciliter. Maybe in some countries it goes up to Maybe in some countries it goes up to Maybe in some countries it goes up to 1,200 but in any case that a male with 1,200 but in any case that a male with 1,200 but in any case that a male with 400 NOG per deciliter testosterone 400 NOG per deciliter testosterone 400 NOG per deciliter testosterone versus 600 it's not as if the male with versus 600 it's not as if the male with versus 600 it's not as if the male with 600 can make you know that much more 600 can make you know that much more 600 can make you know that much more muscle growth and the same is true for muscle growth and the same is true for muscle growth and the same is true for women. &gt;&gt; That's right. Okay. &gt;&gt; That's right. Okay. &gt;&gt; That's right. Okay. &gt;&gt; So as long as you're within that broad &gt;&gt; So as long as you're within that broad &gt;&gt; So as long as you're within that broad normal range and of course what's normal range and of course what's normal range and of course what's normal for you differs from what's normal for you differs from what's normal for you differs from what's normal for someone else. So if there are uh changes someone else. So if there are uh changes someone else. So if there are uh changes that might impact you because now you're that might impact you because now you're that might impact you because now you're below what is your normal then that can below what is your normal then that can below what is your normal then that can manifest in a variety of ways. But manifest in a variety of ways. But manifest in a variety of ways. But there isn't this clear kind of linear there isn't this clear kind of linear there isn't this clear kind of linear relationship where we would say oh let's relationship where we would say oh let's relationship where we would say oh let's measure your testosterone you are going measure your testosterone you are going measure your testosterone you are going to be a hard gainer or you're going to be a hard gainer or you're going to be a hard gainer or you're going to put on mass really easily. If we were to put on mass really easily. If we were to put on mass really easily. If we were to just look at people who are not just look at people who are not just look at people who are not chemically augmented in any way, not chemically augmented in any way, not chemically augmented in any way, not know their testosterone in any way, and know their testosterone in any way, and know their testosterone in any way, and here I'm referring to women here I'm referring to women here I'm referring to women specifically, how much individual specifically, how much individual specifically, how much individual variation is there, or what's known variation is there, or what's known variation is there, or what's known about the individual variation among about the individual variation among about the individual variation among women in terms of the amount of women in terms of the amount of women in terms of the amount of potential to grow muscle and strength? potential to grow muscle and strength? potential to grow muscle and strength? Is it true that some women have a much Is it true that some women have a much Is it true that some women have a much greater potential to build muscle mass greater potential to build muscle mass greater potential to build muscle mass uh that's independent of their uh that's independent of their uh that's independent of their testosterone levels? I'd say yes, it's testosterone levels? I'd say yes, it's testosterone levels? I'd say yes, it's independent of the testosterone levels, independent of the testosterone levels, independent of the testosterone levels, but we're going to start with different but we're going to start with different but we're going to start with different baselines and then it depends on the baselines and then it depends on the baselines and then it depends on the stimulus that you are using for growth. stimulus that you are using for growth. stimulus that you are using for growth. And some people are adapting to that And some people are adapting to that And some people are adapting to that growth stimulus to a greater extent than growth stimulus to a greater extent than growth stimulus to a greater extent than others, but part of that is effective, others, but part of that is effective, others, but part of that is effective, consistent, progressive training, and consistent, progressive training, and consistent, progressive training, and then part of it is arguably some genetic then part of it is arguably some genetic then part of it is arguably some genetic factors. But when we even look at the factors. But when we even look at the factors. But when we even look at the molecular level, say fiber type molecular level, say fiber type molecular level, say fiber type differences, we see adaptation in both differences, we see adaptation in both differences, we see adaptation in both sexes that is quite dramatic. And that sexes that is quite dramatic. And that sexes that is quite dramatic. And that tells us that both men and women have tells us that both men and women have tells us that both men and women have the potential for large adaptations in the potential for large adaptations in the potential for large adaptations in either direction, whether we're saying, either direction, whether we're saying, either direction, whether we're saying, you know, to endurance type training or you know, to endurance type training or you know, to endurance type training or resistance type training. resistance type training. resistance type training. &gt;&gt; I would like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I would like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I would like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, JW. JWV acknowledge one of our sponsors, JW. JWV acknowledge one of our sponsors, JW. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy makes medical grade red light therapy makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that devices. Now, if there's one thing that devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this I have consistently emphasized on this I have consistently emphasized on this podcast is the incredible impact that podcast is the incredible impact that podcast is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology and our light can have on our biology and our light can have on our biology and our health. Now, in addition to sunlight, health. Now, in addition to sunlight, health. Now, in addition to sunlight, which I've talked about a lot on this which I've talked about a lot on this which I've talked about a lot on this podcast, red light, near infrared, and podcast, red light, near infrared, and podcast, red light, near infrared, and infrared light have been specifically infrared light have been specifically infrared light have been specifically shown to have positive effects on shown to have positive effects on shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular improving numerous aspects of cellular improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health. These include faster and organ health. These include faster and organ health. These include faster muscle recovery, improved skin health, muscle recovery, improved skin health, muscle recovery, improved skin health, wound healing, improvements in acne, wound healing, improvements in acne, wound healing, improvements in acne, reduce pain and inflammation, improved reduce pain and inflammation, improved reduce pain and inflammation, improved mitochondrial function, and even mitochondrial function, and even mitochondrial function, and even improvements in vision. Nowadays, there improvements in vision. Nowadays, there improvements in vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red light devices out are a lot of red light devices out are a lot of red light devices out there. But what sets Juv lights apart, there. But what sets Juv lights apart, there. But what sets Juv lights apart, and why they're my preferred red light and why they're my preferred red light and why they're my preferred red light therapy device, is that they use therapy device, is that they use therapy device, is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning they use the specific wavelengths of red they use the specific wavelengths of red they use the specific wavelengths of red light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal in combination to trigger the optimal in combination to trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to the JWV whole body panel about three to the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week, usually for about 10 four times a week, usually for about 10 four times a week, usually for about 10 to 20 minutes per session. And I use the to 20 minutes per session. And I use the to 20 minutes per session. And I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when JWV handheld light both at home and when JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you would like to try JWV, I travel. If you would like to try JWV, I travel. If you would like to try JWV, they're offering up to $400 off select they're offering up to $400 off select they're offering up to $400 off select products for listeners of this podcast. products for listeners of this podcast. products for listeners of this podcast. To learn more, visit JV, spelled To learn more, visit JV, spelled To learn more, visit JV, spelled jvv.com/huberman. Again, that's jovv.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us Today's episode is also brought to us Today's episode is also brought to us byleep. Eightle makes smart mattress byleep. Eightle makes smart mattress byleep. Eightle makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an eightle mattress been sleeping on an eightle mattress been sleeping on an eightle mattress cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest eightle quality of my sleep. The latest eightle quality of my sleep. The latest eightle model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible features. For has so many incredible features. For has so many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called autopilot, which is an AI engine that autopilot, which is an AI engine that autopilot, which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns and then learns your sleep patterns and then learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping adjusts the temperature of your sleeping adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleep environment across different sleep environment across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if stages. It'll even elevate your head if stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring, and it makes other you're snoring, and it makes other you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd like to try eight, go to like to try eight, go to like to try eight, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. I want to put aside the use of exogenous I want to put aside the use of exogenous I want to put aside the use of exogenous uh testosterone therapy although we can uh testosterone therapy although we can uh testosterone therapy although we can return to that a little bit later return to that a little bit later return to that a little bit later because it seems to be a popular theme because it seems to be a popular theme because it seems to be a popular theme in women's health circles now especially in women's health circles now especially in women's health circles now especially in the per perry menopause excuse me a in the per perry menopause excuse me a in the per perry menopause excuse me a menopause conversation but it's well menopause conversation but it's well menopause conversation but it's well known from studies uh I believe that known from studies uh I believe that known from studies uh I believe that were exclusively carried out in men that were exclusively carried out in men that were exclusively carried out in men that training a certain way sprints training a certain way sprints training a certain way sprints resistance training and um we talk about resistance training and um we talk about resistance training and um we talk about exactly how can increase circulating exactly how can increase circulating exactly how can increase circulating testosterone grown in meaningful ways testosterone grown in meaningful ways testosterone grown in meaningful ways that can feed back on psychology and can that can feed back on psychology and can that can feed back on psychology and can feed back on growth and strength feed back on growth and strength feed back on growth and strength development etc. Have the same studies development etc. Have the same studies development etc. Have the same studies been carried out in women? In other been carried out in women? In other been carried out in women? In other words, if a woman lifts weights um in a words, if a woman lifts weights um in a words, if a woman lifts weights um in a certain manner for 45 minutes or 60 certain manner for 45 minutes or 60 certain manner for 45 minutes or 60 minutes, do we expect a big surge in her minutes, do we expect a big surge in her minutes, do we expect a big surge in her circulating levels of testosterone? circulating levels of testosterone? circulating levels of testosterone? &gt;&gt; Well, the circulating levels are already &gt;&gt; Well, the circulating levels are already &gt;&gt; Well, the circulating levels are already quite low. And one of the issues here is quite low. And one of the issues here is quite low. And one of the issues here is that the way testosterone has been that the way testosterone has been that the way testosterone has been measured in women for a very long time measured in women for a very long time measured in women for a very long time is such that the assays are not capable is such that the assays are not capable is such that the assays are not capable of detecting some of these normal low of detecting some of these normal low of detecting some of these normal low levels. So we know a lot less about levels. So we know a lot less about levels. So we know a lot less about those lower kind of circulating levels those lower kind of circulating levels those lower kind of circulating levels of testosterone in women than I think of testosterone in women than I think of testosterone in women than I think people acknowledge. But more people acknowledge. But more people acknowledge. But more importantly, that acute response to importantly, that acute response to importantly, that acute response to exercise, th that those that increase in exercise, th that those that increase in exercise, th that those that increase in um post exercise, testosterone, growth um post exercise, testosterone, growth um post exercise, testosterone, growth hormone, etc., people used to think that hormone, etc., people used to think that hormone, etc., people used to think that was the driver of hypertrophy. And so was the driver of hypertrophy. And so was the driver of hypertrophy. And so there were all of these training styles there were all of these training styles there were all of these training styles to sort of maximize that response. And to sort of maximize that response. And to sort of maximize that response. And so people would uh promote high rep so people would uh promote high rep so people would uh promote high rep training or supersets and they'd say, training or supersets and they'd say, training or supersets and they'd say, "Oh, you know, this is going to really "Oh, you know, this is going to really "Oh, you know, this is going to really maximize that response." But what we maximize that response." But what we maximize that response." But what we know now is that response, although know now is that response, although know now is that response, although acutely, it's not the driver of growth acutely, it's not the driver of growth acutely, it's not the driver of growth long term. And so it doesn't really long term. And so it doesn't really long term. And so it doesn't really make sense to chase that short-term make sense to chase that short-term make sense to chase that short-term response because it's not predictive of response because it's not predictive of response because it's not predictive of longer term adaptation. Until fairly longer term adaptation. Until fairly longer term adaptation. Until fairly recently, women doing resistance training, women doing resistance training, women doing resistance training, especially heavy for them, you know, uh especially heavy for them, you know, uh especially heavy for them, you know, uh somewhere between 70 and 90% of a one somewhere between 70 and 90% of a one somewhere between 70 and 90% of a one rep max or even a one rep max. So, heavy rep max or even a one rep max. So, heavy rep max or even a one rep max. So, heavy for them was scary for a lot of women. for them was scary for a lot of women. for them was scary for a lot of women. I've women in my family and they're I've women in my family and they're I've women in my family and they're like, I don't want to lift weights. I like, I don't want to lift weights. I like, I don't want to lift weights. I don't want to I don't want to get too don't want to I don't want to get too don't want to I don't want to get too big. This is, you know, was a common big. This is, you know, was a common big. This is, you know, was a common statement. What do you think changed? I statement. What do you think changed? I statement. What do you think changed? I think part of it was the introduction of think part of it was the introduction of think part of it was the introduction of the bikini category in competitive the bikini category in competitive the bikini category in competitive bodybuilding because that was a level of bodybuilding because that was a level of bodybuilding because that was a level of muscularity that people didn't look at muscularity that people didn't look at muscularity that people didn't look at and say, "Oh, that's bulky." That was, and say, "Oh, that's bulky." That was, and say, "Oh, that's bulky." That was, "Oh, she looks good in a bikini." And "Oh, she looks good in a bikini." And "Oh, she looks good in a bikini." And so, people wanted to look like that, so, people wanted to look like that, so, people wanted to look like that, realized that they needed to lift realized that they needed to lift realized that they needed to lift weights to do it. And it kind of opened weights to do it. And it kind of opened weights to do it. And it kind of opened up a door for resistance training being up a door for resistance training being up a door for resistance training being more feminine. Um, I think that in more feminine. Um, I think that in more feminine. Um, I think that in combination with the introduction of combination with the introduction of combination with the introduction of more group fitness, it had resistance more group fitness, it had resistance more group fitness, it had resistance training components, crossfit, which um, training components, crossfit, which um, training components, crossfit, which um, a lot of women were drawn to. I think a lot of women were drawn to. I think a lot of women were drawn to. I think all of that has made women feel more all of that has made women feel more all of that has made women feel more empowered to lift weights and less empowered to lift weights and less empowered to lift weights and less fearful of the results. Although I fearful of the results. Although I fearful of the results. Although I think there is still a sentiment in some think there is still a sentiment in some think there is still a sentiment in some circles that lifting weights or lifting circles that lifting weights or lifting circles that lifting weights or lifting too heavy is going to make you huge too heavy is going to make you huge too heavy is going to make you huge instead of you know quote unquote toned. instead of you know quote unquote toned. instead of you know quote unquote toned. Also if there are all of these where are Also if there are all of these where are Also if there are all of these where are all of these bulky women? When do you all of these bulky women? When do you all of these bulky women? When do you walk how often do you walk down the walk how often do you walk down the walk how often do you walk down the street and see an incredibly jacked street and see an incredibly jacked street and see an incredibly jacked woman? It's very rare. And so woman? It's very rare. And so woman? It's very rare. And so clearly no one is getting huge by clearly no one is getting huge by clearly no one is getting huge by accident. you're not getting extremely accident. you're not getting extremely accident. you're not getting extremely muscular without working really muscular without working really muscular without working really hard and often incorporating some hard and often incorporating some hard and often incorporating some pharmacological help pharmacological help pharmacological help &gt;&gt; for a woman who's not currently doing &gt;&gt; for a woman who's not currently doing &gt;&gt; for a woman who's not currently doing resistance training. Um maybe we could resistance training. Um maybe we could resistance training. Um maybe we could talk to her uh for a second. Um at what talk to her uh for a second. Um at what talk to her uh for a second. Um at what age is too early for a woman to do age is too early for a woman to do age is too early for a woman to do resistance training? What does the data resistance training? What does the data resistance training? What does the data say? I think is a cultural I think is a cultural I think is a cultural stereotype that at least in high school stereotype that at least in high school stereotype that at least in high school the girls didn't belong in the weight the girls didn't belong in the weight the girls didn't belong in the weight room. That was certainly my experience room. That was certainly my experience room. That was certainly my experience growing up. Now I think that's shifting. growing up. Now I think that's shifting. growing up. Now I think that's shifting. And so it's not that it's unsafe, it's And so it's not that it's unsafe, it's And so it's not that it's unsafe, it's just that it wasn't done. And so people just that it wasn't done. And so people just that it wasn't done. And so people weren't teaching teenage girls how to weren't teaching teenage girls how to weren't teaching teenage girls how to lift weights. And there's a lot of lift weights. And there's a lot of lift weights. And there's a lot of advantages to that, especially if you're advantages to that, especially if you're advantages to that, especially if you're playing sports. Because we have female playing sports. Because we have female playing sports. Because we have female athletes who are teenagers and then athletes who are teenagers and then athletes who are teenagers and then going into college and continuing to going into college and continuing to going into college and continuing to play their sports and there can be not play their sports and there can be not play their sports and there can be not only a performance improvement but also only a performance improvement but also only a performance improvement but also an injury reduction from doing some an injury reduction from doing some an injury reduction from doing some resistance training along with your resistance training along with your resistance training along with your sports specific training. So I think sports specific training. So I think sports specific training. So I think it's certainly valuable to start it's certainly valuable to start it's certainly valuable to start younger also from a habit building younger also from a habit building younger also from a habit building perspective because I know you know if perspective because I know you know if perspective because I know you know if you're somebody who has gone decades you're somebody who has gone decades you're somebody who has gone decades without ever doing a lot of structured without ever doing a lot of structured without ever doing a lot of structured exercise or without ever lifting weights exercise or without ever lifting weights exercise or without ever lifting weights it can feel kind of daunting and it can feel kind of daunting and it can feel kind of daunting and intimidating to learn the new skill. intimidating to learn the new skill. intimidating to learn the new skill. That said we know that you can gain That said we know that you can gain That said we know that you can gain muscle anytime even if you start at 70. muscle anytime even if you start at 70. muscle anytime even if you start at 70. So, it's not that it's ever too late to So, it's not that it's ever too late to So, it's not that it's ever too late to start, but if we start earlier, we are start, but if we start earlier, we are start, but if we start earlier, we are building muscle in the way that you're building muscle in the way that you're building muscle in the way that you're building a savings account or a building a savings account or a building a savings account or a retirement account. Because if we're not retirement account. Because if we're not retirement account. Because if we're not lifting weights and if we're not lifting weights and if we're not lifting weights and if we're not physically active, then we do start to physically active, then we do start to physically active, then we do start to lose muscle with age. And later in life, lose muscle with age. And later in life, lose muscle with age. And later in life, it does become a problem. it does become a problem. it does become a problem. &gt;&gt; I wonder uh if resistance training &gt;&gt; I wonder uh if resistance training &gt;&gt; I wonder uh if resistance training should be taught earlier. Um it doesn't should be taught earlier. Um it doesn't should be taught earlier. Um it doesn't sound like it should be avoided for sound like it should be avoided for sound like it should be avoided for young girls. Is that correct? young girls. Is that correct? young girls. Is that correct? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I think if we see a young &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I think if we see a young &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I think if we see a young kid doing a barbell squat, there's kid doing a barbell squat, there's kid doing a barbell squat, there's something kind of jarring about that. something kind of jarring about that. something kind of jarring about that. But think about all the kids we see all But think about all the kids we see all But think about all the kids we see all the time, you know, on the monkey bars the time, you know, on the monkey bars the time, you know, on the monkey bars essentially doing pull-ups or muscleups essentially doing pull-ups or muscleups essentially doing pull-ups or muscleups and developing a lot of upper body and developing a lot of upper body and developing a lot of upper body strength. And certainly young gymnasts strength. And certainly young gymnasts strength. And certainly young gymnasts have been doing that for a very long have been doing that for a very long have been doing that for a very long time. So, it's not that there isn't any time. So, it's not that there isn't any time. So, it's not that there isn't any sort of resistance training or going sort of resistance training or going sort of resistance training or going around or happening in childhood. around or happening in childhood. around or happening in childhood. It's just not the structured training It's just not the structured training It's just not the structured training that we think when we talk about lifting that we think when we talk about lifting that we think when we talk about lifting weights. &gt;&gt; That's an excellent point and it makes &gt;&gt; That's an excellent point and it makes &gt;&gt; That's an excellent point and it makes me realize that probably early in me realize that probably early in me realize that probably early in development, boys and girls are doing development, boys and girls are doing development, boys and girls are doing resistance training at the level of resistance training at the level of resistance training at the level of pull-ups and monkey bars and all the pull-ups and monkey bars and all the pull-ups and monkey bars and all the rest. Um, to the same extent, maybe even rest. Um, to the same extent, maybe even rest. Um, to the same extent, maybe even the girls a bit more if the boys are all the girls a bit more if the boys are all the girls a bit more if the boys are all playing video games or like I don't playing video games or like I don't playing video games or like I don't know. Oh no, who knows? But then there's know. Oh no, who knows? But then there's know. Oh no, who knows? But then there's a drop off because of this what really a drop off because of this what really a drop off because of this what really is just a cultural stereotype is just a cultural stereotype is just a cultural stereotype um that boys are going to go to the gym um that boys are going to go to the gym um that boys are going to go to the gym and girls aren't. Although that seems to and girls aren't. Although that seems to and girls aren't. Although that seems to be changing. Okay. Well, that's a bit of be changing. Okay. Well, that's a bit of be changing. Okay. Well, that's a bit of the sociology around resistance training the sociology around resistance training the sociology around resistance training in young girls. What about um a woman in young girls. What about um a woman in young girls. What about um a woman in her, you know, teens, 20s, 30s or in her, you know, teens, 20s, 30s or in her, you know, teens, 20s, 30s or older who's just never done formal older who's just never done formal older who's just never done formal resistance training, perhaps has done resistance training, perhaps has done resistance training, perhaps has done other forms of exercise. How should she other forms of exercise. How should she other forms of exercise. How should she think about starting resistance think about starting resistance think about starting resistance training? We could break this down into training? We could break this down into training? We could break this down into days per week, sets and reps, etc. But days per week, sets and reps, etc. But days per week, sets and reps, etc. But what's the sort of general contour what's the sort of general contour what's the sort of general contour of a really good starter program for a of a really good starter program for a of a really good starter program for a woman at essentially any age? woman at essentially any age? woman at essentially any age? &gt;&gt; Historically, I think women have been &gt;&gt; Historically, I think women have been &gt;&gt; Historically, I think women have been told that exercise is for weight loss. told that exercise is for weight loss. told that exercise is for weight loss. And so, it's really important that we And so, it's really important that we And so, it's really important that we start to shift that narrative because start to shift that narrative because start to shift that narrative because resistance training isn't about being resistance training isn't about being resistance training isn't about being smaller. It's not about the number on smaller. It's not about the number on smaller. It's not about the number on the scale. So, we want to think about the scale. So, we want to think about the scale. So, we want to think about getting bigger, about growing muscle. getting bigger, about growing muscle. getting bigger, about growing muscle. And in order to do that, we need to And in order to do that, we need to And in order to do that, we need to challenge the muscle in a way that is a challenge the muscle in a way that is a challenge the muscle in a way that is a sufficient stimulus for growth. So, if sufficient stimulus for growth. So, if sufficient stimulus for growth. So, if we think about a full body training we think about a full body training we think about a full body training program, we want to target all of the program, we want to target all of the program, we want to target all of the major muscle groups and a challenging major muscle groups and a challenging major muscle groups and a challenging load will differ depending on the load will differ depending on the load will differ depending on the exercise and the muscle groups that exercise and the muscle groups that exercise and the muscle groups that we're targeting. And we can train in we're targeting. And we can train in we're targeting. And we can train in low, moderate, or high rep ranges, but low, moderate, or high rep ranges, but low, moderate, or high rep ranges, but we need to train close enough to we need to train close enough to we need to train close enough to failure. Meaning, if we can only do 10 failure. Meaning, if we can only do 10 failure. Meaning, if we can only do 10 and not an 11th, that's failure. So, we and not an 11th, that's failure. So, we and not an 11th, that's failure. So, we can stop at maybe eight or nine and can stop at maybe eight or nine and can stop at maybe eight or nine and that's an appropriate stimulus. But if that's an appropriate stimulus. But if that's an appropriate stimulus. But if we finish that set of 10 and we could we finish that set of 10 and we could we finish that set of 10 and we could easily do another 10, then that load is easily do another 10, then that load is easily do another 10, then that load is too light. So making sure that we are too light. So making sure that we are too light. So making sure that we are doing a full body training program doing a full body training program doing a full body training program targeting all the major muscle groups targeting all the major muscle groups targeting all the major muscle groups that we're using appropriate loads and that we're using appropriate loads and that we're using appropriate loads and we're progressing over time because what we're progressing over time because what we're progressing over time because what you'll be able to do whether it's load you'll be able to do whether it's load you'll be able to do whether it's load or number of repetitions this month will or number of repetitions this month will or number of repetitions this month will change next month and the month after. change next month and the month after. change next month and the month after. &gt;&gt; You mentioned full body program. Does &gt;&gt; You mentioned full body program. Does &gt;&gt; You mentioned full body program. Does the entire body ha uh have to be trained the entire body ha uh have to be trained the entire body ha uh have to be trained each session? Or could um somebody use a each session? Or could um somebody use a each session? Or could um somebody use a so-called split like you know chest and so-called split like you know chest and so-called split like you know chest and back one day rest legs the next day rest back one day rest legs the next day rest back one day rest legs the next day rest shoulders and arms calves some ab work shoulders and arms calves some ab work shoulders and arms calves some ab work stretch repeat that sort of thing. If stretch repeat that sort of thing. If stretch repeat that sort of thing. If you're only going to train two or three you're only going to train two or three you're only going to train two or three times a week, I think it's better to do times a week, I think it's better to do times a week, I think it's better to do a full body session because a full body session because a full body session because you're hitting all those major muscle you're hitting all those major muscle you're hitting all those major muscle groups at an appropriate number of times groups at an appropriate number of times groups at an appropriate number of times per week. If you want to train more per week. If you want to train more per week. If you want to train more often than that, it does make sense to often than that, it does make sense to often than that, it does make sense to split it up. So, if you're training four split it up. So, if you're training four split it up. So, if you're training four days per week, I would do, you know, days per week, I would do, you know, days per week, I would do, you know, maybe upper body, lower body, upper maybe upper body, lower body, upper maybe upper body, lower body, upper body, lower body. If you're training 5 body, lower body. If you're training 5 body, lower body. If you're training 5 days or six days per week, then we might days or six days per week, then we might days or six days per week, then we might split it up even more the way that you split it up even more the way that you split it up even more the way that you suggested. And there are also uh options suggested. And there are also uh options suggested. And there are also uh options depending on your personal goals. And so depending on your personal goals. And so depending on your personal goals. And so if we're thinking about muscle growth if we're thinking about muscle growth if we're thinking about muscle growth for overall health, then maybe we're not for overall health, then maybe we're not for overall health, then maybe we're not doing as many exercises like accessory doing as many exercises like accessory doing as many exercises like accessory type exercises. But if we're thinking type exercises. But if we're thinking type exercises. But if we're thinking about changing the physique with about changing the physique with about changing the physique with resistance training, then we might resistance training, then we might resistance training, then we might tailor the program to your goals and tailor the program to your goals and tailor the program to your goals and preferences and um work a little bit preferences and um work a little bit preferences and um work a little bit more on those muscle groups that are more on those muscle groups that are more on those muscle groups that are important to you. for sake of example important to you. for sake of example important to you. for sake of example then I I'll just try and build a then I I'll just try and build a then I I'll just try and build a structure around what you're saying. structure around what you're saying. structure around what you're saying. Let's say uh a woman decides to do a Let's say uh a woman decides to do a Let's say uh a woman decides to do a Monday, Wednesday, Friday whole body Monday, Wednesday, Friday whole body Monday, Wednesday, Friday whole body workout each time. Take the weekends workout each time. Take the weekends workout each time. Take the weekends off. Obviously the days that it starts off. Obviously the days that it starts off. Obviously the days that it starts could shift. Um but due to schedule or could shift. Um but due to schedule or could shift. Um but due to schedule or other things, sometimes it's a Monday, other things, sometimes it's a Monday, other things, sometimes it's a Monday, Friday, sometimes it's a Monday, Friday, sometimes it's a Monday, Friday, sometimes it's a Monday, Wednesday, sometimes they hit Monday, Wednesday, sometimes they hit Monday, Wednesday, sometimes they hit Monday, Wednesday, Friday. Seems like a Wednesday, Friday. Seems like a Wednesday, Friday. Seems like a reasonable framework. Would you suggest reasonable framework. Would you suggest reasonable framework. Would you suggest training the entire body all three or in training the entire body all three or in training the entire body all three or in some cases two days per week using some cases two days per week using some cases two days per week using the same exercises to target the same the same exercises to target the same the same exercises to target the same muscle groups each time? Meaning if she muscle groups each time? Meaning if she muscle groups each time? Meaning if she squats on uh Monday for her quads and of squats on uh Monday for her quads and of squats on uh Monday for her quads and of course also for uh other muscle groups, course also for uh other muscle groups, course also for uh other muscle groups, you know, hamstrings and glutes and you know, hamstrings and glutes and you know, hamstrings and glutes and lower back are going to get hit too. But lower back are going to get hit too. But lower back are going to get hit too. But should she squat again on Wednesday and should she squat again on Wednesday and should she squat again on Wednesday and Friday or do you recommend varying the Friday or do you recommend varying the Friday or do you recommend varying the movement by uh per muscle group? the movement by uh per muscle group? the movement by uh per muscle group? It's an option to do either. I think It's an option to do either. I think It's an option to do either. I think it's there's an element of personal it's there's an element of personal it's there's an element of personal preference. If you're working on preference. If you're working on preference. If you're working on improving squat strength, then you improving squat strength, then you improving squat strength, then you probably do want to squat more than once probably do want to squat more than once probably do want to squat more than once per week because it practicing the per week because it practicing the per week because it practicing the movement is important. But if we're movement is important. But if we're movement is important. But if we're talking about muscle growth, then we talking about muscle growth, then we talking about muscle growth, then we have a lot of options. And so you can do have a lot of options. And so you can do have a lot of options. And so you can do barbell work, you can do machine work, barbell work, you can do machine work, barbell work, you can do machine work, you can do dumbbells. And we can break you can do dumbbells. And we can break you can do dumbbells. And we can break it up if you wanted more variety by it up if you wanted more variety by it up if you wanted more variety by saying, "Okay, Monday your lower body saying, "Okay, Monday your lower body saying, "Okay, Monday your lower body exercises are going to be a squat and on exercises are going to be a squat and on exercises are going to be a squat and on Wednesday we'll do a good morning and Wednesday we'll do a good morning and Wednesday we'll do a good morning and we'll work more of the posterior chain we'll work more of the posterior chain we'll work more of the posterior chain or Friday maybe we'll do more of a or Friday maybe we'll do more of a or Friday maybe we'll do more of a glute dominant exercise and we'll do glute dominant exercise and we'll do glute dominant exercise and we'll do some hip thrusts." And so I think it some hip thrusts." And so I think it some hip thrusts." And so I think it depends how many exercises you're doing depends how many exercises you're doing depends how many exercises you're doing in a session and then how long the in a session and then how long the in a session and then how long the workout's going to be before we decide workout's going to be before we decide workout's going to be before we decide how we're going to split that up. And so how we're going to split that up. And so how we're going to split that up. And so you could do this a more quad dominant you could do this a more quad dominant you could do this a more quad dominant movement like a squat, a lunge, a leg movement like a squat, a lunge, a leg movement like a squat, a lunge, a leg press, a step up, and also do more of a press, a step up, and also do more of a press, a step up, and also do more of a glute hamstring dominant movement like a glute hamstring dominant movement like a glute hamstring dominant movement like a good morning or a stiff leg deadlift. good morning or a stiff leg deadlift. good morning or a stiff leg deadlift. and do both in the same session. Or you and do both in the same session. Or you and do both in the same session. Or you could split those up and have more of a could split those up and have more of a could split those up and have more of a quad dominant day and a more hamstring quad dominant day and a more hamstring quad dominant day and a more hamstring glute dominant day. glute dominant day. glute dominant day. &gt;&gt; Got it. Um, I'm going to drill down a &gt;&gt; Got it. Um, I'm going to drill down a &gt;&gt; Got it. Um, I'm going to drill down a little bit more into specifics because I little bit more into specifics because I little bit more into specifics because I anticipate that's what people will want anticipate that's what people will want anticipate that's what people will want and it's uh probably the first time and it's uh probably the first time and it's uh probably the first time we've had somebody uh so well qualified we've had somebody uh so well qualified we've had somebody uh so well qualified to get into these specifics about to get into these specifics about to get into these specifics about resistance training on this podcast resistance training on this podcast resistance training on this podcast specifically for women. Although you're specifically for women. Although you're specifically for women. Although you're going to tell us later that the words going to tell us later that the words going to tell us later that the words specifically for women is dangerous specifically for women is dangerous specifically for women is dangerous language. We'll we'll get back to that. language. We'll we'll get back to that. language. We'll we'll get back to that. Okay. So, let's assume two or three days Okay. So, let's assume two or three days Okay. So, let's assume two or three days per week whole body workouts. Um, one per week whole body workouts. Um, one per week whole body workouts. Um, one could vary or keep the exercises per could vary or keep the exercises per could vary or keep the exercises per muscle group the same. Um, how many work muscle group the same. Um, how many work muscle group the same. Um, how many work sets after a sufficient warm-up? And sets after a sufficient warm-up? And sets after a sufficient warm-up? And when I think of warm-up, I'll take the when I think of warm-up, I'll take the when I think of warm-up, I'll take the liberty here and you can tell me where liberty here and you can tell me where liberty here and you can tell me where I'm wrong. I think, okay, a light set to I'm wrong. I think, okay, a light set to I'm wrong. I think, okay, a light set to kind of remind yourself what the kind of remind yourself what the kind of remind yourself what the mechanics are, get some blood flow mechanics are, get some blood flow mechanics are, get some blood flow going, see if anything feels like it going, see if anything feels like it going, see if anything feels like it might need another light warm-up set and might need another light warm-up set and might need another light warm-up set and just kind of like a stretching out. Then just kind of like a stretching out. Then just kind of like a stretching out. Then a moderate set, like 50% of your one rep a moderate set, like 50% of your one rep a moderate set, like 50% of your one rep max, something where you could do 10 to max, something where you could do 10 to max, something where you could do 10 to 15 reps, but maybe you do seven or eight 15 reps, but maybe you do seven or eight 15 reps, but maybe you do seven or eight or maybe even a little heavier. And then or maybe even a little heavier. And then or maybe even a little heavier. And then move to the work set. The work set move to the work set. The work set move to the work set. The work set that's taken within to failure or within that's taken within to failure or within that's taken within to failure or within a rep or two just shy of failure. How a rep or two just shy of failure. How a rep or two just shy of failure. How many work sets after a sufficient many work sets after a sufficient many work sets after a sufficient warm-up for that muscle group? warm-up for that muscle group? warm-up for that muscle group? &gt;&gt; At least two. &gt;&gt; At least two. &gt;&gt; At least two. &gt;&gt; I prefer three. &gt;&gt; I prefer three. &gt;&gt; I prefer three. &gt;&gt; Uh you could do four. Beyond that is &gt;&gt; Uh you could do four. Beyond that is &gt;&gt; Uh you could do four. Beyond that is probably overkill. probably overkill. probably overkill. &gt;&gt; And that's assuming one exercise for &gt;&gt; And that's assuming one exercise for &gt;&gt; And that's assuming one exercise for that muscle group for the entire that muscle group for the entire that muscle group for the entire workout. So four three to four sets workout. So four three to four sets workout. So four three to four sets per muscle group per workout, each per muscle group per workout, each per muscle group per workout, each muscle two to three times per week muscle two to three times per week muscle two to three times per week &gt;&gt; with the understanding that many &gt;&gt; with the understanding that many &gt;&gt; with the understanding that many exercises work more than one muscle exercises work more than one muscle exercises work more than one muscle group. So, if I'm doing a leg extension, group. So, if I'm doing a leg extension, group. So, if I'm doing a leg extension, then I know I'm specifically working the then I know I'm specifically working the then I know I'm specifically working the quads, right? But if I'm doing a leg quads, right? But if I'm doing a leg quads, right? But if I'm doing a leg press or a squat, then yes, I'm working press or a squat, then yes, I'm working press or a squat, then yes, I'm working the quads, but I'm also working the quads, but I'm also working the quads, but I'm also working the glutes. And you can kind of say, well, glutes. And you can kind of say, well, glutes. And you can kind of say, well, is that a half a set for the glutes? Is is that a half a set for the glutes? Is is that a half a set for the glutes? Is that a full set for the glutes? And same that a full set for the glutes? And same that a full set for the glutes? And same thing if we're doing a bench press. Yes, thing if we're doing a bench press. Yes, thing if we're doing a bench press. Yes, you're working your chest, you're working your chest, you're working your chest, you're working your delts, you're also working your delts, you're also working your delts, you're also working your triceps. So, uh, is that a full set your triceps. So, uh, is that a full set your triceps. So, uh, is that a full set for the triceps, or is it just a tricep for the triceps, or is it just a tricep for the triceps, or is it just a tricep push down that I'm going to consider a push down that I'm going to consider a push down that I'm going to consider a set for the triceps? So it gets a set for the triceps? So it gets a set for the triceps? So it gets a little bit murky when we think about little bit murky when we think about little bit murky when we think about exercises that work multiple muscle exercises that work multiple muscle exercises that work multiple muscle groups. But I think if we focus on those groups. But I think if we focus on those groups. But I think if we focus on those compound movements, the bench press, compound movements, the bench press, compound movements, the bench press, the squats, the deadlifts, then we the squats, the deadlifts, then we the squats, the deadlifts, then we should think in that range that we're should think in that range that we're should think in that range that we're doing at least two, preferably three, uh doing at least two, preferably three, uh doing at least two, preferably three, uh but beyond four probably unnecessary. but beyond four probably unnecessary. but beyond four probably unnecessary. Well, at three workouts per week, you Well, at three workouts per week, you Well, at three workouts per week, you know, it's, you know, that's getting know, it's, you know, that's getting know, it's, you know, that's getting anywhere from, you know, nine to 12 sets anywhere from, you know, nine to 12 sets anywhere from, you know, nine to 12 sets for the quads. That's that's a fair for the quads. That's that's a fair for the quads. That's that's a fair amount of work. If one were to collapse amount of work. If one were to collapse amount of work. If one were to collapse all of that into a single workout, all of that into a single workout, all of that into a single workout, that's a lot of quad work. What that's a lot of quad work. What that's a lot of quad work. What sort of rest intervals between sets? sort of rest intervals between sets? sort of rest intervals between sets? &gt;&gt; I prefer autoregulation for rest. I &gt;&gt; I prefer autoregulation for rest. I &gt;&gt; I prefer autoregulation for rest. I think if you have strength specific think if you have strength specific think if you have strength specific goals, meaning you're really working on goals, meaning you're really working on goals, meaning you're really working on a one rep max deadlift, let's say, in a one rep max deadlift, let's say, in a one rep max deadlift, let's say, in order to repeat that type of order to repeat that type of order to repeat that type of performance, you will need longer rest. performance, you will need longer rest. performance, you will need longer rest. Um maybe four minutes, 5 minutes, it Um maybe four minutes, 5 minutes, it Um maybe four minutes, 5 minutes, it depends, right? Uh but for an average depends, right? Uh but for an average depends, right? Uh but for an average gym session, you know, using some gym session, you know, using some gym session, you know, using some machines [clears throat] or using some machines [clears throat] or using some machines [clears throat] or using some dumbbells, then two minutes is probably dumbbells, then two minutes is probably dumbbells, then two minutes is probably fine for most people. And once you're fine for most people. And once you're fine for most people. And once you're you've been training for a while, you'll you've been training for a while, you'll you've been training for a while, you'll know when you're ready. But if it makes know when you're ready. But if it makes know when you're ready. But if it makes you feel better to set the timer, then you feel better to set the timer, then you feel better to set the timer, then I'd say 2 minutes for most exercises. Um I'd say 2 minutes for most exercises. Um I'd say 2 minutes for most exercises. Um maybe 3 minutes for something like a maybe 3 minutes for something like a maybe 3 minutes for something like a squat or deadlift. Is there anything of squat or deadlift. Is there anything of squat or deadlift. Is there anything of value that can be done during the rest value that can be done during the rest value that can be done during the rest period other than rest and change the period other than rest and change the period other than rest and change the weight? Of course, weight? Of course, weight? Of course, &gt;&gt; if you want to maximize time efficiency, &gt;&gt; if you want to maximize time efficiency, &gt;&gt; if you want to maximize time efficiency, then we might consider agonist then we might consider agonist then we might consider agonist antagonist supersets. So when you look antagonist supersets. So when you look antagonist supersets. So when you look at somebody doing a bench press or chest at somebody doing a bench press or chest at somebody doing a bench press or chest press and then instead of resting for press and then instead of resting for press and then instead of resting for the two to three minutes and then doing the two to three minutes and then doing the two to three minutes and then doing the next set, they go and they do a row. the next set, they go and they do a row. the next set, they go and they do a row. And so you're going back and forth and And so you're going back and forth and And so you're going back and forth and you're pairing a push and a pull. you're pairing a push and a pull. you're pairing a push and a pull. And that doesn't seem to interfere with And that doesn't seem to interfere with And that doesn't seem to interfere with adaptation or even acute performance the adaptation or even acute performance the adaptation or even acute performance the same way it would if you didn't rest in same way it would if you didn't rest in same way it would if you didn't rest in between your straight sets of bench between your straight sets of bench between your straight sets of bench press. So that can be a really viable press. So that can be a really viable press. So that can be a really viable way to train especially if you are way to train especially if you are way to train especially if you are crunched for time. So maybe a bench crunched for time. So maybe a bench crunched for time. So maybe a bench press or some other press type movement, press or some other press type movement, press or some other press type movement, dumbbell incline presses, whatever um dumbbell incline presses, whatever um dumbbell incline presses, whatever um she selects and then um move immediately she selects and then um move immediately she selects and then um move immediately from there to a pull down. from there to a pull down. from there to a pull down. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; And then wait out the remainder of the &gt;&gt; And then wait out the remainder of the &gt;&gt; And then wait out the remainder of the rest interval and then do another rest interval and then do another rest interval and then do another superset. That sort of arrangement. superset. That sort of arrangement. superset. That sort of arrangement. &gt;&gt; Yep. superers setting or doing an &gt;&gt; Yep. superers setting or doing an &gt;&gt; Yep. superers setting or doing an exercise that normally you would rest exercise that normally you would rest exercise that normally you would rest two or three minutes between and instead two or three minutes between and instead two or three minutes between and instead resting a minute than going doing the resting a minute than going doing the resting a minute than going doing the antagonistic muscle and back also um antagonistic muscle and back also um antagonistic muscle and back also um prevents getting lost in your phone prevents getting lost in your phone prevents getting lost in your phone because you're on task. You know, it's because you're on task. You know, it's because you're on task. You know, it's amazing how much longer workouts get amazing how much longer workouts get amazing how much longer workouts get when one starts texting or paying when one starts texting or paying when one starts texting or paying attention to other things and the attention to other things and the attention to other things and the switching back of focus from the switching back of focus from the switching back of focus from exercise to phone is a I don't know I exercise to phone is a I don't know I exercise to phone is a I don't know I don't know any good studies on this but don't know any good studies on this but don't know any good studies on this but it can't be healthy. it can't be healthy. it can't be healthy. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There are also studies about &gt;&gt; Yeah. There are also studies about &gt;&gt; Yeah. There are also studies about stretching in between or doing some sort stretching in between or doing some sort stretching in between or doing some sort of active recovery type work in between. of active recovery type work in between. of active recovery type work in between. We don't have enough data to say that's We don't have enough data to say that's We don't have enough data to say that's necessarily beneficial. Uh but I think necessarily beneficial. Uh but I think necessarily beneficial. Uh but I think if [clears throat] people are thinking I if [clears throat] people are thinking I if [clears throat] people are thinking I don't want to sit and rest and do don't want to sit and rest and do don't want to sit and rest and do nothing, then the superset or even a nothing, then the superset or even a nothing, then the superset or even a circuit type of structure is probably a circuit type of structure is probably a circuit type of structure is probably a better way to go. better way to go. better way to go. &gt;&gt; What about pushing past failure? some, &gt;&gt; What about pushing past failure? some, &gt;&gt; What about pushing past failure? some, you know, assisted reps, aka forced you know, assisted reps, aka forced you know, assisted reps, aka forced reps, done in reasonably good form, so reps, done in reasonably good form, so reps, done in reasonably good form, so injury isn't a risk. Uh, drop sets where injury isn't a risk. Uh, drop sets where injury isn't a risk. Uh, drop sets where you immediately lower the weight and get you immediately lower the weight and get you immediately lower the weight and get a few more reps after failure. Are you a few more reps after failure. Are you a few more reps after failure. Are you a fan of these so-called um intensity fan of these so-called um intensity fan of these so-called um intensity techniques? &gt;&gt; I think forced reps where we're not &gt;&gt; I think forced reps where we're not &gt;&gt; I think forced reps where we're not getting much benefit from other than it getting much benefit from other than it getting much benefit from other than it can be fun if you're working with a can be fun if you're working with a can be fun if you're working with a training partner. [laughter] training partner. [laughter] training partner. [laughter] Uh [clears throat] Uh [clears throat] Uh [clears throat] drop sets um are a good kind of finisher drop sets um are a good kind of finisher drop sets um are a good kind of finisher because they can especially if you're because they can especially if you're because they can especially if you're doing a cable type exercise. doing a cable type exercise. doing a cable type exercise. I'm not I'm not going to say drop sets I'm not I'm not going to say drop sets I'm not I'm not going to say drop sets are better than straight sets, but it is are better than straight sets, but it is are better than straight sets, but it is a way to add some kind of variety into a way to add some kind of variety into a way to add some kind of variety into especially the last set of a workout. especially the last set of a workout. especially the last set of a workout. um or if you're doing exercises that um or if you're doing exercises that um or if you're doing exercises that are um just more conducive to drop sets are um just more conducive to drop sets are um just more conducive to drop sets like a bicep curl or a leg extension or like a bicep curl or a leg extension or like a bicep curl or a leg extension or something that's really easy to something that's really easy to something that's really easy to immediately [clears throat] drop the immediately [clears throat] drop the immediately [clears throat] drop the weight and go to the next. So, it's not weight and go to the next. So, it's not weight and go to the next. So, it's not better, but it's certainly a tool and it better, but it's certainly a tool and it better, but it's certainly a tool and it fits into that timeefficient strategy. fits into that timeefficient strategy. fits into that timeefficient strategy. &gt;&gt; For the longest time, I thought time &gt;&gt; For the longest time, I thought time &gt;&gt; For the longest time, I thought time under tension and moving the weight under tension and moving the weight under tension and moving the weight really slow was a value. I know that really slow was a value. I know that really slow was a value. I know that everyone should control the weight so everyone should control the weight so everyone should control the weight so that you don't get injured. No, you that you don't get injured. No, you that you don't get injured. No, you know, dropping the weight and swinging know, dropping the weight and swinging know, dropping the weight and swinging it back up and this kind of thing. Um, it back up and this kind of thing. Um, it back up and this kind of thing. Um, but assuming that the weight is under but assuming that the weight is under but assuming that the weight is under control, meaning momentum isn't doing control, meaning momentum isn't doing control, meaning momentum isn't doing most of the work, you're being careful most of the work, you're being careful most of the work, you're being careful to protect your um form and posture, to protect your um form and posture, to protect your um form and posture, etc. Is there a best rate of movement etc. Is there a best rate of movement etc. Is there a best rate of movement for the resistance? Should we emphasize for the resistance? Should we emphasize for the resistance? Should we emphasize the lowering phase, etc.? the lowering phase, etc.? the lowering phase, etc.? &gt;&gt; There's always going to be a harder part &gt;&gt; There's always going to be a harder part &gt;&gt; There's always going to be a harder part of the movement and an easier part of the movement and an easier part of the movement and an easier part of the movement. So, we should the movement. So, we should the movement. So, we should move the weight as quickly as we can move the weight as quickly as we can move the weight as quickly as we can during that difficult phase and then during that difficult phase and then during that difficult phase and then control on the easier phase. But trying control on the easier phase. But trying control on the easier phase. But trying to intentionally slow down either to intentionally slow down either to intentionally slow down either direction is not particularly direction is not particularly direction is not particularly advantageous, especially if we think advantageous, especially if we think advantageous, especially if we think about like standing up from a about like standing up from a about like standing up from a squat. We want to stand up from the squat. We want to stand up from the squat. We want to stand up from the bottom of the squat as quickly as we can bottom of the squat as quickly as we can bottom of the squat as quickly as we can under load. If we have a lot of load, under load. If we have a lot of load, under load. If we have a lot of load, we're not going to stand up super fast, we're not going to stand up super fast, we're not going to stand up super fast, but we should be thinking stand up but we should be thinking stand up but we should be thinking stand up because if we don't, we're less likely because if we don't, we're less likely because if we don't, we're less likely to be able to complete that repetition. to be able to complete that repetition. to be able to complete that repetition. &gt;&gt; I think this is a really important point &gt;&gt; I think this is a really important point &gt;&gt; I think this is a really important point that most non muscle physiologists, that most non muscle physiologists, that most non muscle physiologists, exercise physiologists have not been exercise physiologists have not been exercise physiologists have not been trained on, but I'm hearing more about trained on, but I'm hearing more about trained on, but I'm hearing more about this these days that trying to move the this these days that trying to move the this these days that trying to move the weight as fast as one can under control weight as fast as one can under control weight as fast as one can under control against resistance should be the mindset against resistance should be the mindset against resistance should be the mindset inside of the set. Is that correct? Did inside of the set. Is that correct? Did inside of the set. Is that correct? Did I want to make sure I'm not contorting I want to make sure I'm not contorting I want to make sure I'm not contorting your words at all. your words at all. your words at all. &gt;&gt; That's right. And when you think about &gt;&gt; That's right. And when you think about &gt;&gt; That's right. And when you think about doing a set of 10, right? By the time doing a set of 10, right? By the time doing a set of 10, right? By the time you get to seven, eight, nine, the you get to seven, eight, nine, the you get to seven, eight, nine, the weight is already moving more slowly. weight is already moving more slowly. weight is already moving more slowly. You're starting to grind it out because You're starting to grind it out because You're starting to grind it out because it's getting more and more challenging. it's getting more and more challenging. it's getting more and more challenging. And so if you are using a load that And so if you are using a load that And so if you are using a load that is appropriate, then the rate the is appropriate, then the rate the is appropriate, then the rate the time it takes for you to complete that time it takes for you to complete that time it takes for you to complete that rep will inevitably get a little bit rep will inevitably get a little bit rep will inevitably get a little bit longer. But that's not something you're longer. But that's not something you're longer. But that's not something you're doing intentionally. doing intentionally. doing intentionally. &gt;&gt; Got it. Um, getting really granular &gt;&gt; Got it. Um, getting really granular &gt;&gt; Got it. Um, getting really granular here, but I get asked these questions here, but I get asked these questions here, but I get asked these questions all the time and um, as it relates to all the time and um, as it relates to all the time and um, as it relates to women's training specifically. You'd be women's training specifically. You'd be women's training specifically. You'd be amazed that people are coming to me for amazed that people are coming to me for amazed that people are coming to me for that, but almost certainly so that I that, but almost certainly so that I that, but almost certainly so that I could ask you. Partial repetitions and could ask you. Partial repetitions and could ask you. Partial repetitions and isometric holds. Do they have any value? isometric holds. Do they have any value? isometric holds. Do they have any value? The problem with doing partial The problem with doing partial The problem with doing partial repetitions or even playing with tempo repetitions or even playing with tempo repetitions or even playing with tempo is that it's really difficult to is that it's really difficult to is that it's really difficult to replicate consistently. And so I replicate consistently. And so I replicate consistently. And so I mentioned earlier that we want to mentioned earlier that we want to mentioned earlier that we want to progress over time. And if we're progress over time. And if we're progress over time. And if we're standardizing the range of motion and standardizing the range of motion and standardizing the range of motion and we're standardizing the exercise and we're standardizing the exercise and we're standardizing the exercise and we're standardizing the tempo, then it's we're standardizing the tempo, then it's we're standardizing the tempo, then it's easy to say, "Okay, I'm using 2 and a easy to say, "Okay, I'm using 2 and a easy to say, "Okay, I'm using 2 and a half more pounds this week. I've half more pounds this week. I've half more pounds this week. I've progressed." If we're playing around progressed." If we're playing around progressed." If we're playing around with all of these variables and then with all of these variables and then with all of these variables and then we're trying to add load, it starts to we're trying to add load, it starts to we're trying to add load, it starts to get a little tricky because you're get a little tricky because you're get a little tricky because you're saying, I know I'm using more load, but saying, I know I'm using more load, but saying, I know I'm using more load, but am I cutting the range of motion short am I cutting the range of motion short am I cutting the range of motion short in order to lift more? Uh am I in order to lift more? Uh am I in order to lift more? Uh am I speeding up the reps in order to lift speeding up the reps in order to lift speeding up the reps in order to lift more? So we want to introduce fewer more? So we want to introduce fewer more? So we want to introduce fewer variables to make sure that we are variables to make sure that we are variables to make sure that we are progressing whether it's a rep or load progressing whether it's a rep or load progressing whether it's a rep or load &gt;&gt; repetition ranges. Uh earlier you said &gt;&gt; repetition ranges. Uh earlier you said &gt;&gt; repetition ranges. Uh earlier you said getting close to failure or going to getting close to failure or going to getting close to failure or going to failure is the critical component but failure is the critical component but failure is the critical component but within a pretty broad range. Um, do you within a pretty broad range. Um, do you within a pretty broad range. Um, do you think it's necessary to limit uh oneself think it's necessary to limit uh oneself think it's necessary to limit uh oneself to certain repetition ranges on the to certain repetition ranges on the to certain repetition ranges on the order of a workout, the week, the month, order of a workout, the week, the month, order of a workout, the week, the month, a phase of the year? Um, are repetition a phase of the year? Um, are repetition a phase of the year? Um, are repetition ranges between, you know, three and five ranges between, you know, three and five ranges between, you know, three and five compatible with repetition ranges for compatible with repetition ranges for compatible with repetition ranges for the, you know, other muscle groups are the, you know, other muscle groups are the, you know, other muscle groups are the same in the same week of 10 to the same in the same week of 10 to the same in the same week of 10 to 15? I mean, I think there's a lot of um 15? I mean, I think there's a lot of um 15? I mean, I think there's a lot of um kind of uh vagueness around there this kind of uh vagueness around there this kind of uh vagueness around there this for women and for men. You know, you for women and for men. You know, you for women and for men. You know, you hear, "Oh, low reps get you strong but hear, "Oh, low reps get you strong but hear, "Oh, low reps get you strong but don't grow muscle." And then here, don't grow muscle." And then here, don't grow muscle." And then here, higher reps, as long as you go to higher reps, as long as you go to higher reps, as long as you go to failure, they'll grow muscle. And uh failure, they'll grow muscle. And uh failure, they'll grow muscle. And uh that's all fine and good, but no one that's all fine and good, but no one that's all fine and good, but no one really has ever said clearly how to vary really has ever said clearly how to vary really has ever said clearly how to vary this stuff in a way that allows for the this stuff in a way that allows for the this stuff in a way that allows for the best progress. And um I realize that's a best progress. And um I realize that's a best progress. And um I realize that's a lot to ask you to tackle in one lot to ask you to tackle in one lot to ask you to tackle in one answer, but you have the mic. uh what answer, but you have the mic. uh what answer, but you have the mic. uh what are your thoughts on repetition what are your thoughts on repetition what are your thoughts on repetition ranges and how to vary them uh and ranges and how to vary them uh and ranges and how to vary them uh and when &gt;&gt; we used to think and they used to teach &gt;&gt; we used to think and they used to teach &gt;&gt; we used to think and they used to teach all the personal trainers this there was all the personal trainers this there was all the personal trainers this there was a strength endurance continuum such that a strength endurance continuum such that a strength endurance continuum such that you're doing one to five reps and you're doing one to five reps and you're doing one to five reps and you're building strength and then you're doing building strength and then you're doing building strength and then you're doing something kind of moderate range up to something kind of moderate range up to something kind of moderate range up to 12 and that's hypertrophy and then 12 and that's hypertrophy and then 12 and that's hypertrophy and then beyond that 12 to 20 that's in muscular beyond that 12 to 20 that's in muscular beyond that 12 to 20 that's in muscular endurance and our understanding of that endurance and our understanding of that endurance and our understanding of that has evolved certainly if you're training has evolved certainly if you're training has evolved certainly if you're training for maximal strength, i.e. a one rep for maximal strength, i.e. a one rep for maximal strength, i.e. a one rep max, then you need to be training in max, then you need to be training in max, then you need to be training in those lower rep ranges because that is a those lower rep ranges because that is a those lower rep ranges because that is a sports specific uh training. And so it's sports specific uh training. And so it's sports specific uh training. And so it's not that if you do sets of 10, your one not that if you do sets of 10, your one not that if you do sets of 10, your one rep max won't get stronger. It will, but rep max won't get stronger. It will, but rep max won't get stronger. It will, but to maximize your one rep max, then we to maximize your one rep max, then we to maximize your one rep max, then we need to do some very high load, very low need to do some very high load, very low need to do some very high load, very low rep training. If the goal is rep training. If the goal is rep training. If the goal is hypertrophy, we have way more hypertrophy, we have way more hypertrophy, we have way more flexibility because we do see similar flexibility because we do see similar flexibility because we do see similar growth whether you're training in those growth whether you're training in those growth whether you're training in those high load low rep ranges or the lower high load low rep ranges or the lower high load low rep ranges or the lower load high rep ranges and anything in load high rep ranges and anything in load high rep ranges and anything in between provided that we train close between provided that we train close between provided that we train close enough to failure. However, we need to enough to failure. However, we need to enough to failure. However, we need to think about overall volume because think about overall volume because think about overall volume because that's very important for growth. So, if that's very important for growth. So, if that's very important for growth. So, if we're doing sets of three, we're going we're doing sets of three, we're going we're doing sets of three, we're going to need to do a lot of sets of three to need to do a lot of sets of three to need to do a lot of sets of three to accomplish the same overall volume that accomplish the same overall volume that accomplish the same overall volume that we would get by doing sets of eight or we would get by doing sets of eight or we would get by doing sets of eight or 10. &gt;&gt; That last point, I'm so grateful you &gt;&gt; That last point, I'm so grateful you &gt;&gt; That last point, I'm so grateful you said that. I used to hear the late said that. I used to hear the late said that. I used to hear the late Charles Pulquin say this that if you're Charles Pulquin say this that if you're Charles Pulquin say this that if you're going to use higher repetitions, let's going to use higher repetitions, let's going to use higher repetitions, let's say between eight and 15, which for me say between eight and 15, which for me say between eight and 15, which for me seems like high repetitions, um you can seems like high repetitions, um you can seems like high repetitions, um you can I don't want to say get away with, but I don't want to say get away with, but I don't want to say get away with, but you could do two or three sets per you could do two or three sets per you could do two or three sets per muscle group um or per exercise and muscle group um or per exercise and muscle group um or per exercise and maybe two exercises for a muscle group. maybe two exercises for a muscle group. maybe two exercises for a muscle group. Whereas, if you were going to train in Whereas, if you were going to train in Whereas, if you were going to train in the three to six rep range, you might the three to six rep range, you might the three to six rep range, you might need to do eight sets of and because need to do eight sets of and because need to do eight sets of and because typically one rests longer in between typically one rests longer in between typically one rests longer in between sets when with heavier loads. Those are sets when with heavier loads. Those are sets when with heavier loads. Those are two very different workouts. One is two very different workouts. One is two very different workouts. One is actually much more efficient than the actually much more efficient than the actually much more efficient than the other, even though it gets you something other, even though it gets you something other, even though it gets you something slightly different. I'm sure people are slightly different. I'm sure people are slightly different. I'm sure people are wondering, and I know you don't want to wondering, and I know you don't want to wondering, and I know you don't want to bias people's choices, but do you have a bias people's choices, but do you have a bias people's choices, but do you have a favorite repetition range for you for favorite repetition range for you for favorite repetition range for you for your level of experience these days? I your level of experience these days? I your level of experience these days? I mean, what do you typically select? mean, what do you typically select? mean, what do you typically select? I typically I typically I typically do something in the six to 12 depending do something in the six to 12 depending do something in the six to 12 depending on the exercise, but I think some on the exercise, but I think some on the exercise, but I think some exercises are fun to do 15 reps of um exercises are fun to do 15 reps of um exercises are fun to do 15 reps of um and some are not. So I think if you're and some are not. So I think if you're and some are not. So I think if you're doing something like face pulls for your doing something like face pulls for your doing something like face pulls for your rear delts or leg extensions, I would rear delts or leg extensions, I would rear delts or leg extensions, I would never say, "Yeah, do a set of three." never say, "Yeah, do a set of three." never say, "Yeah, do a set of three." But if you're doing squats, I don't want But if you're doing squats, I don't want But if you're doing squats, I don't want to do a set of 20 squats ever. And most to do a set of 20 squats ever. And most to do a set of 20 squats ever. And most people don't. Uh so I think we can for people don't. Uh so I think we can for people don't. Uh so I think we can for most people say all right, somewhere in most people say all right, somewhere in most people say all right, somewhere in the kind of 6 to 12ish is a good the kind of 6 to 12ish is a good the kind of 6 to 12ish is a good sweet spot. If you're new, I'd say go 8 sweet spot. If you're new, I'd say go 8 sweet spot. If you're new, I'd say go 8 to 12 because we want to get really to 12 because we want to get really to 12 because we want to get really comfortable with the movement pattern. comfortable with the movement pattern. comfortable with the movement pattern. And so if you're only doing sets of four And so if you're only doing sets of four And so if you're only doing sets of four or sets of five, then you're not or sets of five, then you're not or sets of five, then you're not repeating the movement enough to get repeating the movement enough to get repeating the movement enough to get really proficient with the technique. So really proficient with the technique. So really proficient with the technique. So I'd love for those people to start I'd love for those people to start I'd love for those people to start in a moderate rep range. I think also if in a moderate rep range. I think also if in a moderate rep range. I think also if you go beyond that, then there's you go beyond that, then there's you go beyond that, then there's more of a chance of uh kind of form more of a chance of uh kind of form more of a chance of uh kind of form failure and injury risk. And so we want failure and injury risk. And so we want failure and injury risk. And so we want to be really proficient in the moderate to be really proficient in the moderate to be really proficient in the moderate rep range before we start exploring rep range before we start exploring rep range before we start exploring those lower or higher rep ranges. Do you those lower or higher rep ranges. Do you those lower or higher rep ranges. Do you think it's valuable uh for women to vary think it's valuable uh for women to vary think it's valuable uh for women to vary the repetition or men uh to vary the repetition or men uh to vary the repetition or men uh to vary the repetition ranges um like week by week repetition ranges um like week by week repetition ranges um like week by week like okay this week I'm going to train like okay this week I'm going to train like okay this week I'm going to train six to 10 reps on everything or um I'm six to 10 reps on everything or um I'm six to 10 reps on everything or um I'm going to go three to five reps on going to go three to five reps on going to go three to five reps on everything for three weeks then I'm everything for three weeks then I'm everything for three weeks then I'm going to switch to six to eight for going to switch to six to eight for going to switch to six to eight for three weeks and then I'm going to go you three weeks and then I'm going to go you three weeks and then I'm going to go you know 10 to 15 for three weeks and then know 10 to 15 for three weeks and then know 10 to 15 for three weeks and then repeat. Is there is there any um known repeat. Is there is there any um known repeat. Is there is there any um known value for hypertrophy and strength value for hypertrophy and strength value for hypertrophy and strength training to doing it sticking with one training to doing it sticking with one training to doing it sticking with one thing and then systematically varying thing and then systematically varying thing and then systematically varying every say three weeks? every say three weeks? every say three weeks? &gt;&gt; You can do it that way. I prefer to &gt;&gt; You can do it that way. I prefer to &gt;&gt; You can do it that way. I prefer to combine it into the week. So if let's combine it into the week. So if let's combine it into the week. So if let's say we're doing squats twice a week, say we're doing squats twice a week, say we're doing squats twice a week, then let's do a lower rep set day and a then let's do a lower rep set day and a then let's do a lower rep set day and a moderate rep set day. And you can do moderate rep set day. And you can do moderate rep set day. And you can do that for all of your kind of main that for all of your kind of main that for all of your kind of main compound lifts. And that adds some compound lifts. And that adds some compound lifts. And that adds some variety, but also means you have the variety, but also means you have the variety, but also means you have the data to make sure that you're data to make sure that you're data to make sure that you're progressing in each of those rep ranges progressing in each of those rep ranges progressing in each of those rep ranges kind of simultaneously. Whereas if we kind of simultaneously. Whereas if we kind of simultaneously. Whereas if we were to do sets of six for three weeks were to do sets of six for three weeks were to do sets of six for three weeks and then move to sets of 12, then I and then move to sets of 12, then I and then move to sets of 12, then I don't really have that anchor point for don't really have that anchor point for don't really have that anchor point for am I making progress because now I'm am I making progress because now I'm am I making progress because now I'm doing the that lift in another rep doing the that lift in another rep doing the that lift in another rep range. &gt;&gt; If you're a regular listener of the &gt;&gt; If you're a regular listener of the &gt;&gt; If you're a regular listener of the Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been on the fence about it, now is an awesome on the fence about it, now is an awesome on the fence about it, now is an awesome time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full supplement package with your first supplement package with your first supplement package with your first subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a sample pack of the new sleep formula, sample pack of the new sleep formula, sample pack of the new sleep formula, AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It tastes great and like I said, it has me tastes great and like I said, it has me tastes great and like I said, it has me sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, so make sure to go to drink so make sure to go to drink so make sure to go to drink a1.com/huberman to get started today. A moment ago, you to get started today. A moment ago, you to get started today. A moment ago, you said something and I'm so grateful that said something and I'm so grateful that said something and I'm so grateful that you said this because I don't think it's you said this because I don't think it's you said this because I don't think it's ever been communicated as clearly as you ever been communicated as clearly as you ever been communicated as clearly as you did and I would just want to double did and I would just want to double did and I would just want to double click on it. Um, there's this assumption click on it. Um, there's this assumption click on it. Um, there's this assumption that heavier sets, and I'm not referring that heavier sets, and I'm not referring that heavier sets, and I'm not referring to one to three reps. I mean, let's say to one to three reps. I mean, let's say to one to three reps. I mean, let's say in the five to eight repetition range, in the five to eight repetition range, in the five to eight repetition range, final repetitions close to failure or final repetitions close to failure or final repetitions close to failure or failure, that somehow they are more failure, that somehow they are more failure, that somehow they are more dangerous um than high repetition sets. dangerous um than high repetition sets. dangerous um than high repetition sets. In my experience, high repetitions from In my experience, high repetitions from In my experience, high repetitions from 15 to 25, especially on compound 15 to 25, especially on compound 15 to 25, especially on compound movements, get people hurt movements, get people hurt movements, get people hurt at least as often as the heavy stuff. at least as often as the heavy stuff. at least as often as the heavy stuff. And I think it's because it's I'm And I think it's because it's I'm And I think it's because it's I'm guessing here, but that it's hard to guessing here, but that it's hard to guessing here, but that it's hard to concentrate and generate perfect form on concentrate and generate perfect form on concentrate and generate perfect form on a very high repetition set. And compound a very high repetition set. And compound a very high repetition set. And compound movements are where you can get hurt. movements are where you can get hurt. movements are where you can get hurt. You can get hurt on isolation movements, You can get hurt on isolation movements, You can get hurt on isolation movements, but multi- joint movements done for 20 but multi- joint movements done for 20 but multi- joint movements done for 20 reps, I mean, unless you're really reps, I mean, unless you're really reps, I mean, unless you're really locked in mentally, that's often where locked in mentally, that's often where locked in mentally, that's often where people get injured is my observation. people get injured is my observation. people get injured is my observation. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's an equal opportunity &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's an equal opportunity &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it's an equal opportunity game. You know, we really need to game. You know, we really need to game. You know, we really need to make sure that form is dialed in and make sure that form is dialed in and make sure that form is dialed in and that you have a spotter or a training that you have a spotter or a training that you have a spotter or a training partner if appropriate depending on the partner if appropriate depending on the partner if appropriate depending on the lift that you're doing. Because if lift that you're doing. Because if lift that you're doing. Because if you're doing high rep deadlifts, for you're doing high rep deadlifts, for you're doing high rep deadlifts, for example, you do have more opportunities example, you do have more opportunities example, you do have more opportunities to lift the weight in such a way that to lift the weight in such a way that to lift the weight in such a way that you just tweak something. And sometimes you just tweak something. And sometimes you just tweak something. And sometimes if people are doing those lower rep if people are doing those lower rep if people are doing those lower rep heavier sets, they're more likely to heavier sets, they're more likely to heavier sets, they're more likely to kind of take that moment, reset, lock kind of take that moment, reset, lock kind of take that moment, reset, lock in, and then perform the next rep. And in, and then perform the next rep. And in, and then perform the next rep. And it's a bit easier to rush the set and it's a bit easier to rush the set and it's a bit easier to rush the set and not kind of force yourself to not kind of force yourself to not kind of force yourself to reset and focus on those form cues reset and focus on those form cues reset and focus on those form cues when you're using a load that doesn't when you're using a load that doesn't when you're using a load that doesn't require you to do so. require you to do so. require you to do so. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Yes, recently there was a &gt;&gt; Thank you. Yes, recently there was a &gt;&gt; Thank you. Yes, recently there was a pretty uh avid debate online about heavy pretty uh avid debate online about heavy pretty uh avid debate online about heavy weights versus not heavy weights, weights versus not heavy weights, weights versus not heavy weights, especially for older folks. And since especially for older folks. And since especially for older folks. And since now I'm 50, I place myself in that now I'm 50, I place myself in that now I'm 50, I place myself in that category. I'm a big fan of low category. I'm a big fan of low category. I'm a big fan of low repetitions, but not three or less. Um, repetitions, but not three or less. Um, repetitions, but not three or less. Um, but let's just say some of my peers feel but let's just say some of my peers feel but let's just say some of my peers feel that that's super dangerous not to that that's super dangerous not to that that's super dangerous not to recommend, you know, five to eight recommend, you know, five to eight recommend, you know, five to eight repetition range. It could be that some repetition range. It could be that some repetition range. It could be that some people are just better at quote unquote people are just better at quote unquote people are just better at quote unquote locking everything in and getting really locking everything in and getting really locking everything in and getting really focused and doing a proper set when focused and doing a proper set when focused and doing a proper set when there's fewer repetitions then and some there's fewer repetitions then and some there's fewer repetitions then and some people might be great at I realize people might be great at I realize people might be great at I realize that doing 20 repetitions of that doing 20 repetitions of that doing 20 repetitions of stiff-legged deadlifts and every stiff-legged deadlifts and every stiff-legged deadlifts and every repetition is just beautiful. But isn't repetition is just beautiful. But isn't repetition is just beautiful. But isn't there the idea that some of the smaller there the idea that some of the smaller there the idea that some of the smaller supporting muscles can fatigue as a set supporting muscles can fatigue as a set supporting muscles can fatigue as a set goes on and make one susceptible to goes on and make one susceptible to goes on and make one susceptible to injury? Is that or is that just gym? Is injury? Is that or is that just gym? Is injury? Is that or is that just gym? Is that just like jock science? that just like jock science? that just like jock science? &gt;&gt; No matter what, we need to make sure &gt;&gt; No matter what, we need to make sure &gt;&gt; No matter what, we need to make sure that we're appropriately warmed up and that we're appropriately warmed up and that we're appropriately warmed up and that we're using proper technique. So, that we're using proper technique. So, that we're using proper technique. So, if you try to go do a one rep max or a if you try to go do a one rep max or a if you try to go do a one rep max or a set of three and you're not properly set of three and you're not properly set of three and you're not properly warmed up, I'm concerned. warmed up, I'm concerned. warmed up, I'm concerned. &gt;&gt; Sure. But assuming all else is equal, &gt;&gt; Sure. But assuming all else is equal, &gt;&gt; Sure. But assuming all else is equal, then depending on the exercise, we also then depending on the exercise, we also then depending on the exercise, we also have to think of overall systemic have to think of overall systemic have to think of overall systemic fatigue. Even fatigue. Even fatigue. Even fatigue um on the cardiovascular system fatigue um on the cardiovascular system fatigue um on the cardiovascular system if you're doing 30 squats, you might be if you're doing 30 squats, you might be if you're doing 30 squats, you might be out of breath before your legs give out of breath before your legs give out of breath before your legs give out and that can introduce another mental and that can introduce another mental and that can introduce another mental challenge to the set. challenge to the set. challenge to the set. &gt;&gt; Excellent point. I hadn't considered &gt;&gt; Excellent point. I hadn't considered &gt;&gt; Excellent point. I hadn't considered that. I also don't enjoy 20 repetition that. I also don't enjoy 20 repetition that. I also don't enjoy 20 repetition squats. Although on the belt squat, I'm squats. Although on the belt squat, I'm squats. Although on the belt squat, I'm finding some, let's just say, some finding some, let's just say, some finding some, let's just say, some personal growth through them. Mental personal growth through them. Mental personal growth through them. Mental personal growth. It's a whole different personal growth. It's a whole different personal growth. It's a whole different thing to do high repetition leg work. thing to do high repetition leg work. thing to do high repetition leg work. It's like a and it is very It's like a and it is very It's like a and it is very cardiovascular. Speaking of which, um I cardiovascular. Speaking of which, um I cardiovascular. Speaking of which, um I think most people nowadays, men and think most people nowadays, men and think most people nowadays, men and women, uh understand that cardiovascular women, uh understand that cardiovascular women, uh understand that cardiovascular exercise is important as well. And I exercise is important as well. And I exercise is important as well. And I realize that term pisses off the realize that term pisses off the realize that term pisses off the endurance athletes because what is endurance athletes because what is endurance athletes because what is cardiovascular exercise? I'm talking cardiovascular exercise? I'm talking cardiovascular exercise? I'm talking about something that you can repeat for about something that you can repeat for about something that you can repeat for six minutes or more. um continuously uh six minutes or more. um continuously uh six minutes or more. um continuously uh gets heart rate elevated and so on. I gets heart rate elevated and so on. I gets heart rate elevated and so on. I think most people think of this as think most people think of this as think most people think of this as cardio. Um how do you recommend uh cardio. Um how do you recommend uh cardio. Um how do you recommend uh scheduling cardio with the two or three scheduling cardio with the two or three scheduling cardio with the two or three day per week um resistance training? day per week um resistance training? day per week um resistance training? Does it matter if somebody does it Does it matter if somebody does it Does it matter if somebody does it before or after their weight training on before or after their weight training on before or after their weight training on a given day? Um can they do it on the a given day? Um can they do it on the a given day? Um can they do it on the same day? Would they be better off doing same day? Would they be better off doing same day? Would they be better off doing it on other days? Uh what are the it on other days? Uh what are the it on other days? Uh what are the guidelines? So the concept of kind of the So the concept of kind of the So the concept of kind of the interference effect or issues with interference effect or issues with interference effect or issues with concurrent training come from the idea concurrent training come from the idea concurrent training come from the idea that you have both endurance training that you have both endurance training that you have both endurance training goals and resistance training goals and goals and resistance training goals and goals and resistance training goals and that if you perform those too close that if you perform those too close that if you perform those too close together that the endurance training together that the endurance training together that the endurance training might blunt some of that hypertrophic might blunt some of that hypertrophic might blunt some of that hypertrophic adaptation. um we see that could be true adaptation. um we see that could be true adaptation. um we see that could be true if you're doing very high volume work if you're doing very high volume work if you're doing very high volume work and you're stacking it very close and you're stacking it very close and you're stacking it very close together. So assuming your hypertrophy together. So assuming your hypertrophy together. So assuming your hypertrophy or strength is the goal, then we would or strength is the goal, then we would or strength is the goal, then we would want to perform that first and if want to perform that first and if want to perform that first and if possible, separate them by, you know, at possible, separate them by, you know, at possible, separate them by, you know, at least several hours. But we really don't least several hours. But we really don't least several hours. But we really don't run into true uh interference effect run into true uh interference effect run into true uh interference effect type results unless we're doing tons of type results unless we're doing tons of type results unless we're doing tons of training and you know, you're doing your training and you know, you're doing your training and you know, you're doing your sprints before you do your leg workout. sprints before you do your leg workout. sprints before you do your leg workout. I would avoid that. I think we also need I would avoid that. I think we also need I would avoid that. I think we also need to think about whether we have endurance to think about whether we have endurance to think about whether we have endurance training goals or we're just trying to training goals or we're just trying to training goals or we're just trying to be fit for health. Most people listening be fit for health. Most people listening be fit for health. Most people listening to this probably to this probably to this probably um would like to get stronger, probably um would like to get stronger, probably um would like to get stronger, probably would like to add muscle to specific would like to add muscle to specific would like to add muscle to specific muscles and maybe have it in mind and muscles and maybe have it in mind and muscles and maybe have it in mind and we'll get here in a moment to not we'll get here in a moment to not we'll get here in a moment to not deliberately not add muscle to other deliberately not add muscle to other deliberately not add muscle to other muscles and um to be what they consider muscles and um to be what they consider muscles and um to be what they consider lean enough and that want to be fit. I lean enough and that want to be fit. I lean enough and that want to be fit. I always think of the general life always think of the general life always think of the general life requirements like you want to be able to requirements like you want to be able to requirements like you want to be able to carry your suitcase or bagging if you carry your suitcase or bagging if you carry your suitcase or bagging if you have to run for the plane that you can have to run for the plane that you can have to run for the plane that you can do it without coughing up along. Pick do it without coughing up along. Pick do it without coughing up along. Pick things up and not get injured. Sprint if things up and not get injured. Sprint if things up and not get injured. Sprint if you need to. Play a game of frisbee or you need to. Play a game of frisbee or you need to. Play a game of frisbee or soccer or volleyball, a pickup soccer or volleyball, a pickup soccer or volleyball, a pickup game at the picnic or something. Uh go game at the picnic or something. Uh go game at the picnic or something. Uh go for a hike maybe with a kid on your for a hike maybe with a kid on your for a hike maybe with a kid on your back, maybe with a backpack if you don't back, maybe with a backpack if you don't back, maybe with a backpack if you don't have kids. I think the sort of like just have kids. I think the sort of like just have kids. I think the sort of like just ability to go out on a Sunday and take a ability to go out on a Sunday and take a ability to go out on a Sunday and take a long hike with a pack without having to long hike with a pack without having to long hike with a pack without having to train for it. the ability to sprint for train for it. the ability to sprint for train for it. the ability to sprint for the plane without dying when you the plane without dying when you the plane without dying when you arrive there. Um, these kinds of things arrive there. Um, these kinds of things arrive there. Um, these kinds of things to me are the real life metrics. I feel to me are the real life metrics. I feel to me are the real life metrics. I feel like that's what most people want. And like that's what most people want. And like that's what most people want. And then of course some people want to run then of course some people want to run then of course some people want to run marathons and be powerliffters and, you marathons and be powerliffters and, you marathons and be powerliffters and, you know, Alex Hunnel just, you know, scaled know, Alex Hunnel just, you know, scaled know, Alex Hunnel just, you know, scaled a tower in Taipei without any ropes. a tower in Taipei without any ropes. a tower in Taipei without any ropes. So, you know, there's a huge range, but So, you know, there's a huge range, but So, you know, there's a huge range, but I think what I described, I think, is I think what I described, I think, is I think what I described, I think, is where most of us are at. What do you where most of us are at. What do you where most of us are at. What do you think most women are at? think most women are at? think most women are at? &gt;&gt; Lifting weights is so important because &gt;&gt; Lifting weights is so important because &gt;&gt; Lifting weights is so important because we don't have a lifestyle we don't have a lifestyle we don't have a lifestyle fun equivalent activity. fun equivalent activity. fun equivalent activity. &gt;&gt; Mhm. But I don't think we all need to be &gt;&gt; Mhm. But I don't think we all need to be &gt;&gt; Mhm. But I don't think we all need to be going for a jog or spending an hour on going for a jog or spending an hour on going for a jog or spending an hour on the elliptical if we prefer playing the elliptical if we prefer playing the elliptical if we prefer playing tennis or going for bike rides with tennis or going for bike rides with tennis or going for bike rides with friends or going for hikes or something friends or going for hikes or something friends or going for hikes or something that is physically active and enjoyable that is physically active and enjoyable that is physically active and enjoyable and that we will be more likely to do and that we will be more likely to do and that we will be more likely to do consistently. So there is an element of consistently. So there is an element of consistently. So there is an element of that can be really freeing for that can be really freeing for that can be really freeing for people because they think, "Oh, well people because they think, "Oh, well people because they think, "Oh, well then I don't need to worry about adding then I don't need to worry about adding then I don't need to worry about adding these structured cardio sessions in my these structured cardio sessions in my these structured cardio sessions in my week. I'm just going to do those outdoor week. I'm just going to do those outdoor week. I'm just going to do those outdoor physical activities with friends that physical activities with friends that physical activities with friends that I'm enjoying and also benefiting from." I'm enjoying and also benefiting from." I'm enjoying and also benefiting from." &gt;&gt; What are the data on walking? Um I've &gt;&gt; What are the data on walking? Um I've &gt;&gt; What are the data on walking? Um I've heard 7,000 steps or so per day is a is heard 7,000 steps or so per day is a is heard 7,000 steps or so per day is a is a good number to shoot for. where I a good number to shoot for. where I a good number to shoot for. where I heard that the 10,000 number was just heard that the 10,000 number was just heard that the 10,000 number was just kind of thrown out there the same way kind of thrown out there the same way kind of thrown out there the same way that 8 hours of intermittent fasting was that 8 hours of intermittent fasting was that 8 hours of intermittent fasting was just kind of thrown out there. We'll get just kind of thrown out there. We'll get just kind of thrown out there. We'll get back to that. How important and helpful back to that. How important and helpful back to that. How important and helpful is walking for women in particular? is walking for women in particular? is walking for women in particular? &gt;&gt; I like to think of walking as something &gt;&gt; I like to think of walking as something &gt;&gt; I like to think of walking as something you can do that is not structured you can do that is not structured you can do that is not structured exercise. And so we're not thinking exercise. And so we're not thinking exercise. And so we're not thinking about meeting a step count necessarily. You meeting a step count necessarily. You meeting a step count necessarily. You can do that, but people who focus on can do that, but people who focus on can do that, but people who focus on something like step counts usually do so something like step counts usually do so something like step counts usually do so for a few months and then stop because for a few months and then stop because for a few months and then stop because being kind of obsessive about tracking being kind of obsessive about tracking being kind of obsessive about tracking that metric gets a little old. that metric gets a little old. that metric gets a little old. &gt;&gt; And it's important to think not only &gt;&gt; And it's important to think not only &gt;&gt; And it's important to think not only about hitting one target, whether it's, about hitting one target, whether it's, about hitting one target, whether it's, you know, minutes of exercise per week you know, minutes of exercise per week you know, minutes of exercise per week or step count or heart rate goal, but or step count or heart rate goal, but or step count or heart rate goal, but what are we doing for the other what are we doing for the other what are we doing for the other hours in the day? So I think somebody hours in the day? So I think somebody hours in the day? So I think somebody who isn't active at all going from doing who isn't active at all going from doing who isn't active at all going from doing very few steps to getting it up to four, very few steps to getting it up to four, very few steps to getting it up to four, five, 6 thousand steps, yes, we're going five, 6 thousand steps, yes, we're going five, 6 thousand steps, yes, we're going to see a huge benefit. But if you're to see a huge benefit. But if you're to see a huge benefit. But if you're somebody who is physically active in a somebody who is physically active in a somebody who is physically active in a variety of ways and you are moving variety of ways and you are moving variety of ways and you are moving throughout the day, not necessarily throughout the day, not necessarily throughout the day, not necessarily focusing purely on steps, then focusing purely on steps, then focusing purely on steps, then that metric of step count is a little that metric of step count is a little that metric of step count is a little bit less useful because we are getting bit less useful because we are getting bit less useful because we are getting in that overall activity that is going in that overall activity that is going in that overall activity that is going to be beneficial for health. So, what to be beneficial for health. So, what to be beneficial for health. So, what I'm hearing is if a woman is in the gym I'm hearing is if a woman is in the gym I'm hearing is if a woman is in the gym two or three days per week lifting the two or three days per week lifting the two or three days per week lifting the way that you described and has some way that you described and has some way that you described and has some outdoor or indoor social sport type outdoor or indoor social sport type outdoor or indoor social sport type activities that she enjoys, there's no activities that she enjoys, there's no activities that she enjoys, there's no need to specifically add cardio unless need to specifically add cardio unless need to specifically add cardio unless there's an endurance goal or a sprint there's an endurance goal or a sprint there's an endurance goal or a sprint competition goal. Is that right? competition goal. Is that right? competition goal. Is that right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think a lot of people are &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think a lot of people are &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think a lot of people are adding cardio for weight loss goals and adding cardio for weight loss goals and adding cardio for weight loss goals and that is a bit of a fool's errand because that is a bit of a fool's errand because that is a bit of a fool's errand because the fat loss that we will get from just the fat loss that we will get from just the fat loss that we will get from just adding exercise is pretty disappointing adding exercise is pretty disappointing adding exercise is pretty disappointing relative to the fat loss that we will relative to the fat loss that we will relative to the fat loss that we will see when we adjust our nutrition. see when we adjust our nutrition. see when we adjust our nutrition. &gt;&gt; What about getting up toward max heart &gt;&gt; What about getting up toward max heart &gt;&gt; What about getting up toward max heart rate for sake of the dreaded V2 max? No, rate for sake of the dreaded V2 max? No, rate for sake of the dreaded V2 max? No, I don't say dreaded. I mean, I just I don't say dreaded. I mean, I just I don't say dreaded. I mean, I just think it's funny cuz, you know, 5 years think it's funny cuz, you know, 5 years think it's funny cuz, you know, 5 years ago, no one was talking about heart rate ago, no one was talking about heart rate ago, no one was talking about heart rate variability and V2 max. I mean, again, variability and V2 max. I mean, again, variability and V2 max. I mean, again, I'm not trying to inject male fitness or I'm not trying to inject male fitness or I'm not trying to inject male fitness or my routine into it, but by virtue of my routine into it, but by virtue of my routine into it, but by virtue of what I've learned in the course of the what I've learned in the course of the what I've learned in the course of the podcast and also what I enjoy, I make it podcast and also what I enjoy, I make it podcast and also what I enjoy, I make it a point to get on the aine bike or some a point to get on the aine bike or some a point to get on the aine bike or some other thing I can do at max effort or other thing I can do at max effort or other thing I can do at max effort or close to it without getting injured um close to it without getting injured um close to it without getting injured um and do, you know, 30 second sprint, 30 and do, you know, 30 second sprint, 30 and do, you know, 30 second sprint, 30 second rest, 30 second sprint for at second rest, 30 second sprint for at second rest, 30 second sprint for at least once a week, ideally twice. I'm least once a week, ideally twice. I'm least once a week, ideally twice. I'm assuming, and you tell me, you have the assuming, and you tell me, you have the assuming, and you tell me, you have the credentials here. Uh I'm the credentials here. Uh I'm the credentials here. Uh I'm assuming that by getting my heart rate assuming that by getting my heart rate assuming that by getting my heart rate way up uh for a couple minutes each way up uh for a couple minutes each way up uh for a couple minutes each week, that I'm doing myself some benefit week, that I'm doing myself some benefit week, that I'm doing myself some benefit separate from my resistance training. separate from my resistance training. separate from my resistance training. Is that true or is it or is it um Is that true or is it or is it um Is that true or is it or is it um because I see I mean, I'm not a because I see I mean, I'm not a because I see I mean, I'm not a calorie counter. Kind of an intuitive calorie counter. Kind of an intuitive calorie counter. Kind of an intuitive sense of what I need. Um, but I see, you sense of what I need. Um, but I see, you sense of what I need. Um, but I see, you know, at the end of those workouts, it know, at the end of those workouts, it know, at the end of those workouts, it says I burned 100 calories, which is, says I burned 100 calories, which is, says I burned 100 calories, which is, you know, I, you know, I walk I eat 100 you know, I, you know, I walk I eat 100 you know, I, you know, I walk I eat 100 calories of blueberries in one pass by calories of blueberries in one pass by calories of blueberries in one pass by the [clears throat] blueberry basket. the [clears throat] blueberry basket. the [clears throat] blueberry basket. So, so I'm not trying to do it for So, so I'm not trying to do it for So, so I'm not trying to do it for caloric burn sake. caloric burn sake. caloric burn sake. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The value of the really &gt;&gt; Yeah. The value of the really &gt;&gt; Yeah. The value of the really highintensity stuff is time efficiency. highintensity stuff is time efficiency. highintensity stuff is time efficiency. So, if we look at those adaptations to So, if we look at those adaptations to So, if we look at those adaptations to endurance exercise or if we're going to endurance exercise or if we're going to endurance exercise or if we're going to just say cardio broadly, then you can just say cardio broadly, then you can just say cardio broadly, then you can get those by doing more long form get those by doing more long form get those by doing more long form moderate intensity. You can also get moderate intensity. You can also get moderate intensity. You can also get those by doing higher intensity for those by doing higher intensity for those by doing higher intensity for shorter amounts of time. So, it's not shorter amounts of time. So, it's not shorter amounts of time. So, it's not that [clears throat] that [clears throat] that [clears throat] it's magic in terms of the adaptation, it's magic in terms of the adaptation, it's magic in terms of the adaptation, but you're able to get more bang for but you're able to get more bang for but you're able to get more bang for your buck because you're doing that your buck because you're doing that your buck because you're doing that higher intensity and you don't need to higher intensity and you don't need to higher intensity and you don't need to do it for quite as long. do it for quite as long. do it for quite as long. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about the somewhat barbedwire &gt;&gt; Let's talk about the somewhat barbedwire &gt;&gt; Let's talk about the somewhat barbedwire topic uh these days about variations in topic uh these days about variations in topic uh these days about variations in hormones as they relate to the menstrual hormones as they relate to the menstrual hormones as they relate to the menstrual cycle and training requirements. cycle and training requirements. cycle and training requirements. There's a lot of assumptions about this. There's a lot of assumptions about this. There's a lot of assumptions about this. There's a lot of conjecture and I do There's a lot of conjecture and I do There's a lot of conjecture and I do believe there's also a lot of outright believe there's also a lot of outright believe there's also a lot of outright fabrication. Not because anyone fabrication. Not because anyone fabrication. Not because anyone necessarily uh wants to mislead, but I necessarily uh wants to mislead, but I necessarily uh wants to mislead, but I don't think anyone has spent as much don't think anyone has spent as much don't think anyone has spent as much time with the data on this as you have. time with the data on this as you have. time with the data on this as you have. So, should women train differently So, should women train differently So, should women train differently depending on where they are in their depending on where they are in their depending on where they are in their menstrual cycle? menstrual cycle? menstrual cycle? &gt;&gt; The short answer is no. The conversation &gt;&gt; The short answer is no. The conversation &gt;&gt; The short answer is no. The conversation around the menstrual cycle is good. I around the menstrual cycle is good. I around the menstrual cycle is good. I think it's good that we're talking about think it's good that we're talking about think it's good that we're talking about it. It's good that people feel it. It's good that people feel it. It's good that people feel comfortable discussing it with their comfortable discussing it with their comfortable discussing it with their coach. The unfortunate shift of because you The unfortunate shift of because you The unfortunate shift of because you have a menstrual cycle and because have a menstrual cycle and because have a menstrual cycle and because hormones are fluctuating, you need to hormones are fluctuating, you need to hormones are fluctuating, you need to change how you are exercising is way too change how you are exercising is way too change how you are exercising is way too simplistic and doesn't align with the simplistic and doesn't align with the simplistic and doesn't align with the data that we have. So instead of data that we have. So instead of data that we have. So instead of worrying about whether you're in this worrying about whether you're in this worrying about whether you're in this phase or that phase or whether estradile phase or that phase or whether estradile phase or that phase or whether estradile is high or low, I would really focus on is high or low, I would really focus on is high or low, I would really focus on how you feel. how you feel. how you feel. Train hard, train consistently, train Train hard, train consistently, train Train hard, train consistently, train progressively. If at some point in your progressively. If at some point in your progressively. If at some point in your cycle you experience menstrual symptoms cycle you experience menstrual symptoms cycle you experience menstrual symptoms or fatigue or a lack of motivation that or fatigue or a lack of motivation that or fatigue or a lack of motivation that you relate to menration, then having an you relate to menration, then having an you relate to menration, then having an option to skip a workout or adjust the option to skip a workout or adjust the option to skip a workout or adjust the exercises that you're doing for that exercises that you're doing for that exercises that you're doing for that workout or do another form of exercise workout or do another form of exercise workout or do another form of exercise that day is completely fine. Not saying that day is completely fine. Not saying that day is completely fine. Not saying you have to grind it out, push through, you have to grind it out, push through, you have to grind it out, push through, but you are not less capable that day but you are not less capable that day but you are not less capable that day because you have your menstrual period because you have your menstrual period because you have your menstrual period or because the hormone profile has or because the hormone profile has or because the hormone profile has shifted in one direction or another. shifted in one direction or another. shifted in one direction or another. &gt;&gt; There's a broader conversation around &gt;&gt; There's a broader conversation around &gt;&gt; There's a broader conversation around this, I think, about when to push this, I think, about when to push this, I think, about when to push through internal resistance, either just through internal resistance, either just through internal resistance, either just kind of general malaise, like one kind of general malaise, like one kind of general malaise, like one doesn't feel well or didn't sleep well, doesn't feel well or didn't sleep well, doesn't feel well or didn't sleep well, um whether or not one is feeling run um whether or not one is feeling run um whether or not one is feeling run down. Maybe we can kind of tuck that down. Maybe we can kind of tuck that down. Maybe we can kind of tuck that into this conversation about uh ways to into this conversation about uh ways to into this conversation about uh ways to vary training or not vary training vary training or not vary training vary training or not vary training according to phase of the menstrual according to phase of the menstrual according to phase of the menstrual cycle. Let's say somebody is not feeling cycle. Let's say somebody is not feeling cycle. Let's say somebody is not feeling as rested as they normally do or would as rested as they normally do or would as rested as they normally do or would like to. And I say that because people like to. And I say that because people like to. And I say that because people assume you need eight hours of sleep, assume you need eight hours of sleep, assume you need eight hours of sleep, right? I one might need eight, they right? I one might need eight, they right? I one might need eight, they might need 10. I'm fine on 6 and 1 half might need 10. I'm fine on 6 and 1 half might need 10. I'm fine on 6 and 1 half to seven. I prefer eight, but actually 6 to seven. I prefer eight, but actually 6 to seven. I prefer eight, but actually 6 and 1 half to seven I'm good. five, and 1 half to seven I'm good. five, and 1 half to seven I'm good. five, that's a whole other issue. So, that's a whole other issue. So, that's a whole other issue. So, should women push through a day of a should women push through a day of a should women push through a day of a workout if they got, you know, maybe an workout if they got, you know, maybe an workout if they got, you know, maybe an hour or two less than their normal hour or two less than their normal hour or two less than their normal ration of sleep that they need? Is it or ration of sleep that they need? Is it or ration of sleep that they need? Is it or are they putting themselves in some sort are they putting themselves in some sort are they putting themselves in some sort of danger if they do that? of danger if they do that? of danger if they do that? &gt;&gt; There's no danger. You might feel worse, &gt;&gt; There's no danger. You might feel worse, &gt;&gt; There's no danger. You might feel worse, &gt;&gt; but subjective &gt;&gt; but subjective &gt;&gt; but subjective measures of performance are different measures of performance are different measures of performance are different often from objective measures of often from objective measures of often from objective measures of performance. And that goes for the performance. And that goes for the performance. And that goes for the menstrual cycle symptoms and other menstrual cycle symptoms and other menstrual cycle symptoms and other factors as well. So you might go in and factors as well. So you might go in and factors as well. So you might go in and deadlift the same weight as last and deadlift the same weight as last and deadlift the same weight as last week and you'd say, "Wow, this feels week and you'd say, "Wow, this feels week and you'd say, "Wow, this feels really heavy or the weight's moving really heavy or the weight's moving really heavy or the weight's moving really slow this morning." But you're really slow this morning." But you're really slow this morning." But you're still lifting it. So objectively, the still lifting it. So objectively, the still lifting it. So objectively, the performance was the same. It's just your performance was the same. It's just your performance was the same. It's just your experience of what it felt like differs. experience of what it felt like differs. experience of what it felt like differs. It feels harder today. To your point, It feels harder today. To your point, It feels harder today. To your point, that can be the case for a variety of that can be the case for a variety of that can be the case for a variety of reasons. We can be underslept or we are reasons. We can be underslept or we are reasons. We can be underslept or we are jet-lagged or we're stressed about jet-lagged or we're stressed about jet-lagged or we're stressed about something workrelated and feeling something workrelated and feeling something workrelated and feeling distracted. There's a lot of reasons why distracted. There's a lot of reasons why distracted. There's a lot of reasons why we don't have a 10 out of 10 workout we don't have a 10 out of 10 workout we don't have a 10 out of 10 workout every single time we go to the gym. So, every single time we go to the gym. So, every single time we go to the gym. So, I think there's an argument to be made I think there's an argument to be made I think there's an argument to be made to Yeah. push forward, just do it to Yeah. push forward, just do it to Yeah. push forward, just do it anyway. even a subpar workout is better anyway. even a subpar workout is better anyway. even a subpar workout is better than no workout at all. than no workout at all. than no workout at all. &gt;&gt; In your experience and observation, um &gt;&gt; In your experience and observation, um &gt;&gt; In your experience and observation, um do you think that women who take up do you think that women who take up do you think that women who take up resistance training enjoy it on average? resistance training enjoy it on average? resistance training enjoy it on average? Do they tend to enjoy it or do they tend Do they tend to enjoy it or do they tend Do they tend to enjoy it or do they tend to um enjoy the feeling afterwards? How to um enjoy the feeling afterwards? How to um enjoy the feeling afterwards? How do you how do you feel about resistance do you how do you feel about resistance do you how do you feel about resistance training? &gt;&gt; I think it's particularly powerful for &gt;&gt; I think it's particularly powerful for &gt;&gt; I think it's particularly powerful for women because and I alluded to this women because and I alluded to this women because and I alluded to this earlier, there's a history of earlier, there's a history of earlier, there's a history of marketing ineffective programs to women marketing ineffective programs to women marketing ineffective programs to women or encouraging them to constantly switch or encouraging them to constantly switch or encouraging them to constantly switch it up. Try this new group fitness class it up. Try this new group fitness class it up. Try this new group fitness class or try this new at home video workout or try this new at home video workout or try this new at home video workout and they never really see the results and they never really see the results and they never really see the results that they are hoping to see. And so that they are hoping to see. And so that they are hoping to see. And so you're just program hopping and you're just program hopping and you're just program hopping and disappointed and feeling like I'm disappointed and feeling like I'm disappointed and feeling like I'm putting in all this work. I'm doing the putting in all this work. I'm doing the putting in all this work. I'm doing the thing and I'm not seeing results. When thing and I'm not seeing results. When thing and I'm not seeing results. When you stick to a good resistance training you stick to a good resistance training you stick to a good resistance training program for long enough, not only do you program for long enough, not only do you program for long enough, not only do you start to see results in the way that start to see results in the way that start to see results in the way that your body looks, because muscle growth your body looks, because muscle growth your body looks, because muscle growth can change your body composition and can change your body composition and can change your body composition and can change your physique, but you also have change your physique, but you also have change your physique, but you also have this empowering feeling of progression this empowering feeling of progression this empowering feeling of progression over time. I can get stronger. I can do over time. I can get stronger. I can do over time. I can get stronger. I can do more. And that keeps you coming back. more. And that keeps you coming back. more. And that keeps you coming back. It's really motivating. So, I think that It's really motivating. So, I think that It's really motivating. So, I think that can be really powerful that you feel can be really powerful that you feel can be really powerful that you feel like you're getting something out of like you're getting something out of like you're getting something out of what you're putting in and you're more what you're putting in and you're more what you're putting in and you're more likely to stick to it long term. likely to stick to it long term. likely to stick to it long term. &gt;&gt; For anyone, but since we're talking &gt;&gt; For anyone, but since we're talking &gt;&gt; For anyone, but since we're talking mainly about uh women's resistance mainly about uh women's resistance mainly about uh women's resistance training today, um training today, um training today, um do you think there's value to spending do you think there's value to spending do you think there's value to spending two or three weeks, maybe less, maybe two or three weeks, maybe less, maybe two or three weeks, maybe less, maybe more, just learning movements properly more, just learning movements properly more, just learning movements properly before getting into the whole business before getting into the whole business before getting into the whole business of progressive overload? of progressive overload? of progressive overload? &gt;&gt; Yes. Because the problem is you start to &gt;&gt; Yes. Because the problem is you start to &gt;&gt; Yes. Because the problem is you start to see, oh, I can do more than I did last see, oh, I can do more than I did last see, oh, I can do more than I did last week. And then you think, oh, well, this week. And then you think, oh, well, this week. And then you think, oh, well, this is linear, right? And so you think, I is linear, right? And so you think, I is linear, right? And so you think, I can add 10 pounds every week forever. It can add 10 pounds every week forever. It can add 10 pounds every week forever. It doesn't work like that. So inevitably doesn't work like that. So inevitably doesn't work like that. So inevitably you end up uh training in or many of us you end up uh training in or many of us you end up uh training in or many of us have trained in such a way that we have trained in such a way that we have trained in such a way that we injured something, tweaked something, injured something, tweaked something, injured something, tweaked something, form failed because we got so focused on form failed because we got so focused on form failed because we got so focused on just lifting more weight, lifting more just lifting more weight, lifting more just lifting more weight, lifting more weight, lifting more weight. So, I agree weight, lifting more weight. So, I agree weight, lifting more weight. So, I agree that uh a slower progression could be that uh a slower progression could be that uh a slower progression could be better, but that's also the power of better, but that's also the power of better, but that's also the power of just trying to add another rep instead just trying to add another rep instead just trying to add another rep instead of trying to add weight week in and week of trying to add weight week in and week of trying to add weight week in and week out. &gt;&gt; We're all told we just kind of like need &gt;&gt; We're all told we just kind of like need &gt;&gt; We're all told we just kind of like need to exercise. And there's examples of how to exercise. And there's examples of how to exercise. And there's examples of how to do movements, but be wonderful if to do movements, but be wonderful if to do movements, but be wonderful if there was kind of like getting the there was kind of like getting the there was kind of like getting the basics. Like a sprinter doesn't just go basics. Like a sprinter doesn't just go basics. Like a sprinter doesn't just go sprint, they learn how to do all these sprint, they learn how to do all these sprint, they learn how to do all these drills and um and move into it. And some drills and um and move into it. And some drills and um and move into it. And some of these things are complex and it's not of these things are complex and it's not of these things are complex and it's not just about avoiding injury. It's about just about avoiding injury. It's about just about avoiding injury. It's about getting the most out of the exercise getting the most out of the exercise getting the most out of the exercise over time. That's kind of how I'm over time. That's kind of how I'm over time. That's kind of how I'm thinking about this. thinking about this. thinking about this. &gt;&gt; I think it's also making sure that you &gt;&gt; I think it's also making sure that you &gt;&gt; I think it's also making sure that you are using proper technique and full are using proper technique and full are using proper technique and full range of motion because that's one of range of motion because that's one of range of motion because that's one of the other things that is often the first the other things that is often the first the other things that is often the first to go when we really try to load up and to go when we really try to load up and to go when we really try to load up and load up and load up. And you see this load up and load up. And you see this load up and load up. And you see this with people squatting and benching all with people squatting and benching all with people squatting and benching all the time. they're just adding another the time. they're just adding another the time. they're just adding another plate but then cutting the range of plate but then cutting the range of plate but then cutting the range of motion short to accommodate that motion short to accommodate that motion short to accommodate that additional load. And so that's not additional load. And so that's not additional load. And so that's not really progressive overload because you really progressive overload because you really progressive overload because you changed your range of motion. So I think changed your range of motion. So I think changed your range of motion. So I think especially if a lift is technically especially if a lift is technically especially if a lift is technically demanding something like a hinge, you demanding something like a hinge, you demanding something like a hinge, you know, deadlift, good morning. For a lot know, deadlift, good morning. For a lot know, deadlift, good morning. For a lot of people who've never done that of people who've never done that of people who've never done that movement pattern, it can be really movement pattern, it can be really movement pattern, it can be really difficult to just develop that difficult to just develop that difficult to just develop that kinesthetic awareness like where am I in kinesthetic awareness like where am I in kinesthetic awareness like where am I in space? Am I bending my knees too much or space? Am I bending my knees too much or space? Am I bending my knees too much or not enough? Um am I starting to round not enough? Um am I starting to round not enough? Um am I starting to round my upper back? And when you can really my upper back? And when you can really my upper back? And when you can really understand the proper form, then you understand the proper form, then you understand the proper form, then you know how to load it. know how to load it. know how to load it. &gt;&gt; If a woman just feels lousy at one &gt;&gt; If a woman just feels lousy at one &gt;&gt; If a woman just feels lousy at one particular phase of her cycle, and particular phase of her cycle, and particular phase of her cycle, and that's a consistent month-to-month thing that's a consistent month-to-month thing that's a consistent month-to-month thing for her and she doesn't want to train for her and she doesn't want to train for her and she doesn't want to train during that time. during that time. during that time. It sounded like there's no issue with It sounded like there's no issue with It sounded like there's no issue with that you're not suggesting that you that you're not suggesting that you that you're not suggesting that you that women push through that necessarily that women push through that necessarily that women push through that necessarily that they we're on the West Coast that they we're on the West Coast that they we're on the West Coast that they honor their feelings is how they honor their feelings is how they honor their feelings is how people speak out here. Um that they people speak out here. Um that they people speak out here. Um that they honor their feelings as opposed to push honor their feelings as opposed to push honor their feelings as opposed to push against the you know the sense like against the you know the sense like against the you know the sense like it this is just a tough time to do this. it this is just a tough time to do this. it this is just a tough time to do this. But you're from New York and you're But you're from New York and you're But you're from New York and you're giving me this look now where that makes giving me this look now where that makes giving me this look now where that makes people who are people are just people who are people are just people who are people are just listening. Um Lauren's looking at me listening. Um Lauren's looking at me listening. Um Lauren's looking at me like, "Yeah, that sounds like uh you like, "Yeah, that sounds like uh you like, "Yeah, that sounds like uh you know, I don't know." So, but I don't know, I don't know." So, but I don't know, I don't know." So, but I don't want to put words in your mouth. What want to put words in your mouth. What want to put words in your mouth. What are you thinking? are you thinking? are you thinking? &gt;&gt; Well, I'll tell you this. We have survey &gt;&gt; Well, I'll tell you this. We have survey &gt;&gt; Well, I'll tell you this. We have survey data looking at how many people report data looking at how many people report data looking at how many people report experiencing menstrual symptoms, things experiencing menstrual symptoms, things experiencing menstrual symptoms, things like uh cramps and low back pain, uh like uh cramps and low back pain, uh like uh cramps and low back pain, uh lack of motivation, irritability. And 75 lack of motivation, irritability. And 75 lack of motivation, irritability. And 75 80% of women report feeling those 80% of women report feeling those 80% of women report feeling those symptoms. and none of them report symptoms. and none of them report symptoms. and none of them report changing their training in response to changing their training in response to changing their training in response to those symptoms. So, and not to say that those symptoms. So, and not to say that those symptoms. So, and not to say that you shouldn't, but typically, at least you shouldn't, but typically, at least you shouldn't, but typically, at least where the data shows, it's not that where the data shows, it's not that where the data shows, it's not that common that people are overhauling their common that people are overhauling their common that people are overhauling their training even in response to menstrual training even in response to menstrual training even in response to menstrual symptoms. That said, most people symptoms. That said, most people symptoms. That said, most people experience them for one or two days. So, experience them for one or two days. So, experience them for one or two days. So, we're only talking about skipping or we're only talking about skipping or we're only talking about skipping or adjusting one, maybe two workouts. So, I adjusting one, maybe two workouts. So, I adjusting one, maybe two workouts. So, I don't feel that strongly about it I don't feel that strongly about it I don't feel that strongly about it either way. I think it, you know, it's either way. I think it, you know, it's either way. I think it, you know, it's up to you. And like I said, there will up to you. And like I said, there will up to you. And like I said, there will be a variety of reasons within any given be a variety of reasons within any given be a variety of reasons within any given month why we show up to the gym and we month why we show up to the gym and we month why we show up to the gym and we don't feel our best. And some of those don't feel our best. And some of those don't feel our best. And some of those days, again, for a variety of reasons, days, again, for a variety of reasons, days, again, for a variety of reasons, we might decide to make some adjustments we might decide to make some adjustments we might decide to make some adjustments and other days we might just decide to and other days we might just decide to and other days we might just decide to push through. And both are completely push through. And both are completely push through. And both are completely acceptable. It's an unfortunate reality, but tap It's an unfortunate reality, but tap It's an unfortunate reality, but tap water often contains contaminants that water often contains contaminants that water often contains contaminants that negatively impact our health. In fact, a negatively impact our health. In fact, a negatively impact our health. In fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental Working 2020 study by the Environmental Working 2020 study by the Environmental Working Group estimated that more than 200 Group estimated that more than 200 Group estimated that more than 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS million Americans are exposed to PAS million Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, through drinking of tap chemicals, through drinking of tap chemicals, through drinking of tap water. These forever chemicals are water. These forever chemicals are water. These forever chemicals are linked to serious health issues such as linked to serious health issues such as linked to serious health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome hormone disruption, gut microbiome hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many disruption, fertility issues, and many disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. The Environmental other health problems. The Environmental other health problems. The Environmental Working Group has also shown that over Working Group has also shown that over Working Group has also shown that over 122 million Americans drink tap water 122 million Americans drink tap water 122 million Americans drink tap water with high levels of chemicals known to with high levels of chemicals known to with high levels of chemicals known to cause cancer. It's for all these reasons cause cancer. It's for all these reasons cause cancer. It's for all these reasons that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a sponsor of this podcast. I've been using sponsor of this podcast. I've been using sponsor of this podcast. I've been using the Aurora countertop system for almost the Aurora countertop system for almost the Aurora countertop system for almost a year now. Rurora's filtration a year now. Rurora's filtration a year now. Rurora's filtration technology removes harmful substances, technology removes harmful substances, technology removes harmful substances, including endocrine disruptors and including endocrine disruptors and including endocrine disruptors and disinfection byproducts, while disinfection byproducts, while disinfection byproducts, while preserving beneficial minerals like preserving beneficial minerals like preserving beneficial minerals like magnesium and calcium. It requires no magnesium and calcium. It requires no magnesium and calcium. It requires no installation or plumbing. It's built installation or plumbing. It's built installation or plumbing. It's built from medical grade stainless steel and from medical grade stainless steel and from medical grade stainless steel and its sleek design fits beautifully on its sleek design fits beautifully on its sleek design fits beautifully on your countertop. In fact, I consider it your countertop. In fact, I consider it your countertop. In fact, I consider it a welcome addition to my kitchen. It a welcome addition to my kitchen. It a welcome addition to my kitchen. It looks great and the water is delicious. looks great and the water is delicious. looks great and the water is delicious. If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. If I'm not mistaken, you've uh looked at If I'm not mistaken, you've uh looked at If I'm not mistaken, you've uh looked at the data on the relationship between the data on the relationship between the data on the relationship between hormone-based contraception and effects hormone-based contraception and effects hormone-based contraception and effects of exercise. Um, and I want to be very of exercise. Um, and I want to be very of exercise. Um, and I want to be very clear. I said hormone-based clear. I said hormone-based clear. I said hormone-based contraception because there are so many contraception because there are so many contraception because there are so many different forms of contraception. Some different forms of contraception. Some different forms of contraception. Some of which are hormone based, some of which are hormone based, some of which are hormone based, some of which aren't. And of course, within the which aren't. And of course, within the which aren't. And of course, within the domain of hormone-based, you've got domain of hormone-based, you've got domain of hormone-based, you've got estrogen based, progesterine based, and estrogen based, progesterine based, and estrogen based, progesterine based, and there's others as well. What are the and there's others as well. What are the and there's others as well. What are the general and more specific takeaways from general and more specific takeaways from general and more specific takeaways from that uh literature? Does hormone-based that uh literature? Does hormone-based that uh literature? Does hormone-based contraception impact the adaptation to contraception impact the adaptation to contraception impact the adaptation to exercise, the motivation to exercise, or exercise, the motivation to exercise, or exercise, the motivation to exercise, or anything else that women should be aware anything else that women should be aware anything else that women should be aware of? Um, what do the data say? The of? Um, what do the data say? The of? Um, what do the data say? The majority of these studies are on folks majority of these studies are on folks majority of these studies are on folks taking combined oral contraceptive taking combined oral contraceptive taking combined oral contraceptive pills. So, this wouldn't apply to pills. So, this wouldn't apply to pills. So, this wouldn't apply to something like a hormonal IED uh or something like a hormonal IED uh or something like a hormonal IED uh or the there's a patch that people are the there's a patch that people are the there's a patch that people are using now that it's more modern take, using now that it's more modern take, using now that it's more modern take, but there is enough data at this point but there is enough data at this point but there is enough data at this point to say when it comes to strength, to say when it comes to strength, to say when it comes to strength, hypertrophy, power, we're not seeing hypertrophy, power, we're not seeing hypertrophy, power, we're not seeing combined oral contraceptive pills move combined oral contraceptive pills move combined oral contraceptive pills move the needle in either direction. And the needle in either direction. And the needle in either direction. And there were appropriate hypotheses to there were appropriate hypotheses to there were appropriate hypotheses to say, oh, maybe this could be detrimental say, oh, maybe this could be detrimental say, oh, maybe this could be detrimental or maybe this could be beneficial. But or maybe this could be beneficial. But or maybe this could be beneficial. But what we see similar to the influence of what we see similar to the influence of what we see similar to the influence of the endogenous hormone fluctuations, the endogenous hormone fluctuations, the endogenous hormone fluctuations, which are quite substantial, if those which are quite substantial, if those which are quite substantial, if those aren't affecting performance or exercise aren't affecting performance or exercise aren't affecting performance or exercise induced adaptations, it's not that induced adaptations, it's not that induced adaptations, it's not that shocking that the hormonal shocking that the hormonal shocking that the hormonal contraceptives wouldn't move the needle contraceptives wouldn't move the needle contraceptives wouldn't move the needle to a great extent either. to a great extent either. to a great extent either. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's an excellent point. I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's an excellent point. I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's an excellent point. I mean, if one just looks at the uh the plot of if one just looks at the uh the plot of if one just looks at the uh the plot of estrogen levels or progesterone levels estrogen levels or progesterone levels estrogen levels or progesterone levels across the different phases of the across the different phases of the across the different phases of the menstrual cycle, you know, these are menstrual cycle, you know, these are menstrual cycle, you know, these are enormous differences. Uh likewise for enormous differences. Uh likewise for enormous differences. Uh likewise for testosterone and other and other testosterone and other and other testosterone and other and other hormones in women. Um and you're making hormones in women. Um and you're making hormones in women. Um and you're making the point that uh hormone based uh pill the point that uh hormone based uh pill the point that uh hormone based uh pill contraception um is making changes in contraception um is making changes in contraception um is making changes in hormones of at least that magnitude. And hormones of at least that magnitude. And hormones of at least that magnitude. And and so there's no reason to expect that and so there's no reason to expect that and so there's no reason to expect that it should impact um at least ability. it should impact um at least ability. it should impact um at least ability. I can think of motivation to train um I can think of motivation to train um I can think of motivation to train um ability somehow like if it relates ability somehow like if it relates ability somehow like if it relates somehow to contractile ability the somehow to contractile ability the somehow to contractile ability the muscles or tendon um uh tendon muscles or tendon um uh tendon muscles or tendon um uh tendon strength or something and then the strength or something and then the strength or something and then the actual adaptation like so it sounds like actual adaptation like so it sounds like actual adaptation like so it sounds like none of these things block the none of these things block the none of these things block the adaptation to exercise the increase in adaptation to exercise the increase in adaptation to exercise the increase in muscle size or strength or both. Is that muscle size or strength or both. Is that muscle size or strength or both. Is that right? &gt;&gt; That's right. I would say if you're &gt;&gt; That's right. I would say if you're &gt;&gt; That's right. I would say if you're just starting a contraceptive pill there just starting a contraceptive pill there just starting a contraceptive pill there some people have symptoms and side some people have symptoms and side some people have symptoms and side effects some of which are kind of effects some of which are kind of effects some of which are kind of attenuated over time and some of which attenuated over time and some of which attenuated over time and some of which are not and you need to switch to are not and you need to switch to are not and you need to switch to something else. So you might for a short something else. So you might for a short something else. So you might for a short term because that pill is not a good fit term because that pill is not a good fit term because that pill is not a good fit for you then there could there could be for you then there could there could be for you then there could there could be some short-term influence in that sense. some short-term influence in that sense. some short-term influence in that sense. But on the flip side, a lot of people go But on the flip side, a lot of people go But on the flip side, a lot of people go on a hormonal contraceptive because they on a hormonal contraceptive because they on a hormonal contraceptive because they have really severe menstrual symptoms have really severe menstrual symptoms have really severe menstrual symptoms and then that can be helpful in and then that can be helpful in and then that can be helpful in relieving that pain. And so then you relieving that pain. And so then you relieving that pain. And so then you might be willing to go to the gym might be willing to go to the gym might be willing to go to the gym more frequently during the week where more frequently during the week where more frequently during the week where you have your menstrual period. So I you have your menstrual period. So I you have your menstrual period. So I think we can we can think about those think we can we can think about those think we can we can think about those kind of practical implications, but in kind of practical implications, but in kind of practical implications, but in terms of just the hormones themselves terms of just the hormones themselves terms of just the hormones themselves and the fact that, you know, we're and the fact that, you know, we're and the fact that, you know, we're downregulating the endogenous hormone downregulating the endogenous hormone downregulating the endogenous hormone production by introducing these production by introducing these production by introducing these synthetic hormones that doesn't seem to synthetic hormones that doesn't seem to synthetic hormones that doesn't seem to impact performance or adaptations to impact performance or adaptations to impact performance or adaptations to exercise. &gt;&gt; What if any are the really good data &gt;&gt; What if any are the really good data &gt;&gt; What if any are the really good data around the relationship between around the relationship between around the relationship between pmenopause and menopause and the hormone pmenopause and menopause and the hormone pmenopause and menopause and the hormone changes that tend to occur? Let's assume changes that tend to occur? Let's assume changes that tend to occur? Let's assume without hormone replacement therapy for without hormone replacement therapy for without hormone replacement therapy for the moment and training. Should women the moment and training. Should women the moment and training. Should women change their training as they enter change their training as they enter change their training as they enter permenopause, menopause? permenopause, menopause? permenopause, menopause? &gt;&gt; There's no reason to change your &gt;&gt; There's no reason to change your &gt;&gt; There's no reason to change your training because we still want the same training because we still want the same training because we still want the same adaptations. We want to increase and adaptations. We want to increase and adaptations. We want to increase and maintain muscle size and strength. We maintain muscle size and strength. We maintain muscle size and strength. We want to reduce fall risk and fracture want to reduce fall risk and fracture want to reduce fall risk and fracture risk, maintain bone density. And so risk, maintain bone density. And so risk, maintain bone density. And so resistance training is going to be a resistance training is going to be a resistance training is going to be a really key component of an exercise really key component of an exercise really key component of an exercise program for somebody uh pre and post program for somebody uh pre and post program for somebody uh pre and post menopause. I think the idea that somehow menopause. I think the idea that somehow menopause. I think the idea that somehow the hormonal changes would influence the hormonal changes would influence the hormonal changes would influence muscle are really tied to that same muscle are really tied to that same muscle are really tied to that same thought process that cycle syncing is thought process that cycle syncing is thought process that cycle syncing is based on. And so it comes down to this based on. And so it comes down to this based on. And so it comes down to this hypothesis that there is this hypothesis that there is this hypothesis that there is this relationship between estrogen and relationship between estrogen and relationship between estrogen and muscle. And so is if estrogen is muscle. And so is if estrogen is muscle. And so is if estrogen is declining with menopause, then that declining with menopause, then that declining with menopause, then that would have some effect on muscle. But we would have some effect on muscle. But we would have some effect on muscle. But we don't see that. We see age related don't see that. We see age related don't see that. We see age related muscle loss that is exacerbated by muscle loss that is exacerbated by muscle loss that is exacerbated by physical inactivity. But you look at physical inactivity. But you look at physical inactivity. But you look at lean mass across the men the across the lean mass across the men the across the lean mass across the men the across the menopause transition and that in and of menopause transition and that in and of menopause transition and that in and of itself isn't accelerating the loss of itself isn't accelerating the loss of itself isn't accelerating the loss of muscle. &gt;&gt; I think for understandable reasons &gt;&gt; I think for understandable reasons &gt;&gt; I think for understandable reasons there's this correlation that people there's this correlation that people there's this correlation that people draw between hormones and muscle and draw between hormones and muscle and draw between hormones and muscle and since resistance training is more kind since resistance training is more kind since resistance training is more kind of muscle oriented in people's minds of muscle oriented in people's minds of muscle oriented in people's minds anyway I mean you got you know tendon anyway I mean you got you know tendon anyway I mean you got you know tendon and bone etc than cardiovascular and bone etc than cardiovascular and bone etc than cardiovascular training. It's a silly thing but we kind training. It's a silly thing but we kind training. It's a silly thing but we kind of make that association. There seem all of make that association. There seem all of make that association. There seem all these things around uh women's fitness. these things around uh women's fitness. these things around uh women's fitness. It's like should training change uh It's like should training change uh It's like should training change uh during different phases of the menstrual during different phases of the menstrual during different phases of the menstrual cycle because after all menstrual cycle because after all menstrual cycle because after all menstrual cycle is hormones. Hormones affect how one is hormones. Hormones affect how one is hormones. Hormones affect how one feels but also muscle. Here we are you feels but also muscle. Here we are you feels but also muscle. Here we are you know back to muscle. that changes in muscle size and strength that changes in muscle size and strength that changes in muscle size and strength as one ages in my understanding are just as one ages in my understanding are just as one ages in my understanding are just as much a function of atrophy of nerve as much a function of atrophy of nerve as much a function of atrophy of nerve to muscle connections the strength of to muscle connections the strength of to muscle connections the strength of those as they are some drop in hormones those as they are some drop in hormones those as they are some drop in hormones and I think it's never really been and I think it's never really been and I think it's never really been stated out loud you know so I just want stated out loud you know so I just want stated out loud you know so I just want your thoughts on this um do you think your thoughts on this um do you think your thoughts on this um do you think that if people understood that a lot of that if people understood that a lot of that if people understood that a lot of muscle and strength loss is inactivity muscle and strength loss is inactivity muscle and strength loss is inactivity as you said and inact activity brings a as you said and inact activity brings a as you said and inact activity brings a weakening of the nerve to muscle weakening of the nerve to muscle weakening of the nerve to muscle connection that it might help us get connection that it might help us get connection that it might help us get away a little bit from this idea that away a little bit from this idea that away a little bit from this idea that everything about muscles is hormones and everything about muscles is hormones and everything about muscles is hormones and everything about hormones is muscle that everything about hormones is muscle that everything about hormones is muscle that they're equally important. I really they're equally important. I really they're equally important. I really realize I'm leading the witness here a realize I'm leading the witness here a realize I'm leading the witness here a little bit, but I I'll just out you. little bit, but I I'll just out you. little bit, but I I'll just out you. Your father's a neuroscientist. How Your father's a neuroscientist. How Your father's a neuroscientist. How important is the nervous system and the important is the nervous system and the important is the nervous system and the changes that the nervous system normally changes that the nervous system normally changes that the nervous system normally undergoes as one ages important here? Is undergoes as one ages important here? Is undergoes as one ages important here? Is that what we're trying to do or are we that what we're trying to do or are we that what we're trying to do or are we trying to offset some of that? It's trying to offset some of that? It's trying to offset some of that? It's important too because we need to important too because we need to important too because we need to maintain those connections for all maintain those connections for all maintain those connections for all movement patterns right and so when we movement patterns right and so when we movement patterns right and so when we see long periods of physical inactivity see long periods of physical inactivity see long periods of physical inactivity think you know immobilization or bed think you know immobilization or bed think you know immobilization or bed rest the rate at which you lose muscle rest the rate at which you lose muscle rest the rate at which you lose muscle is shocking I mean it's really is shocking I mean it's really is shocking I mean it's really dramatic and so we know that is a very dramatic and so we know that is a very dramatic and so we know that is a very extreme model of atrophy that we extreme model of atrophy that we extreme model of atrophy that we want to avoid but there are other want to avoid but there are other want to avoid but there are other versions of that in just daily kind of versions of that in just daily kind of versions of that in just daily kind of sedentary life. You're not on bed rest, sedentary life. You're not on bed rest, sedentary life. You're not on bed rest, but and you're not technically but and you're not technically but and you're not technically immobilized, but you're moving so immobilized, but you're moving so immobilized, but you're moving so infrequently that you are exacerbating infrequently that you are exacerbating infrequently that you are exacerbating muscle loss. And even if you are just muscle loss. And even if you are just muscle loss. And even if you are just physically active, even if you're not physically active, even if you're not physically active, even if you're not lifting weights, you're much more likely lifting weights, you're much more likely lifting weights, you're much more likely to maintain that muscle. But once you to maintain that muscle. But once you to maintain that muscle. But once you stop being physically active, then we stop being physically active, then we stop being physically active, then we run into a lot of problems. run into a lot of problems. run into a lot of problems. If more people understood the neural If more people understood the neural If more people understood the neural aspect of all this exercise stuff and aspect of all this exercise stuff and aspect of all this exercise stuff and muscle and how that relates to fitness muscle and how that relates to fitness muscle and how that relates to fitness and brain health, I think it would help and brain health, I think it would help and brain health, I think it would help men and women kind of get around this men and women kind of get around this men and women kind of get around this thing that you mentioned earlier. It's thing that you mentioned earlier. It's thing that you mentioned earlier. It's just kind of hovering my mind that so just kind of hovering my mind that so just kind of hovering my mind that so much of the way that fitness has been much of the way that fitness has been much of the way that fitness has been presented, exercise has been presented presented, exercise has been presented presented, exercise has been presented to women is around weight loss. to women is around weight loss. to women is around weight loss. &gt;&gt; And now the conversation seems to be &gt;&gt; And now the conversation seems to be &gt;&gt; And now the conversation seems to be changing. It's about longevity. It's changing. It's about longevity. It's changing. It's about longevity. It's about maintaining muscle. It's about maintaining muscle. It's about maintaining muscle. It's about maintaining brain health and not getting maintaining brain health and not getting maintaining brain health and not getting injured. And so it seems like it's injured. And so it seems like it's injured. And so it seems like it's morphing slightly. morphing slightly. morphing slightly. &gt;&gt; I think that is missed in resistance &gt;&gt; I think that is missed in resistance &gt;&gt; I think that is missed in resistance training because we just think about it training because we just think about it training because we just think about it at the muscle level. But when we think at the muscle level. But when we think at the muscle level. But when we think about motor unit recruitment, that is a about motor unit recruitment, that is a about motor unit recruitment, that is a neural pathway. And we need all of those neural pathway. And we need all of those neural pathway. And we need all of those to stay intact to perform any kind of to stay intact to perform any kind of to stay intact to perform any kind of motor function. And so when we are motor function. And so when we are motor function. And so when we are lifting weights, we're not exclusively lifting weights, we're not exclusively lifting weights, we're not exclusively building muscle. And that's why we see building muscle. And that's why we see building muscle. And that's why we see tendon adaptations, bone adaptations, tendon adaptations, bone adaptations, tendon adaptations, bone adaptations, everything is connected. And it's also everything is connected. And it's also everything is connected. And it's also why if you're somebody who is aging, but why if you're somebody who is aging, but why if you're somebody who is aging, but you're physically active in a way that you're physically active in a way that you're physically active in a way that requires a certain type of coordination, requires a certain type of coordination, requires a certain type of coordination, maybe it's pickle ball, um that is maybe it's pickle ball, um that is maybe it's pickle ball, um that is really helpful as well. I think the idea really helpful as well. I think the idea really helpful as well. I think the idea that you have to go to the gym is that you have to go to the gym is that you have to go to the gym is intimidating for some people because a intimidating for some people because a intimidating for some people because a lot of women in their minds think that lot of women in their minds think that lot of women in their minds think that they're going to be the only woman in they're going to be the only woman in they're going to be the only woman in the gym. That's less and less true, but the gym. That's less and less true, but the gym. That's less and less true, but in my experience, it's still the weight in my experience, it's still the weight in my experience, it's still the weight room is still probably a maledominated room is still probably a maledominated room is still probably a maledominated section of the gym. I think the biggest section of the gym. I think the biggest section of the gym. I think the biggest fear is not knowing what to do. And fear is not knowing what to do. And fear is not knowing what to do. And machines can be a really good place to machines can be a really good place to machines can be a really good place to start if you're somebody who doesn't start if you're somebody who doesn't start if you're somebody who doesn't want to work with a trainer and is a want to work with a trainer and is a want to work with a trainer and is a little bit nervous about trying to little bit nervous about trying to little bit nervous about trying to selfach those movement patterns with selfach those movement patterns with selfach those movement patterns with barbells or dumbbells. A lot of barbells or dumbbells. A lot of barbells or dumbbells. A lot of commercial gyms these days have a commercial gyms these days have a commercial gyms these days have a circuit of machines and you can start circuit of machines and you can start circuit of machines and you can start there and kind of get comfortable with there and kind of get comfortable with there and kind of get comfortable with those movement patterns. get comfortable those movement patterns. get comfortable those movement patterns. get comfortable with what is challenging, what is close with what is challenging, what is close with what is challenging, what is close to failure, and then progress to some of to failure, and then progress to some of to failure, and then progress to some of these other exercises and equipment. these other exercises and equipment. these other exercises and equipment. &gt;&gt; Yeah. When I've tried to encourage &gt;&gt; Yeah. When I've tried to encourage &gt;&gt; Yeah. When I've tried to encourage family me female family members like to family me female family members like to family me female family members like to weight train, like I don't want to go to weight train, like I don't want to go to weight train, like I don't want to go to a gym. Like, why not? They're like, I a gym. Like, why not? They're like, I a gym. Like, why not? They're like, I like my yoga class. I like Pilates. I like my yoga class. I like Pilates. I like my yoga class. I like Pilates. I like going for hikes. What do you think like going for hikes. What do you think like going for hikes. What do you think are some things that women could do to are some things that women could do to are some things that women could do to sort of lower those barriers for sort of lower those barriers for sort of lower those barriers for people? starting with group fitness people? starting with group fitness people? starting with group fitness because even though most group fitness because even though most group fitness because even though most group fitness classes are suboptimal from the classes are suboptimal from the classes are suboptimal from the perspective of a sound resistance perspective of a sound resistance perspective of a sound resistance training program, it gets you into the training program, it gets you into the training program, it gets you into the gym. It gets you feeling comfortable. It gym. It gets you feeling comfortable. It gym. It gets you feeling comfortable. It will teach you some of those movement will teach you some of those movement will teach you some of those movement patterns that we've discussed. And then patterns that we've discussed. And then patterns that we've discussed. And then maybe after class, you and a couple of maybe after class, you and a couple of maybe after class, you and a couple of friends that you've made in class can go friends that you've made in class can go friends that you've made in class can go and try out a couple of machines. and try out a couple of machines. and try out a couple of machines. And so you can kind of ease into it that And so you can kind of ease into it that And so you can kind of ease into it that way. And people gravitate towards group way. And people gravitate towards group way. And people gravitate towards group fitness because it's social and you have fitness because it's social and you have fitness because it's social and you have an appointment because you have to be an appointment because you have to be an appointment because you have to be there at a specific time. So that can there at a specific time. So that can there at a specific time. So that can be another good kind of entry point to be another good kind of entry point to be another good kind of entry point to get you going to the gym without feeling get you going to the gym without feeling get you going to the gym without feeling overwhelmed by exercises you're not sure overwhelmed by exercises you're not sure overwhelmed by exercises you're not sure how to perform or equipment that how to perform or equipment that how to perform or equipment that you're not sure how to use. In terms of you're not sure how to use. In terms of you're not sure how to use. In terms of the relationship between hormones, the relationship between hormones, the relationship between hormones, menstrual cycle, and training, I know menstrual cycle, and training, I know menstrual cycle, and training, I know I'm staying on this, but it comes up. I I'm staying on this, but it comes up. I I'm staying on this, but it comes up. I mean, you've on social media. I mean, I mean, you've on social media. I mean, I mean, you've on social media. I mean, I don't know what percentage of questions don't know what percentage of questions don't know what percentage of questions that you get on social media relate to that you get on social media relate to that you get on social media relate to hormones and training uh as they relate hormones and training uh as they relate hormones and training uh as they relate to one another. to one another. to one another. &gt;&gt; It's a lot. I think now more than ever, &gt;&gt; It's a lot. I think now more than ever, &gt;&gt; It's a lot. I think now more than ever, you're just seeing more and more of this you're just seeing more and more of this you're just seeing more and more of this messaging pop up. And with the menstrual messaging pop up. And with the menstrual messaging pop up. And with the menstrual cycle, it's not only about exercise. I cycle, it's not only about exercise. I cycle, it's not only about exercise. I see uh the way you should eat see uh the way you should eat see uh the way you should eat differently due to cycle phase, the way differently due to cycle phase, the way differently due to cycle phase, the way you should work differently, the way you should work differently, the way you should work differently, the way you should socialize differently. Um there should socialize differently. Um there should socialize differently. Um there are all of these messages that are all of these messages that are all of these messages that are saying you need to kind of overhaul this saying you need to kind of overhaul this saying you need to kind of overhaul this aspect of your life to align with these aspect of your life to align with these aspect of your life to align with these phases. Is there any evidence that phases. Is there any evidence that phases. Is there any evidence that resistance training can help amelate resistance training can help amelate resistance training can help amelate some of the um symptoms of the some of the um symptoms of the some of the um symptoms of the negative symptoms of uh certain phases negative symptoms of uh certain phases negative symptoms of uh certain phases of the cycle that women might be of the cycle that women might be of the cycle that women might be experiencing? In other words, do they experiencing? In other words, do they experiencing? In other words, do they often feel better by training during the often feel better by training during the often feel better by training during the most difficult phase of their cycle? Has most difficult phase of their cycle? Has most difficult phase of their cycle? Has that ever been demonstrated? that ever been demonstrated? that ever been demonstrated? &gt;&gt; Not with resistance training &gt;&gt; Not with resistance training &gt;&gt; Not with resistance training specifically, but with physical specifically, but with physical specifically, but with physical activity, sure. Uh it can activity, sure. Uh it can activity, sure. Uh it can definitely help. Um because you if you definitely help. Um because you if you definitely help. Um because you if you have something like cramps then just have something like cramps then just have something like cramps then just kind of doing something to increase kind of doing something to increase kind of doing something to increase blood flow even if it's going for a walk blood flow even if it's going for a walk blood flow even if it's going for a walk can be helpful and it also kind of gets can be helpful and it also kind of gets can be helpful and it also kind of gets your mind off of it so you're not your mind off of it so you're not your mind off of it so you're not actually sitting there kind of focusing actually sitting there kind of focusing actually sitting there kind of focusing on the fact that you're uncomfortable on the fact that you're uncomfortable on the fact that you're uncomfortable and it depends on the person but I think and it depends on the person but I think and it depends on the person but I think some sort of physical activity can be some sort of physical activity can be some sort of physical activity can be beneficial and that's something that beneficial and that's something that beneficial and that's something that you should consider exploring that you should consider exploring that you should consider exploring whether it's resistance training or whether it's resistance training or whether it's resistance training or anything else. anything else. anything else. &gt;&gt; What about the nutrition um aspect uh in &gt;&gt; What about the nutrition um aspect uh in &gt;&gt; What about the nutrition um aspect uh in the menstrual cycle? the menstrual cycle? the menstrual cycle? &gt;&gt; The nutrition data is pretty poor &gt;&gt; The nutrition data is pretty poor &gt;&gt; The nutrition data is pretty poor because as is most nutrition data, it's because as is most nutrition data, it's because as is most nutrition data, it's kind of self-report. And so we're saying kind of self-report. And so we're saying kind of self-report. And so we're saying observationally people tend to eat a little bit more in people tend to eat a little bit more in people tend to eat a little bit more in this phase versus that phase on average this phase versus that phase on average this phase versus that phase on average based on self-reported food diaries. based on self-reported food diaries. based on self-reported food diaries. Does that mean that you should change Does that mean that you should change Does that mean that you should change caloric intake or protein intake or caloric intake or protein intake or caloric intake or protein intake or carbohydrate intake? We don't have the carbohydrate intake? We don't have the carbohydrate intake? We don't have the data to support any of that. And a lot data to support any of that. And a lot data to support any of that. And a lot of it comes back to this theory that you of it comes back to this theory that you of it comes back to this theory that you have a kind of an anabolic phase or a have a kind of an anabolic phase or a have a kind of an anabolic phase or a catabolic phase. And so that extended catabolic phase. And so that extended catabolic phase. And so that extended from oh you should focus on more from oh you should focus on more from oh you should focus on more resistance training during this phase to resistance training during this phase to resistance training during this phase to oh well then you must need more protein oh well then you must need more protein oh well then you must need more protein in this other phase. So what kind of in this other phase. So what kind of in this other phase. So what kind of started as a hypothesis about anabolic started as a hypothesis about anabolic started as a hypothesis about anabolic and catabolic states has twisted into and catabolic states has twisted into and catabolic states has twisted into changing your exercise program and changing your exercise program and changing your exercise program and changing your diet among other things. changing your diet among other things. changing your diet among other things. &gt;&gt; I spoke to a couple different uh women &gt;&gt; I spoke to a couple different uh women &gt;&gt; I spoke to a couple different uh women prior to sitting down with you today prior to sitting down with you today prior to sitting down with you today because I needed data from actual women because I needed data from actual women because I needed data from actual women as opposed to my ideas about what they as opposed to my ideas about what they as opposed to my ideas about what they might be thinking, right? Or what I see might be thinking, right? Or what I see might be thinking, right? Or what I see online, right? Um these are people I'm online, right? Um these are people I'm online, right? Um these are people I'm close with and uh I believe they close with and uh I believe they close with and uh I believe they were honest with me and for the it were honest with me and for the it were honest with me and for the it wasn't an enormous poll. This is uh not wasn't an enormous poll. This is uh not wasn't an enormous poll. This is uh not an official study, but I heard something an official study, but I heard something an official study, but I heard something at least three times out of the five at least three times out of the five at least three times out of the five people I spoke to and it was this. I people I spoke to and it was this. I people I spoke to and it was this. I know I should lift weights, but I feel know I should lift weights, but I feel know I should lift weights, but I feel like I get enough muscle training from like I get enough muscle training from like I get enough muscle training from my Pilates or yoga. And I said, "Yeah, my Pilates or yoga. And I said, "Yeah, my Pilates or yoga. And I said, "Yeah, but couldn't those things be really but couldn't those things be really but couldn't those things be really different than resistance training?" And different than resistance training?" And different than resistance training?" And the answer that I got back was similar the answer that I got back was similar the answer that I got back was similar in several cases, which was, "Yeah, but in several cases, which was, "Yeah, but in several cases, which was, "Yeah, but my Pilates teacher, she looks awesome my Pilates teacher, she looks awesome my Pilates teacher, she looks awesome and she has tons of energy and she's 10 and she has tons of energy and she's 10 and she has tons of energy and she's 10 years older than me and I want to look years older than me and I want to look years older than me and I want to look like her, so I'm going to do Pilates." like her, so I'm going to do Pilates." like her, so I'm going to do Pilates." And I said, "Well, do you does she lift And I said, "Well, do you does she lift And I said, "Well, do you does she lift weights?" And she said, "No, she just weights?" And she said, "No, she just weights?" And she said, "No, she just does Pilates." And I said, "Well, I does Pilates." And I said, "Well, I does Pilates." And I said, "Well, I wonder if she like did gymnastics when wonder if she like did gymnastics when wonder if she like did gymnastics when we were younger." And then pretty soon we were younger." And then pretty soon we were younger." And then pretty soon I'm now the guy having this like I'm now the guy having this like I'm now the guy having this like conversation trying to essentially conversation trying to essentially conversation trying to essentially negotiate something I have no interest negotiate something I have no interest negotiate something I have no interest in negotiating. But it gave me a window in negotiating. But it gave me a window in negotiating. But it gave me a window into something that I think might be into something that I think might be into something that I think might be pretty common, which is that um we all pretty common, which is that um we all pretty common, which is that um we all look at somebody and what they're doing look at somebody and what they're doing look at somebody and what they're doing and we go, "Oh, like that seems like a and we go, "Oh, like that seems like a and we go, "Oh, like that seems like a look that is reasonable and look that is reasonable and look that is reasonable and attractive and I would want that and attractive and I would want that and attractive and I would want that and they seem to be like kicking butt in they seem to be like kicking butt in they seem to be like kicking butt in life and happy and I'm going to just do life and happy and I'm going to just do life and happy and I'm going to just do that." And so what do you say to women that." And so what do you say to women that." And so what do you say to women who perhaps think like they're as who perhaps think like they're as who perhaps think like they're as muscular as they want to be now doing muscular as they want to be now doing muscular as they want to be now doing Pilates and walking and maybe doing some Pilates and walking and maybe doing some Pilates and walking and maybe doing some other activities, but they're not doing other activities, but they're not doing other activities, but they're not doing resistance training. Is there some resistance training. Is there some resistance training. Is there some reason why they should be motivated to reason why they should be motivated to reason why they should be motivated to also resistance train? what you're also resistance train? what you're also resistance train? what you're describing is very common and describing is very common and describing is very common and unfortunately for the vast majority of unfortunately for the vast majority of unfortunately for the vast majority of people they then go and do the exercise people they then go and do the exercise people they then go and do the exercise class or follow what this person eats in class or follow what this person eats in class or follow what this person eats in a day and they never end up looking like a day and they never end up looking like a day and they never end up looking like that person because we have genetic that person because we have genetic that person because we have genetic factors, nutritional factors, exercise factors, nutritional factors, exercise factors, nutritional factors, exercise factors and sometimes no matter what factors and sometimes no matter what factors and sometimes no matter what we're not going to have the body of this we're not going to have the body of this we're not going to have the body of this other person. But Pilates is other person. But Pilates is other person. But Pilates is particularly guilty of promising these particularly guilty of promising these particularly guilty of promising these dramatic changes in body composition. dramatic changes in body composition. dramatic changes in body composition. And that if you do this class that And that if you do this class that And that if you do this class that you're going to get toned, you're going to get toned, you're going to get toned, you're going to increase your muscle mass and going to increase your muscle mass and going to increase your muscle mass and get these long lean lines or you'll look get these long lean lines or you'll look get these long lean lines or you'll look like a dancer. And so we're when we when like a dancer. And so we're when we when like a dancer. And so we're when we when we use that word, which we don't, toned, we use that word, which we don't, toned, we use that word, which we don't, toned, but when people use it, they mean but when people use it, they mean but when people use it, they mean increase muscle size and decrease body increase muscle size and decrease body increase muscle size and decrease body fat. And the most effective and fat. And the most effective and fat. And the most effective and efficient way to accomplish that is efficient way to accomplish that is efficient way to accomplish that is through resistance training to increase through resistance training to increase through resistance training to increase muscle size and through nutritional muscle size and through nutritional muscle size and through nutritional adjustments to decrease body fat. adjustments to decrease body fat. adjustments to decrease body fat. Even if you're happy doing the Pilates Even if you're happy doing the Pilates Even if you're happy doing the Pilates and walking right now, and I'm not and walking right now, and I'm not and walking right now, and I'm not saying give that up because I'm a fan of saying give that up because I'm a fan of saying give that up because I'm a fan of all physical activity that people enjoy, all physical activity that people enjoy, all physical activity that people enjoy, but it is not sufficient resistance. but it is not sufficient resistance. but it is not sufficient resistance. It's not progressive resistance to stave It's not progressive resistance to stave It's not progressive resistance to stave off that age- related muscle loss that I off that age- related muscle loss that I off that age- related muscle loss that I mentioned. All we need is two 20 minute mentioned. All we need is two 20 minute mentioned. All we need is two 20 minute workouts per week, full body resistance workouts per week, full body resistance workouts per week, full body resistance training to make a pretty powerful training to make a pretty powerful training to make a pretty powerful impact on trying to attenuate some of impact on trying to attenuate some of impact on trying to attenuate some of that decline and losing muscle mass, that decline and losing muscle mass, that decline and losing muscle mass, increasing fall risk, fracture risk, all increasing fall risk, fracture risk, all increasing fall risk, fracture risk, all of those downstream health effects that of those downstream health effects that of those downstream health effects that lead to an existence in your 80s or 90s lead to an existence in your 80s or 90s lead to an existence in your 80s or 90s that is not very functionally that is not very functionally that is not very functionally independent. We don't want that. And so independent. We don't want that. And so independent. We don't want that. And so if we know we can implement this and if we know we can implement this and if we know we can implement this and it's not that much of a time investment, it's not that much of a time investment, it's not that much of a time investment, it's not that much of a financial it's not that much of a financial it's not that much of a financial investment, it's kind of a no-brainer. investment, it's kind of a no-brainer. investment, it's kind of a no-brainer. &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you mentioned the genetic &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you mentioned the genetic &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you mentioned the genetic piece. Um because piece. Um because piece. Um because genetics are huge when it comes to, you genetics are huge when it comes to, you genetics are huge when it comes to, you know, lean mass to non-lean mass body know, lean mass to non-lean mass body know, lean mass to non-lean mass body ratio. People don't I mean obviously ratio. People don't I mean obviously ratio. People don't I mean obviously people over consume calories. They're people over consume calories. They're people over consume calories. They're going to gain weight. Some people more going to gain weight. Some people more going to gain weight. Some people more quickly than others perhaps. Um but you quickly than others perhaps. Um but you quickly than others perhaps. Um but you know it's such a big factor. It know it's such a big factor. It know it's such a big factor. It seems to me that so is um h someone seems to me that so is um h someone seems to me that so is um h someone having done strength and speed sports having done strength and speed sports having done strength and speed sports when they were younger. Like you look at when they were younger. Like you look at when they were younger. Like you look at someone who is a gymnast, um a sprinter, someone who is a gymnast, um a sprinter, someone who is a gymnast, um a sprinter, a pole vter, a competitive tennis a pole vter, a competitive tennis a pole vter, a competitive tennis player, any a lot of like speed type player, any a lot of like speed type player, any a lot of like speed type movement and I've noticed even when they movement and I've noticed even when they movement and I've noticed even when they just do yoga or something in their 30s, just do yoga or something in their 30s, just do yoga or something in their 30s, I know this because as a graduate I know this because as a graduate I know this because as a graduate student, as you know, right in your when student, as you know, right in your when student, as you know, right in your when I was in my 20s and then a posttock in I was in my 20s and then a posttock in I was in my 20s and then a posttock in my 30s, you know, I was exercising less my 30s, you know, I was exercising less my 30s, you know, I was exercising less and the people around you are exercising and the people around you are exercising and the people around you are exercising less. just doing experiments all the less. just doing experiments all the less. just doing experiments all the time and studying all the time and some time and studying all the time and some time and studying all the time and some people just seem to stay really fit people just seem to stay really fit people just seem to stay really fit through that and you go like what do you through that and you go like what do you through that and you go like what do you do and they're like oh I just like these do and they're like oh I just like these do and they're like oh I just like these days I just do yoga did you play a sport days I just do yoga did you play a sport days I just do yoga did you play a sport in high school yeah it was like you know in high school yeah it was like you know in high school yeah it was like you know D1 soccer gymnast and I do think that D1 soccer gymnast and I do think that D1 soccer gymnast and I do think that people who play these competitive sports people who play these competitive sports people who play these competitive sports early in life they hold on to a certain early in life they hold on to a certain early in life they hold on to a certain amount of musculature now maybe there's amount of musculature now maybe there's amount of musculature now maybe there's a selection bias that led them to be a selection bias that led them to be a selection bias that led them to be a D1 athlete combined with training right D1 athlete combined with training right D1 athlete combined with training right so they were kind of had genetics that so they were kind of had genetics that so they were kind of had genetics that then they built on but what I'm I feel then they built on but what I'm I feel then they built on but what I'm I feel like these situations are very like these situations are very like these situations are very misleading And with men it tends to be misleading And with men it tends to be misleading And with men it tends to be misleading where somebody is extremely muscular and where somebody is extremely muscular and where somebody is extremely muscular and lean. I think of my friend Nimma. He lean. I think of my friend Nimma. He lean. I think of my friend Nimma. He does a podcast with Mark Bell. Um Sema does a podcast with Mark Bell. Um Sema does a podcast with Mark Bell. Um Sema is completely steroid and TRT free. He is completely steroid and TRT free. He is completely steroid and TRT free. He really is. I believe him and is really is. I believe him and is really is. I believe him and is actually to speak to your earlier point actually to speak to your earlier point actually to speak to your earlier point his testosterone he sh he's he shown his testosterone he sh he's he shown his testosterone he sh he's he shown his charge to somewhere in like the mid5s. charge to somewhere in like the mid5s. charge to somewhere in like the mid5s. The guy is like his muscle density is The guy is like his muscle density is The guy is like his muscle density is insane. He's got he walks around with 8% insane. He's got he walks around with 8% insane. He's got he walks around with 8% body fat. he's a terrific athlete, etc. body fat. he's a terrific athlete, etc. body fat. he's a terrific athlete, etc. He has genetic gifts that he's built He has genetic gifts that he's built He has genetic gifts that he's built upon with very hard work. So, I can't upon with very hard work. So, I can't upon with very hard work. So, I can't look at him and say, "Oh, I'm going to look at him and say, "Oh, I'm going to look at him and say, "Oh, I'm going to just do what he does, right?" The just do what he does, right?" The just do what he does, right?" The parallel in women's fitness, and I don't parallel in women's fitness, and I don't parallel in women's fitness, and I don't want to discount the, you know, the want to discount the, you know, the want to discount the, you know, the women out there who want to be very, women out there who want to be very, women out there who want to be very, very muscular, but let's just consider very muscular, but let's just consider very muscular, but let's just consider the averages here. They might look at the averages here. They might look at the averages here. They might look at their Pilates teacher and she might have their Pilates teacher and she might have their Pilates teacher and she might have been a gymnast who was also slightly been a gymnast who was also slightly been a gymnast who was also slightly genetically gifted and now can just do genetically gifted and now can just do genetically gifted and now can just do that. No one talks about this and it that. No one talks about this and it that. No one talks about this and it really contorts people's thinking and really contorts people's thinking and really contorts people's thinking and people are trying to figure out what to people are trying to figure out what to people are trying to figure out what to do, what to eat, etc. So, I'd love for do, what to eat, etc. So, I'd love for do, what to eat, etc. So, I'd love for you to elaborate on this a bit more you to elaborate on this a bit more you to elaborate on this a bit more where if you think it's appropriate, but where if you think it's appropriate, but where if you think it's appropriate, but like no one acknowledges this. like no one acknowledges this. like no one acknowledges this. &gt;&gt; I share your hypothesis about the &gt;&gt; I share your hypothesis about the &gt;&gt; I share your hypothesis about the activity you do as a kid. Even if you activity you do as a kid. Even if you activity you do as a kid. Even if you don't become an elite athlete, I think don't become an elite athlete, I think don't become an elite athlete, I think that is something that does kind of that is something that does kind of that is something that does kind of stick with you. And let's say you were a stick with you. And let's say you were a stick with you. And let's say you were a child gymnast and then you pick up child gymnast and then you pick up child gymnast and then you pick up lifting in your 20s. I see women develop lifting in your 20s. I see women develop lifting in your 20s. I see women develop that upper body strength a lot more that upper body strength a lot more that upper body strength a lot more easily because I think they easily because I think they easily because I think they were doing that in childhood. I the were doing that in childhood. I the were doing that in childhood. I the genetic variability is huge because it's genetic variability is huge because it's genetic variability is huge because it's the structure um our bone structure the structure um our bone structure the structure um our bone structure our muscle insertions our muscle insertions our muscle insertions uh the size of our waist. There are uh the size of our waist. There are uh the size of our waist. There are certain things that we can't change. You certain things that we can't change. You certain things that we can't change. You can't change your shape. Yes, we can can't change your shape. Yes, we can can't change your shape. Yes, we can gain fat, lose fat, gain muscle, lose gain fat, lose fat, gain muscle, lose gain fat, lose fat, gain muscle, lose muscle, but some people have naturally muscle, but some people have naturally muscle, but some people have naturally broader shoulders or have delt broader shoulders or have delt broader shoulders or have delt insertions that mean they have that look insertions that mean they have that look insertions that mean they have that look of these capped shoulders or they just of these capped shoulders or they just of these capped shoulders or they just don't carry a lot of body fat on their don't carry a lot of body fat on their don't carry a lot of body fat on their arms or on their legs. And so the way arms or on their legs. And so the way arms or on their legs. And so the way that where we tend to store fat or that where we tend to store fat or that where we tend to store fat or distribute that fat varies from person distribute that fat varies from person distribute that fat varies from person to person. The place in which we lose to person. The place in which we lose to person. The place in which we lose fat first and last will vary. And often fat first and last will vary. And often fat first and last will vary. And often when you compare yourself to somebody when you compare yourself to somebody when you compare yourself to somebody with a very different structure, perhaps with a very different structure, perhaps with a very different structure, perhaps they have a metabolism that allows for they have a metabolism that allows for they have a metabolism that allows for them to maintain a certain body weight them to maintain a certain body weight them to maintain a certain body weight or a certain body fat at a really or a certain body fat at a really or a certain body fat at a really comfortable caloric intake. Whereas for comfortable caloric intake. Whereas for comfortable caloric intake. Whereas for you to maintain that certain level of you to maintain that certain level of you to maintain that certain level of body size or body fat would require a body size or body fat would require a body size or body fat would require a very uncomfortable unsustainable level very uncomfortable unsustainable level very uncomfortable unsustainable level of caloric intake and that is just is of caloric intake and that is just is of caloric intake and that is just is what it is. what it is. what it is. &gt;&gt; In the old days of fitness meaning when &gt;&gt; In the old days of fitness meaning when &gt;&gt; In the old days of fitness meaning when I started uh in the '9s it's not old I started uh in the '9s it's not old I started uh in the '9s it's not old days but here I am. Um there was this days but here I am. Um there was this days but here I am. Um there was this idea of ectomorph idea of ectomorph idea of ectomorph endomorph and misomorph. We don't hear endomorph and misomorph. We don't hear endomorph and misomorph. We don't hear that anymore. ectomorph being very thin, that anymore. ectomorph being very thin, that anymore. ectomorph being very thin, long syninnowy muscles, small joints, long syninnowy muscles, small joints, long syninnowy muscles, small joints, quoteunquote hard gainer. There was a quoteunquote hard gainer. There was a quoteunquote hard gainer. There was a misomorph, which is the kind of, you misomorph, which is the kind of, you misomorph, which is the kind of, you know, more muscular, somewhat lean know, more muscular, somewhat lean know, more muscular, somewhat lean perhaps. And then there was the perhaps. And then there was the perhaps. And then there was the endomorph idea, somebody carrying a lot endomorph idea, somebody carrying a lot endomorph idea, somebody carrying a lot of excess body fat kind of um idea. Is of excess body fat kind of um idea. Is of excess body fat kind of um idea. Is that just completely irrelevant now in that just completely irrelevant now in that just completely irrelevant now in terms of picking training programs? Um, terms of picking training programs? Um, terms of picking training programs? Um, have we just really landed in a place have we just really landed in a place have we just really landed in a place where it's all about, hey, listen, if where it's all about, hey, listen, if where it's all about, hey, listen, if you're a endomorph, you're eating more you're a endomorph, you're eating more you're a endomorph, you're eating more than you should. There's muscle under than you should. There's muscle under than you should. There's muscle under there. Perhaps if you're an ectomorph, there. Perhaps if you're an ectomorph, there. Perhaps if you're an ectomorph, you're just, you know, maintaining a you're just, you know, maintaining a you're just, you know, maintaining a very low body weight. You need to lift very low body weight. You need to lift very low body weight. You need to lift more and eat more. Is there any reality more and eat more. Is there any reality more and eat more. Is there any reality to this? to this? to this? &gt;&gt; I could be wrong, but I think those &gt;&gt; I could be wrong, but I think those &gt;&gt; I could be wrong, but I think those labels and those descriptors don't even labels and those descriptors don't even labels and those descriptors don't even come from any sort of physiology u come from any sort of physiology u come from any sort of physiology u research or framework. I think they come research or framework. I think they come research or framework. I think they come from psychology, from psychology, from psychology, which makes no sense given that we're which makes no sense given that we're which makes no sense given that we're using them to describe how one might using them to describe how one might using them to describe how one might expect to adapt to training. You can expect to adapt to training. You can expect to adapt to training. You can say, "Oh, if you're somebody who is kind say, "Oh, if you're somebody who is kind say, "Oh, if you're somebody who is kind of skinny, maybe you can expect to be a of skinny, maybe you can expect to be a of skinny, maybe you can expect to be a hard gainer, but sometimes that's not hard gainer, but sometimes that's not hard gainer, but sometimes that's not the case at all." You see teenage boys the case at all." You see teenage boys the case at all." You see teenage boys that were kind of skin and bones and that were kind of skin and bones and that were kind of skin and bones and lanky and then they start lifting and lanky and then they start lifting and lanky and then they start lifting and they blow up. they blow up. they blow up. &gt;&gt; Oh, I didn't I raised my hand as you &gt;&gt; Oh, I didn't I raised my hand as you &gt;&gt; Oh, I didn't I raised my hand as you said I didn't blow up but I mean I was said I didn't blow up but I mean I was said I didn't blow up but I mean I was 61 150 lbs. Yeah. And in my first year 61 150 lbs. Yeah. And in my first year 61 150 lbs. Yeah. And in my first year of training I think I put on like 2530 of training I think I put on like 2530 of training I think I put on like 2530 lbs of maybe it wasn't all muscle but it lbs of maybe it wasn't all muscle but it lbs of maybe it wasn't all muscle but it did that didn't continue. It definitely did that didn't continue. It definitely did that didn't continue. It definitely can happen. But I also knew guys that can happen. But I also knew guys that can happen. But I also knew guys that when we finished junior high school, when we finished junior high school, when we finished junior high school, they were like built even though they were like built even though they were like built even though they had never touched a weight. They were had never touched a weight. They were had never touched a weight. They were like my bulldog Costello who had these like my bulldog Costello who had these like my bulldog Costello who had these huge forearms. He never touched a huge forearms. He never touched a huge forearms. He never touched a weight. It was just, you know, so I do weight. It was just, you know, so I do weight. It was just, you know, so I do think the genetic variation piece is think the genetic variation piece is think the genetic variation piece is huge. There's also the height component huge. There's also the height component huge. There's also the height component too though because if you think about if too though because if you think about if too though because if you think about if you are 5'6 and you have you know the you are 5'6 and you have you know the you are 5'6 and you have you know the same kind of relative muscle mass as same kind of relative muscle mass as same kind of relative muscle mass as somebody who is 5'11 you are going to somebody who is 5'11 you are going to somebody who is 5'11 you are going to look way more muscular than the tall look way more muscular than the tall look way more muscular than the tall counterpart. So if the person who's 5'11 counterpart. So if the person who's 5'11 counterpart. So if the person who's 5'11 or 6'2 wants to look really muscular, or 6'2 wants to look really muscular, or 6'2 wants to look really muscular, they're going to have to put on a lot of they're going to have to put on a lot of they're going to have to put on a lot of mass because they're taller. mass because they're taller. mass because they're taller. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. So, to get early access to function. So, to get early access to function. So, let's talk about training fasted or not let's talk about training fasted or not let's talk about training fasted or not training fasted. I'm chuckling because, training fasted. I'm chuckling because, training fasted. I'm chuckling because, you know, there are these times when I you know, there are these times when I you know, there are these times when I think, oh, you know, recently it got think, oh, you know, recently it got think, oh, you know, recently it got really intense online. Should women really intense online. Should women really intense online. Should women train fasted or not train fasted? Coming train fasted or not train fasted? Coming train fasted or not train fasted? Coming from the world of research science, from the world of research science, from the world of research science, which we both do, like these quote which we both do, like these quote which we both do, like these quote unquote battles online, they're like unquote battles online, they're like unquote battles online, they're like nothing because it's in the end it nothing because it's in the end it nothing because it's in the end it really boils down to what do we know, really boils down to what do we know, really boils down to what do we know, what do we not know? Right. what do we not know? Right. what do we not know? Right. &gt;&gt; Right. Battles in science get down to &gt;&gt; Right. Battles in science get down to &gt;&gt; Right. Battles in science get down to two people looking at the same graph and two people looking at the same graph and two people looking at the same graph and arguing about it like every you know arguing about it like every you know arguing about it like every you know that one piece of data out on the plot. that one piece of data out on the plot. that one piece of data out on the plot. We're not really arguing data when we're We're not really arguing data when we're We're not really arguing data when we're arguing um mass experience. So, arguing um mass experience. So, arguing um mass experience. So, &gt;&gt; what is the data, the laboratory data on &gt;&gt; what is the data, the laboratory data on &gt;&gt; what is the data, the laboratory data on women training fasted in terms of fat women training fasted in terms of fat women training fasted in terms of fat loss, muscle gain, strength gain, and just muscle gain, strength gain, and just muscle gain, strength gain, and just whether or not it's a good or bad idea whether or not it's a good or bad idea whether or not it's a good or bad idea on the whole. I'm glad you bring up the on the whole. I'm glad you bring up the on the whole. I'm glad you bring up the data piece because in some of these data piece because in some of these data piece because in some of these conversations there's a lot of conversations there's a lot of conversations there's a lot of extrapolation of a potential mechanism extrapolation of a potential mechanism extrapolation of a potential mechanism and that's not where we lean when we and that's not where we lean when we and that's not where we lean when we develop recommendations about exercise and recommendations about exercise and recommendations about exercise and nutrition. We need to look at the data nutrition. We need to look at the data nutrition. We need to look at the data in the population of interest humans in the population of interest humans in the population of interest humans measuring the outcome we are interested measuring the outcome we are interested measuring the outcome we are interested in using the intervention that we're in using the intervention that we're in using the intervention that we're discussing. So in the case of fed discussing. So in the case of fed discussing. So in the case of fed and fasted state training this has been and fasted state training this has been and fasted state training this has been looked at long on longer term studies. looked at long on longer term studies. looked at long on longer term studies. So consistent fasted state training not So consistent fasted state training not So consistent fasted state training not just an acute bout of fasted state just an acute bout of fasted state just an acute bout of fasted state training. And the muscle growth and fat training. And the muscle growth and fat training. And the muscle growth and fat loss adaptations to exercise are the loss adaptations to exercise are the loss adaptations to exercise are the same in men and in women. And there was same in men and in women. And there was same in men and in women. And there was a school of thought that fasted a school of thought that fasted a school of thought that fasted training might be beneficial for fat training might be beneficial for fat training might be beneficial for fat loss like 2012 maybe. And everyone was loss like 2012 maybe. And everyone was loss like 2012 maybe. And everyone was doing fasted cardio thinking it was doing fasted cardio thinking it was doing fasted cardio thinking it was going to accelerate their fat loss going to accelerate their fat loss going to accelerate their fat loss because they were exercising in a in a fasted they were exercising in a in a fasted they were exercising in a in a fasted state and oxidizing more fat because state and oxidizing more fat because state and oxidizing more fat because they were fasted acutely. Turns out that they were fasted acutely. Turns out that they were fasted acutely. Turns out that acute fat oxidation or fat oxidation acute fat oxidation or fat oxidation acute fat oxidation or fat oxidation post-workout isn't meaningful enough to offset the isn't meaningful enough to offset the isn't meaningful enough to offset the rest of the metabolism throughout the rest of the metabolism throughout the rest of the metabolism throughout the day such that you don't lose more body day such that you don't lose more body day such that you don't lose more body fat long term. Now, the pendulum has fat long term. Now, the pendulum has fat long term. Now, the pendulum has kind of swung in the other direction. kind of swung in the other direction. kind of swung in the other direction. And the argument is that if you're And the argument is that if you're And the argument is that if you're training fasted, you're going to gain training fasted, you're going to gain training fasted, you're going to gain fat or lose muscle. And that doesn't fat or lose muscle. And that doesn't fat or lose muscle. And that doesn't make a whole lot of sense either because make a whole lot of sense either because make a whole lot of sense either because when we wake up in the morning, we ate when we wake up in the morning, we ate when we wake up in the morning, we ate dinner last night, right? We have stored dinner last night, right? We have stored dinner last night, right? We have stored glycogen. And most resistance training glycogen. And most resistance training glycogen. And most resistance training sessions aren't extremely glycogen sessions aren't extremely glycogen sessions aren't extremely glycogen depleting anyway. So unless we're going depleting anyway. So unless we're going depleting anyway. So unless we're going to do some really long form endurance to do some really long form endurance to do some really long form endurance training, in which case, yeah, it's training, in which case, yeah, it's training, in which case, yeah, it's probably wise to have something to eat probably wise to have something to eat probably wise to have something to eat beforehand to fuel that long beforehand to fuel that long beforehand to fuel that long session. The decision to train fed or session. The decision to train fed or session. The decision to train fed or fasted should be based on personal fasted should be based on personal fasted should be based on personal preference. &gt;&gt; Do you have a personal preference? &gt;&gt; Do you have a personal preference? &gt;&gt; Do you have a personal preference? &gt;&gt; If I go in the morning, I always train &gt;&gt; If I go in the morning, I always train &gt;&gt; If I go in the morning, I always train fasted. If I go later in the day, I've fasted. If I go later in the day, I've fasted. If I go later in the day, I've eaten &gt;&gt; caffeine before you train &gt;&gt; caffeine before you train &gt;&gt; caffeine before you train &gt;&gt; always. &gt;&gt; always. &gt;&gt; always. &gt;&gt; Um, for the just general alertness or &gt;&gt; Um, for the just general alertness or &gt;&gt; Um, for the just general alertness or also performance-enhancing effects of also performance-enhancing effects of also performance-enhancing effects of caffeine, &gt;&gt; I notice more the general alertness, but &gt;&gt; I notice more the general alertness, but &gt;&gt; I notice more the general alertness, but it's probably hard to separate those. it's probably hard to separate those. it's probably hard to separate those. I think we see more performance benefits I think we see more performance benefits I think we see more performance benefits if you go from being, you know, caffeine if you go from being, you know, caffeine if you go from being, you know, caffeine naive, and I am not. Um, [laughter] I'm naive, and I am not. Um, [laughter] I'm naive, and I am not. Um, [laughter] I'm very habituated at this point, so I'm very habituated at this point, so I'm very habituated at this point, so I'm probably not seeing that many probably not seeing that many probably not seeing that many performance benefits, but yeah, I performance benefits, but yeah, I performance benefits, but yeah, I definitely feel it when I don't have definitely feel it when I don't have definitely feel it when I don't have caffeine pre-workout. caffeine pre-workout. caffeine pre-workout. &gt;&gt; 90% of adults in the world drink &gt;&gt; 90% of adults in the world drink &gt;&gt; 90% of adults in the world drink caffeine every day. And it turns out one caffeine every day. And it turns out one caffeine every day. And it turns out one of the hardest things to do about of the hardest things to do about of the hardest things to do about running a study on caffeine is getting running a study on caffeine is getting running a study on caffeine is getting people to not drink caffeine for like people to not drink caffeine for like people to not drink caffeine for like two weeks to do a wash out because two weeks to do a wash out because two weeks to do a wash out because otherwise you end up studying caffeine otherwise you end up studying caffeine otherwise you end up studying caffeine withdrawal versus people who are withdrawal versus people who are withdrawal versus people who are continuing to drink caffeine. I spent a continuing to drink caffeine. I spent a continuing to drink caffeine. I spent a lot of time with this literature and lot of time with this literature and lot of time with this literature and it's a maddening literature. I'm right it's a maddening literature. I'm right it's a maddening literature. I'm right there with you. Uh total caffeine addict there with you. Uh total caffeine addict there with you. Uh total caffeine addict and I'm cool. So I'm Andrew. I'm a and I'm cool. So I'm Andrew. I'm a and I'm cool. So I'm Andrew. I'm a caffeine addict, you know, um and proud caffeine addict, you know, um and proud caffeine addict, you know, um and proud of it. of it. of it. So, if you were going to ingest food So, if you were going to ingest food So, if you were going to ingest food before you train, um, and given that before you train, um, and given that before you train, um, and given that most resistance training sessions are most resistance training sessions are most resistance training sessions are not glycogen depleting, which you said, not glycogen depleting, which you said, not glycogen depleting, which you said, um, is there any advantage to having um, is there any advantage to having um, is there any advantage to having some starchy carbohydrate before some starchy carbohydrate before some starchy carbohydrate before resistance training that's independent resistance training that's independent resistance training that's independent of glycogen? Um, is there any value to of glycogen? Um, is there any value to of glycogen? Um, is there any value to eating a given food before training? eating a given food before training? eating a given food before training? &gt;&gt; Might make you feel better. you might &gt;&gt; Might make you feel better. you might &gt;&gt; Might make you feel better. you might feel like you have more energy. You feel like you have more energy. You feel like you have more energy. You might feel better in the gym. Other might feel better in the gym. Other might feel better in the gym. Other people feel like they have GI issues if people feel like they have GI issues if people feel like they have GI issues if they eat too close to a workout. And so they eat too close to a workout. And so they eat too close to a workout. And so that's uh they'd prefer to eat that's uh they'd prefer to eat that's uh they'd prefer to eat afterwards. So I think if you are afterwards. So I think if you are afterwards. So I think if you are someone who wants to experiment with someone who wants to experiment with someone who wants to experiment with both, then have at it. But for both, then have at it. But for both, then have at it. But for resistance training, the composition of resistance training, the composition of resistance training, the composition of the meal you're eating pre-workout is the meal you're eating pre-workout is the meal you're eating pre-workout is very unlikely to be used as fuel in that very unlikely to be used as fuel in that very unlikely to be used as fuel in that workout. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Well, if we are eating right before we &gt;&gt; Well, if we are eating right before we &gt;&gt; Well, if we are eating right before we train, then we still need to digest and train, then we still need to digest and train, then we still need to digest and absorb those nutrients. So, I guess it absorb those nutrients. So, I guess it absorb those nutrients. So, I guess it depends what it is that we're consuming. depends what it is that we're consuming. depends what it is that we're consuming. If you're consuming uh you know one of If you're consuming uh you know one of If you're consuming uh you know one of those liquid packs that people um those liquid packs that people um those liquid packs that people um consume during a marathon, do you know consume during a marathon, do you know consume during a marathon, do you know what I mean? what I mean? what I mean? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like so th that's like really fast &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like so th that's like really fast &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like so th that's like really fast generating um but if we're if we're generating um but if we're if we're generating um but if we're if we're going to have some oats or something, going to have some oats or something, going to have some oats or something, then &gt;&gt; if I'm eating my oats and going to the &gt;&gt; if I'm eating my oats and going to the &gt;&gt; if I'm eating my oats and going to the gym, I'm probably not using that as my gym, I'm probably not using that as my gym, I'm probably not using that as my fuel for that workout. What about fuel for that workout. What about fuel for that workout. What about postworkout nutrition? Uh for many years postworkout nutrition? Uh for many years postworkout nutrition? Uh for many years there were all sorts of ideas. You have there were all sorts of ideas. You have there were all sorts of ideas. You have a unique opportunity to, you know, store a unique opportunity to, you know, store a unique opportunity to, you know, store more glycogen. Uh to this day, I still more glycogen. Uh to this day, I still more glycogen. Uh to this day, I still have some fruit and some starch and a have some fruit and some starch and a have some fruit and some starch and a protein drink after I train. Does it protein drink after I train. Does it protein drink after I train. Does it matter if it's in the first 30 to 90 matter if it's in the first 30 to 90 matter if it's in the first 30 to 90 minutes in terms of the adaptation? This minutes in terms of the adaptation? This minutes in terms of the adaptation? This is all independent [clears throat] is all independent [clears throat] is all independent [clears throat] of um hunger and kind of what one what of um hunger and kind of what one what of um hunger and kind of what one what makes one feel better. I'm just thinking makes one feel better. I'm just thinking makes one feel better. I'm just thinking in terms of recovering more quickly to in terms of recovering more quickly to in terms of recovering more quickly to be able to train again, get back to work be able to train again, get back to work be able to train again, get back to work and do other things. and do other things. and do other things. &gt;&gt; So, the training is the stimulus for the &gt;&gt; So, the training is the stimulus for the &gt;&gt; So, the training is the stimulus for the adaptation or muscle growth if we're adaptation or muscle growth if we're adaptation or muscle growth if we're talking about resistance training. And talking about resistance training. And talking about resistance training. And then the nutrition or the dietary then the nutrition or the dietary then the nutrition or the dietary protein can kind of optimize our results protein can kind of optimize our results protein can kind of optimize our results from that stimulus. And there was once a from that stimulus. And there was once a from that stimulus. And there was once a school of thought that there was this a school of thought that there was this a school of thought that there was this anabolic window and it was very narrow anabolic window and it was very narrow anabolic window and it was very narrow and you needed to slam that protein and you needed to slam that protein and you needed to slam that protein shake the second you left the gym or you shake the second you left the gym or you shake the second you left the gym or you know why did you even bother lifting know why did you even bother lifting know why did you even bother lifting that day. Uh it turns out that post that day. Uh it turns out that post that day. Uh it turns out that post resistance training that window that resistance training that window that resistance training that window that elevated protein synthesis is elevated protein synthesis is elevated protein synthesis is longlasting. We've measured this and see that it's We've measured this and see that it's We've measured this and see that it's still elevated even 24 hours after your still elevated even 24 hours after your still elevated even 24 hours after your session. Not that I'm suggesting you session. Not that I'm suggesting you session. Not that I'm suggesting you wait 24 hours to eat, but this indicates wait 24 hours to eat, but this indicates wait 24 hours to eat, but this indicates that whether you're eating within 30 that whether you're eating within 30 that whether you're eating within 30 minutes or 3 hours, that's not going to minutes or 3 hours, that's not going to minutes or 3 hours, that's not going to affect the extent to which that dietary affect the extent to which that dietary affect the extent to which that dietary protein can support your muscle protein can support your muscle protein can support your muscle adaptations. I saw a study, I think it adaptations. I saw a study, I think it adaptations. I saw a study, I think it was about a year and a half ago that was about a year and a half ago that was about a year and a half ago that asserted that postresistance training, asserted that postresistance training, asserted that postresistance training, and I forget how long they waited and I forget how long they waited and I forget how long they waited postresistance training, but some period postresistance training, but some period postresistance training, but some period of time after resistance training that of time after resistance training that of time after resistance training that men and women can assimilate up to 100 men and women can assimilate up to 100 men and women can assimilate up to 100 grams of protein, whereas previously we grams of protein, whereas previously we grams of protein, whereas previously we thought that uh one could only thought that uh one could only thought that uh one could only assimilate 30 grams of protein per assimilate 30 grams of protein per assimilate 30 grams of protein per feeding. whatever became of the 30 gram feeding. whatever became of the 30 gram feeding. whatever became of the 30 gram limit and how does exercise impact um limit and how does exercise impact um limit and how does exercise impact um the amount of protein one can and the amount of protein one can and the amount of protein one can and perhaps should ingest? Well, when we perhaps should ingest? Well, when we perhaps should ingest? Well, when we think about the protein that we're think about the protein that we're think about the protein that we're actually able to absorb and utilize for actually able to absorb and utilize for actually able to absorb and utilize for muscle adaptation, it's a different muscle adaptation, it's a different muscle adaptation, it's a different question of, you know, how much can we question of, you know, how much can we question of, you know, how much can we consume and absorb because not all of consume and absorb because not all of consume and absorb because not all of the protein that we consume is going the protein that we consume is going the protein that we consume is going straight into the muscle. So it's not straight into the muscle. So it's not straight into the muscle. So it's not that we should worry so much about that we should worry so much about that we should worry so much about maximizing per meal protein so much as maximizing per meal protein so much as maximizing per meal protein so much as you go per day per week consistent you go per day per week consistent you go per day per week consistent protein intake protein intake protein intake and that will again support the and that will again support the and that will again support the adaptations from the stimulus that we're adaptations from the stimulus that we're adaptations from the stimulus that we're getting from our training. But the idea getting from our training. But the idea getting from our training. But the idea that we're somehow that we're somehow that we're somehow gaming the system with timing or gaming the system with timing or gaming the system with timing or dosing, it's really we need to kind of dosing, it's really we need to kind of dosing, it's really we need to kind of pull back the lens and think more big pull back the lens and think more big pull back the lens and think more big picture of okay, if I'm aiming for this picture of okay, if I'm aiming for this picture of okay, if I'm aiming for this overall protein intake, then practically overall protein intake, then practically overall protein intake, then practically it probably makes sense for me to split it probably makes sense for me to split it probably makes sense for me to split that up into a couple of meals. So, what that up into a couple of meals. So, what that up into a couple of meals. So, what does that look like? And then can I do does that look like? And then can I do does that look like? And then can I do that consistently? Creatine is really that consistently? Creatine is really that consistently? Creatine is really big these days. Everyone's talking about big these days. Everyone's talking about big these days. Everyone's talking about creatine, it seems. Creatine has been uh creatine, it seems. Creatine has been uh creatine, it seems. Creatine has been uh around a long time. What can it do for around a long time. What can it do for around a long time. What can it do for muscle and strength? What do we know it muscle and strength? What do we know it muscle and strength? What do we know it can do for brain function? And is there can do for brain function? And is there can do for brain function? And is there anything different about the creatine anything different about the creatine anything different about the creatine women should take or the amount of women should take or the amount of women should take or the amount of creatine women should take or when they creatine women should take or when they creatine women should take or when they should take it? Um I'm not familiar with should take it? Um I'm not familiar with should take it? Um I'm not familiar with this aspect of the creatine literature this aspect of the creatine literature this aspect of the creatine literature at all. Uh, but I hear about creatine at all. Uh, but I hear about creatine at all. Uh, but I hear about creatine just about every day. just about every day. just about every day. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's having a renaissance. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's having a renaissance. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's having a renaissance. Um, but for women, it's still the same. It's but for women, it's still the same. It's but for women, it's still the same. It's just creatine monohydrate. Often uh just creatine monohydrate. Often uh just creatine monohydrate. Often uh packaged in gummy form, which you should packaged in gummy form, which you should packaged in gummy form, which you should be careful about because gummy be careful about because gummy be careful about because gummy supplements often don't contain the dose supplements often don't contain the dose supplements often don't contain the dose that they claim to contain. Uh, someone that they claim to contain. Uh, someone that they claim to contain. Uh, someone actually analyzed a bunch of creatine actually analyzed a bunch of creatine actually analyzed a bunch of creatine gummies, top selling brands on Amazon, gummies, top selling brands on Amazon, gummies, top selling brands on Amazon, and some of them contained virtually no and some of them contained virtually no and some of them contained virtually no creatine. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, be careful about the gummies. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, be careful about the gummies. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, be careful about the gummies. They're often They're often They're often &gt;&gt; they spray the gummy with the kind &gt;&gt; they spray the gummy with the kind &gt;&gt; they spray the gummy with the kind of solution on top afterwards. And so, of solution on top afterwards. And so, of solution on top afterwards. And so, it can Anyway, I would go with a it can Anyway, I would go with a it can Anyway, I would go with a powder form of creatine monohydrate um powder form of creatine monohydrate um powder form of creatine monohydrate um over a gummy. It can get you an extra over a gummy. It can get you an extra over a gummy. It can get you an extra rep or two in the gym or cut a second rep or two in the gym or cut a second rep or two in the gym or cut a second off your sprint. It we're talking off your sprint. It we're talking off your sprint. It we're talking adaptations of that nature. It's very adaptations of that nature. It's very adaptations of that nature. It's very safe. It's wellstudied. And so if you're safe. It's wellstudied. And so if you're safe. It's wellstudied. And so if you're somebody who is training and you're somebody who is training and you're somebody who is training and you're interested, then I think it's worth interested, then I think it's worth interested, then I think it's worth taking. And the kind of standard taking. And the kind of standard taking. And the kind of standard recommendation would be five grams per recommendation would be five grams per recommendation would be five grams per day. And if you're not exercising, I day. And if you're not exercising, I day. And if you're not exercising, I really wouldn't bother taking creatine. really wouldn't bother taking creatine. really wouldn't bother taking creatine. It's not going to just increase muscle It's not going to just increase muscle It's not going to just increase muscle mass when you're when you don't have the mass when you're when you don't have the mass when you're when you don't have the stimulus for muscle growth. So, this is stimulus for muscle growth. So, this is stimulus for muscle growth. So, this is a an appropriate supplement for people a an appropriate supplement for people a an appropriate supplement for people who are exercising. And the claims about who are exercising. And the claims about who are exercising. And the claims about brain health, I think, are premature brain health, I think, are premature brain health, I think, are premature because the data that we have to date because the data that we have to date because the data that we have to date are people in some kind of a deficit. So are people in some kind of a deficit. So are people in some kind of a deficit. So they were Alzheimer's patients. They they were Alzheimer's patients. They they were Alzheimer's patients. They were clinically depressed and also were clinically depressed and also were clinically depressed and also taking SSRIs. They were undergoing taking SSRIs. They were undergoing taking SSRIs. They were undergoing extreme sleep deprivation. extreme sleep deprivation. extreme sleep deprivation. They had a traumatic brain injury. This They had a traumatic brain injury. This They had a traumatic brain injury. This is really interesting literature, but I is really interesting literature, but I is really interesting literature, but I think it's been repackaged to tell think it's been repackaged to tell think it's been repackaged to tell people that you're getting some sort of people that you're getting some sort of people that you're getting some sort of cognitive boost with creatine. And cognitive boost with creatine. And cognitive boost with creatine. And that's not the same as, oh, this could that's not the same as, oh, this could that's not the same as, oh, this could be helpful for these clinical be helpful for these clinical be helpful for these clinical populations with some sort of populations with some sort of populations with some sort of potential creatine brain creatine potential creatine brain creatine potential creatine brain creatine deficit. &gt;&gt; It will increase uh creatinine levels on &gt;&gt; It will increase uh creatinine levels on &gt;&gt; It will increase uh creatinine levels on a blood chart. Is that right? a blood chart. Is that right? a blood chart. Is that right? &gt;&gt; Often it will. Yes. &gt;&gt; Often it will. Yes. &gt;&gt; Often it will. Yes. &gt;&gt; Because that will spike into the &gt;&gt; Because that will spike into the &gt;&gt; Because that will spike into the quote unquote red zone. It'll spike quote unquote red zone. It'll spike quote unquote red zone. It'll spike high. Um is there any My understanding high. Um is there any My understanding high. Um is there any My understanding is there's no reason to be concerned is there's no reason to be concerned is there's no reason to be concerned about that if that spike of the about that if that spike of the about that if that spike of the creatinine levels are because of taking creatinine levels are because of taking creatinine levels are because of taking creatine. That's right. And you just creatine. That's right. And you just creatine. That's right. And you just need to tell your physician that you're need to tell your physician that you're need to tell your physician that you're taking it because otherwise they likely taking it because otherwise they likely taking it because otherwise they likely would be concerned, but that's it's would be concerned, but that's it's would be concerned, but that's it's normal. That's just breaking down normal. That's just breaking down normal. That's just breaking down creatine. &gt;&gt; And is it still true that the long-term &gt;&gt; And is it still true that the long-term &gt;&gt; And is it still true that the long-term data show no danger of taking creatine data show no danger of taking creatine data show no danger of taking creatine on the order of five grams per day for on the order of five grams per day for on the order of five grams per day for years? Is that still true? years? Is that still true? years? Is that still true? &gt;&gt; That's still true. It's one of the most &gt;&gt; That's still true. It's one of the most &gt;&gt; That's still true. It's one of the most studied supplements out there. studied supplements out there. studied supplements out there. &gt;&gt; What's your take on uh the various forms &gt;&gt; What's your take on uh the various forms &gt;&gt; What's your take on uh the various forms of creatine? Um, monohydrate is the most of creatine? Um, monohydrate is the most of creatine? Um, monohydrate is the most typical form, but I see a lot of typical form, but I see a lot of typical form, but I see a lot of different versions. There's a I think different versions. There's a I think different versions. There's a I think it's a well, I won't name brands. Um, it's a well, I won't name brands. Um, it's a well, I won't name brands. Um, not because I'm trying to hide that not because I'm trying to hide that not because I'm trying to hide that because I can't remember, but um, some because I can't remember, but um, some because I can't remember, but um, some people want more water drawn to the people want more water drawn to the people want more water drawn to the muscle and less subcutaneous water. Is muscle and less subcutaneous water. Is muscle and less subcutaneous water. Is there any evidence that the it can be there any evidence that the it can be there any evidence that the it can be directed that way by way of the form of directed that way by way of the form of directed that way by way of the form of creatine? No, I mean creatine monohydrate is No, I mean creatine monohydrate is No, I mean creatine monohydrate is definitely the most studied form and so definitely the most studied form and so definitely the most studied form and so people are trying to introduce people are trying to introduce people are trying to introduce these and with the kind of claim that these and with the kind of claim that these and with the kind of claim that somehow it would be better or that somehow it would be better or that somehow it would be better or that um you know you won't bloat as much. um you know you won't bloat as much. um you know you won't bloat as much. I've seen that particularly marketed to I've seen that particularly marketed to I've seen that particularly marketed to women, but it doesn't really end up women, but it doesn't really end up women, but it doesn't really end up working that way because just because working that way because just because working that way because just because it's um it's breaking down more in your it's um it's breaking down more in your it's um it's breaking down more in your liquid, right? It doesn't mean that it's liquid, right? It doesn't mean that it's liquid, right? It doesn't mean that it's absorbed differently when you actually absorbed differently when you actually absorbed differently when you actually consume it. So even if you were to just consume it. So even if you were to just consume it. So even if you were to just dry scoop creatine and just chase it dry scoop creatine and just chase it dry scoop creatine and just chase it with water, the results are the same as with water, the results are the same as with water, the results are the same as if you blend it up until there's if you blend it up until there's if you blend it up until there's literally no bits left in the glass. literally no bits left in the glass. literally no bits left in the glass. &gt;&gt; For two scientists to have an I have a &gt;&gt; For two scientists to have an I have a &gt;&gt; For two scientists to have an I have a friend who told me kind of conversation friend who told me kind of conversation friend who told me kind of conversation is a little bit non-scientific, but I is a little bit non-scientific, but I is a little bit non-scientific, but I have a friend, she's a woman, she have a friend, she's a woman, she have a friend, she's a woman, she started taking creatine, she started taking creatine, she started taking creatine, she started resistance training. um not in that resistance training. um not in that resistance training. um not in that order and she's getting great results order and she's getting great results order and she's getting great results and loves it and she's totally into the and loves it and she's totally into the and loves it and she's totally into the fact that now she can do three full fact that now she can do three full fact that now she can do three full range pull-ups and it's just awesome to range pull-ups and it's just awesome to range pull-ups and it's just awesome to see her progression and hear her see her progression and hear her see her progression and hear her excitement around it. She was fit before excitement around it. She was fit before excitement around it. She was fit before now she's just really charged up about now she's just really charged up about now she's just really charged up about this and she said she was reporting her this and she said she was reporting her this and she said she was reporting her experience. She said, "You know, when I experience. She said, "You know, when I experience. She said, "You know, when I take uh five grams of creatine um I take uh five grams of creatine um I take uh five grams of creatine um I feel like it kind of makes me uh blurry, feel like it kind of makes me uh blurry, feel like it kind of makes me uh blurry, like there's a lot of subcutaneous water like there's a lot of subcutaneous water like there's a lot of subcutaneous water I hold. Then when I take three, that I hold. Then when I take three, that I hold. Then when I take three, that doesn't happen. doesn't happen. doesn't happen. This is a more general question that I This is a more general question that I This is a more general question that I have about how to deal with people's have about how to deal with people's have about how to deal with people's individual experience. I mean, you never individual experience. I mean, you never individual experience. I mean, you never want to argue with somebody's individual want to argue with somebody's individual want to argue with somebody's individual experience. I believe her. She knows her experience. I believe her. She knows her experience. I believe her. She knows her better than anyone. And yet, my better than anyone. And yet, my better than anyone. And yet, my understanding is that there's no data to understanding is that there's no data to understanding is that there's no data to support that. So I'm asking you about support that. So I'm asking you about support that. So I'm asking you about creatine but thematically I'm asking you creatine but thematically I'm asking you creatine but thematically I'm asking you as a scientist who's online dealing with as a scientist who's online dealing with as a scientist who's online dealing with questions all the time who has their own questions all the time who has their own questions all the time who has their own individual experience. How do you want individual experience. How do you want individual experience. How do you want people to think about a situation like people to think about a situation like people to think about a situation like that for creatine but for anything? Hey that for creatine but for anything? Hey that for creatine but for anything? Hey when I some people say hey I take when I some people say hey I take when I some people say hey I take creatine and I lose hair and you like creatine and I lose hair and you like creatine and I lose hair and you like there's no evidence of that. But then there's no evidence of that. But then there's no evidence of that. But then they go no I think my hair falls out. they go no I think my hair falls out. they go no I think my hair falls out. You know [laughter] You know [laughter] You know [laughter] what do you do? How do you specifically what do you do? How do you specifically what do you do? How do you specifically deal with that? deal with that? deal with that? &gt;&gt; Well, I think some people are online for &gt;&gt; Well, I think some people are online for &gt;&gt; Well, I think some people are online for others to validate their own personal others to validate their own personal others to validate their own personal experiences. And in that situation, you experiences. And in that situation, you experiences. And in that situation, you say, "I respect your experience." And say, "I respect your experience." And say, "I respect your experience." And you walk away. There are other people you walk away. There are other people you walk away. There are other people who are online with genuine who are online with genuine who are online with genuine questions sometimes because they've questions sometimes because they've questions sometimes because they've heard that this was their friend's heard that this was their friend's heard that this was their friend's experience or they've seen another post experience or they've seen another post experience or they've seen another post about it and they're actually open to about it and they're actually open to about it and they're actually open to the information. And those are the information. And those are the information. And those are the people that are worth the time people that are worth the time people that are worth the time investment to connect with because investment to connect with because investment to connect with because they're genuinely interested in the they're genuinely interested in the they're genuinely interested in the science and interested in learning and science and interested in learning and science and interested in learning and it's not about proving them wrong it's not about proving them wrong it's not about proving them wrong because that's a losing battle. because that's a losing battle. because that's a losing battle. &gt;&gt; There is another phenomenon not just &gt;&gt; There is another phenomenon not just &gt;&gt; There is another phenomenon not just online where online where online where there's a lot of distrust in formal there's a lot of distrust in formal there's a lot of distrust in formal academic science nowadays. There are a academic science nowadays. There are a academic science nowadays. There are a lot of reasons for this. um it social lot of reasons for this. um it social lot of reasons for this. um it social media being one of them, but this was media being one of them, but this was media being one of them, but this was building up for a long period of time. building up for a long period of time. building up for a long period of time. And I think as a woman in this area of And I think as a woman in this area of And I think as a woman in this area of research and public education, I think research and public education, I think research and public education, I think it's tricky when we look back, you know, it's tricky when we look back, you know, it's tricky when we look back, you know, 25 years and we were told, oh yeah, you 25 years and we were told, oh yeah, you 25 years and we were told, oh yeah, you know, if you work out with weights, put know, if you work out with weights, put know, if you work out with weights, put on muscle, but then it all turns to fat on muscle, but then it all turns to fat on muscle, but then it all turns to fat if you stop. It's like, you know, uh if you stop. It's like, you know, uh if you stop. It's like, you know, uh if you take creatine, it's going to destroy you take creatine, it's going to destroy you take creatine, it's going to destroy your kidneys. You know, it's going to your kidneys. You know, it's going to your kidneys. You know, it's going to mess up your hormone cycles, especially mess up your hormone cycles, especially mess up your hormone cycles, especially if you're a woman and it's going to mess if you're a woman and it's going to mess if you're a woman and it's going to mess with pregnant. with pregnant. with pregnant. Are there any things that you hear Are there any things that you hear Are there any things that you hear circulating now that you would like to circulating now that you would like to circulating now that you would like to see explored in a formal rigorous way see explored in a formal rigorous way see explored in a formal rigorous way cuz you think they could really help cuz you think they could really help cuz you think they could really help clarify and help people? clarify and help people? clarify and help people? &gt;&gt; I think we don't understand a lot about &gt;&gt; I think we don't understand a lot about &gt;&gt; I think we don't understand a lot about these body composition changes that some these body composition changes that some these body composition changes that some women experience and others don't women experience and others don't women experience and others don't through the menopause transition. And through the menopause transition. And through the menopause transition. And one of the big one of the big one of the big complaints that a lot of women have is complaints that a lot of women have is complaints that a lot of women have is this kind of redistribution of body fat this kind of redistribution of body fat this kind of redistribution of body fat or preferential growth of body fat in or preferential growth of body fat in or preferential growth of body fat in the midsection. And you could speculate the midsection. And you could speculate the midsection. And you could speculate that it's estrogen receptor related that it's estrogen receptor related that it's estrogen receptor related perhaps, but we don't have human data to perhaps, but we don't have human data to perhaps, but we don't have human data to support that. And whenever you make a support that. And whenever you make a support that. And whenever you make a claim about estrogen specifically or claim about estrogen specifically or claim about estrogen specifically or loss of estrogen, then you have to loss of estrogen, then you have to loss of estrogen, then you have to think, well, if it's only that, then it think, well, if it's only that, then it think, well, if it's only that, then it should be everybody who experiences it should be everybody who experiences it should be everybody who experiences it because post-menopause, you're on the because post-menopause, you're on the because post-menopause, you're on the same boat, right? And so it has to be same boat, right? And so it has to be same boat, right? And so it has to be more complicated than that. And and most more complicated than that. And and most more complicated than that. And and most things, as you know, physiologically, things, as you know, physiologically, things, as you know, physiologically, it's rarely just one thing and that it's rarely just one thing and that it's rarely just one thing and that one thing can explain. So I think that one thing can explain. So I think that one thing can explain. So I think that deserves more exploration deserves more exploration deserves more exploration &gt;&gt; and I think we need to do a better job &gt;&gt; and I think we need to do a better job &gt;&gt; and I think we need to do a better job with science communication because with science communication because with science communication because unfortunately the internet is sort of unfortunately the internet is sort of unfortunately the internet is sort of taking it by storm and on one hand I'm taking it by storm and on one hand I'm taking it by storm and on one hand I'm thinking it's cool that there's this thinking it's cool that there's this thinking it's cool that there's this interest in science that people want interest in science that people want interest in science that people want that PubMed ID and people are asking for that PubMed ID and people are asking for that PubMed ID and people are asking for data but the flip side of it is that not data but the flip side of it is that not data but the flip side of it is that not everybody body has, you know, the tool everybody body has, you know, the tool everybody body has, you know, the tool or the skill set to interpret the or the skill set to interpret the or the skill set to interpret the full paper. And so then people are using full paper. And so then people are using full paper. And so then people are using science as a way to cherrypick or to science as a way to cherrypick or to science as a way to cherrypick or to pro promote a message that isn't really pro promote a message that isn't really pro promote a message that isn't really reflective of the literature as a whole. reflective of the literature as a whole. reflective of the literature as a whole. And that's really challenging for the And that's really challenging for the And that's really challenging for the confused woman on social media, for the confused woman on social media, for the confused woman on social media, for the fitness coach or personal trainer who is fitness coach or personal trainer who is fitness coach or personal trainer who is trying to help that woman out, and for trying to help that woman out, and for trying to help that woman out, and for the scientist who looks around and says, the scientist who looks around and says, the scientist who looks around and says, "Hey, this is sort of a weaponization of "Hey, this is sort of a weaponization of "Hey, this is sort of a weaponization of science because it's you're not being science because it's you're not being science because it's you're not being true to the literature." true to the literature." true to the literature." That said, an individual study is not That said, an individual study is not That said, an individual study is not designed to tell any one person exactly designed to tell any one person exactly designed to tell any one person exactly how to eat or how to train or how many how to eat or how to train or how many how to eat or how to train or how many steps to take or what supplements to steps to take or what supplements to steps to take or what supplements to take. So, yes, we need to be take. So, yes, we need to be take. So, yes, we need to be evidence-based. Yes, we need to be evidence-based. Yes, we need to be evidence-based. Yes, we need to be honest about what the science says, honest about what the science says, honest about what the science says, what we do and do not know. But of what we do and do not know. But of what we do and do not know. But of course, there's going to be a component course, there's going to be a component course, there's going to be a component of individualization of individualization of individualization when you as actually make decisions when you as actually make decisions when you as actually make decisions about what behaviors to engage in. about what behaviors to engage in. about what behaviors to engage in. &gt;&gt; Spectacular answer. I would love to &gt;&gt; Spectacular answer. I would love to &gt;&gt; Spectacular answer. I would love to see the study that you described done. see the study that you described done. see the study that you described done. Is it possible to look at receptor Is it possible to look at receptor Is it possible to look at receptor distributions in adult humans using some distributions in adult humans using some distributions in adult humans using some imaging technique so that um or do you imaging technique so that um or do you imaging technique so that um or do you have to biopsy fat and muscle from the have to biopsy fat and muscle from the have to biopsy fat and muscle from the midsection to get a sense of like midsection to get a sense of like midsection to get a sense of like estrogen receptor density and estrogen receptor density and estrogen receptor density and saturation? the biopsy would be the way saturation? the biopsy would be the way saturation? the biopsy would be the way to go. And a unfortunately fat biopsy is to go. And a unfortunately fat biopsy is to go. And a unfortunately fat biopsy is even more uncomfortable than a muscle even more uncomfortable than a muscle even more uncomfortable than a muscle biopsy. &gt;&gt; Ouch. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Ouch. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Ouch. [laughter] Yeah. Wouldn't it be wonderful if there Yeah. Wouldn't it be wonderful if there Yeah. Wouldn't it be wonderful if there were imaging techniques that would allow were imaging techniques that would allow were imaging techniques that would allow people to go into a scanner and you'd people to go into a scanner and you'd people to go into a scanner and you'd get distribution of estrogen receptors, get distribution of estrogen receptors, get distribution of estrogen receptors, distribution of testosterone receptors, distribution of testosterone receptors, distribution of testosterone receptors, and saturation, how many bound it would and saturation, how many bound it would and saturation, how many bound it would be wonderful. These I mean medical be wonderful. These I mean medical be wonderful. These I mean medical imaging can get us there, I think. imaging can get us there, I think. imaging can get us there, I think. Hopefully, you know. Hopefully, you know. Hopefully, you know. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean it would be really powerful &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean it would be really powerful &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean it would be really powerful because even when we think about any because even when we think about any because even when we think about any biopsy study, we're taking 50 to 100 biopsy study, we're taking 50 to 100 biopsy study, we're taking 50 to 100 milligrams of tissue out of a single milligrams of tissue out of a single milligrams of tissue out of a single muscle or site and then making a lot muscle or site and then making a lot muscle or site and then making a lot of extrapolations based on this tiny of extrapolations based on this tiny of extrapolations based on this tiny amount of tissue. We're saying is this amount of tissue. We're saying is this amount of tissue. We're saying is this representative of the whole muscle? representative of the whole muscle? representative of the whole muscle? Is this representative of other muscles Is this representative of other muscles Is this representative of other muscles in the body? Um, and if we're doing a in the body? Um, and if we're doing a in the body? Um, and if we're doing a kind of pre-post design, then when you kind of pre-post design, then when you kind of pre-post design, then when you go back in, um, is it possible that the go back in, um, is it possible that the go back in, um, is it possible that the adaptations along that same muscle could adaptations along that same muscle could adaptations along that same muscle could vary slightly? So there's a lot of uh vary slightly? So there's a lot of uh vary slightly? So there's a lot of uh limitations to what is a very cool limitations to what is a very cool limitations to what is a very cool very valuable technique. But I think very valuable technique. But I think very valuable technique. But I think when we when we talk about the a biopsy when we when we talk about the a biopsy when we when we talk about the a biopsy and what we're getting from that, we do and what we're getting from that, we do and what we're getting from that, we do need to acknowledge that we're making a need to acknowledge that we're making a need to acknowledge that we're making a lot of assumptions based on that tiny lot of assumptions based on that tiny lot of assumptions based on that tiny amount of tissue. amount of tissue. amount of tissue. &gt;&gt; Earlier you said that where people store &gt;&gt; Earlier you said that where people store &gt;&gt; Earlier you said that where people store fat has a genetic component. So, as fat has a genetic component. So, as fat has a genetic component. So, as uncomfortable as the experiment might uncomfortable as the experiment might uncomfortable as the experiment might seem to people, um, is it fair to say if seem to people, um, is it fair to say if seem to people, um, is it fair to say if you want to know where you have a you want to know where you have a you want to know where you have a propensity to store fat, look at your propensity to store fat, look at your propensity to store fat, look at your parents? &gt;&gt; Maybe, but there are lifestyle considerations but there are lifestyle considerations but there are lifestyle considerations certainly that go along with that. So, I certainly that go along with that. So, I certainly that go along with that. So, I think genetics is our starting point, but it genetics is our starting point, but it genetics is our starting point, but it doesn't dictate our end point. And so if doesn't dictate our end point. And so if doesn't dictate our end point. And so if you have parents who have never really you have parents who have never really you have parents who have never really paid attention to their diet, have never paid attention to their diet, have never paid attention to their diet, have never really engaged in sport or structured really engaged in sport or structured really engaged in sport or structured exercise or resistance training, then exercise or resistance training, then exercise or resistance training, then how they fare through the aging process how they fare through the aging process how they fare through the aging process does not have to be the same experience does not have to be the same experience does not have to be the same experience for you. for you. for you. &gt;&gt; I'm just trying to think of how the site &gt;&gt; I'm just trying to think of how the site &gt;&gt; I'm just trying to think of how the site of fat storage would be encoded of fat storage would be encoded of fat storage would be encoded genetically. I'm guessing like more genetically. I'm guessing like more genetically. I'm guessing like more atyposytes like at certain locations. Um, and of like at certain locations. Um, and of like at certain locations. Um, and of course there's a there's a male female course there's a there's a male female course there's a there's a male female difference. There tends to be a male difference. There tends to be a male difference. There tends to be a male female difference that presumably female difference that presumably female difference that presumably depends on androgen and estrogen depends on androgen and estrogen depends on androgen and estrogen receptors, but I'm not an expert in that receptors, but I'm not an expert in that receptors, but I'm not an expert in that um issue specifically. um issue specifically. um issue specifically. &gt;&gt; Some would hypothesize that though &gt;&gt; Some would hypothesize that though &gt;&gt; Some would hypothesize that though there's a kind of reproductive advantage there's a kind of reproductive advantage there's a kind of reproductive advantage to having more fat around the hips. And to having more fat around the hips. And to having more fat around the hips. And so then um across the menopause so then um across the menopause so then um across the menopause transition when you no longer have that transition when you no longer have that transition when you no longer have that reproductive function then that explains reproductive function then that explains reproductive function then that explains the reason why you would start to gain the reason why you would start to gain the reason why you would start to gain more fat around the midsection and lose more fat around the midsection and lose more fat around the midsection and lose fat around the hips. Do we have the data fat around the hips. Do we have the data fat around the hips. Do we have the data to support that? Not really. This is to support that? Not really. This is to support that? Not really. This is more kind of looking back at more kind of looking back at more kind of looking back at evolutionary biology and kind of trying evolutionary biology and kind of trying evolutionary biology and kind of trying to piece things together as to why it to piece things together as to why it to piece things together as to why it might be the case. That said, not all might be the case. That said, not all might be the case. That said, not all men have what we would say, you know, men have what we would say, you know, men have what we would say, you know, male pattern fat distribution and not male pattern fat distribution and not male pattern fat distribution and not all women have what we would say is all women have what we would say is all women have what we would say is female pattern fat distribution. So, female pattern fat distribution. So, female pattern fat distribution. So, yes, you're right that there there's a yes, you're right that there there's a yes, you're right that there there's a tendency to have, you know, one or the tendency to have, you know, one or the tendency to have, you know, one or the other, but it it's not necessarily a other, but it it's not necessarily a other, but it it's not necessarily a one-sizefits-all. Speaking of hormones, let's talk about Speaking of hormones, let's talk about Speaking of hormones, let's talk about the uh most um the uh most um the uh most um you know barbedwire hormone of them all, you know barbedwire hormone of them all, you know barbedwire hormone of them all, which is cortisol. Um you know, I won't which is cortisol. Um you know, I won't which is cortisol. Um you know, I won't belabor this conversation with this belabor this conversation with this belabor this conversation with this because I've said it many times before, because I've said it many times before, because I've said it many times before, but you want high cortisol in the but you want high cortisol in the but you want high cortisol in the morning. It's why you wake up in the morning. It's why you wake up in the morning. It's why you wake up in the morning. You want your cortisol low at morning. You want your cortisol low at morning. You want your cortisol low at night before you go to sleep in the last night before you go to sleep in the last night before you go to sleep in the last hours before sleep. That sets you up for hours before sleep. That sets you up for hours before sleep. That sets you up for a lot of great things. And that's true a lot of great things. And that's true a lot of great things. And that's true for men and women. Um, for men and women. Um, for men and women. Um, but cortisol and women but cortisol and women but cortisol and women and women's fitness has become like a and women's fitness has become like a and women's fitness has become like a real hot bed of misinformation. real hot bed of misinformation. real hot bed of misinformation. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; It's the first time I've ever used that &gt;&gt; It's the first time I've ever used that &gt;&gt; It's the first time I've ever used that word on this podcast. Misinformation. word on this podcast. Misinformation. word on this podcast. Misinformation. It's such a loaded word and it's but I It's such a loaded word and it's but I It's such a loaded word and it's but I think it's appropriate here because I think it's appropriate here because I think it's appropriate here because I you hear you hear you hear all the time, you know, c if you stress all the time, you know, c if you stress all the time, you know, c if you stress your cortisol goes up. If you uh people your cortisol goes up. If you uh people your cortisol goes up. If you uh people will say if you cold plunge, your will say if you cold plunge, your will say if you cold plunge, your cortisol goes up. And if your cortisol goes up. And if your cortisol goes up. And if your cortisol goes up, you're gonna you're going to goes up, you're gonna you're going to goes up, you're gonna you're going to get moon face and you're going to store get moon face and you're going to store get moon face and you're going to store body fat around your midsection, body fat around your midsection, body fat around your midsection, which is true if somebody has Cushing which is true if somebody has Cushing which is true if somebody has Cushing syndrome, which is, you know, syndrome, which is, you know, syndrome, which is, you know, pathologically high levels of cortisol. pathologically high levels of cortisol. pathologically high levels of cortisol. But please clarify, educate. please clarify, educate. please clarify, educate. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and you hear, oh, never do &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and you hear, oh, never do &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and you hear, oh, never do zone 2 training because of cortisol. zone 2 training because of cortisol. zone 2 training because of cortisol. Don't do highintensity training because Don't do highintensity training because Don't do highintensity training because of cortisol. And so then you're stuck of cortisol. And so then you're stuck of cortisol. And so then you're stuck with these women who are thinking that with these women who are thinking that with these women who are thinking that you know any intensity is bad because you know any intensity is bad because you know any intensity is bad because of cortisol. A as you said this is real of cortisol. A as you said this is real of cortisol. A as you said this is real manifestations of Cushing syndrome that manifestations of Cushing syndrome that manifestations of Cushing syndrome that are being kind of twisted to say hey are being kind of twisted to say hey are being kind of twisted to say hey are you a little stressed? Have you gained you a little stressed? Have you gained you a little stressed? Have you gained some fat around your midsection? It must some fat around your midsection? It must some fat around your midsection? It must be cortisol. So, it's a really be cortisol. So, it's a really be cortisol. So, it's a really compelling pitch to people usually to compelling pitch to people usually to compelling pitch to people usually to sell them some ineffective cortisol sell them some ineffective cortisol sell them some ineffective cortisol reducing supplement which we don't need reducing supplement which we don't need reducing supplement which we don't need and they don't work. Uh, if you actually and they don't work. Uh, if you actually and they don't work. Uh, if you actually have chronically elevated cortisol, then have chronically elevated cortisol, then have chronically elevated cortisol, then you need to be treated with medication, you need to be treated with medication, you need to be treated with medication, not some natural supplement. So, I think not some natural supplement. So, I think not some natural supplement. So, I think the important point here is that those the important point here is that those the important point here is that those cortisol increases are normal and cortisol increases are normal and cortisol increases are normal and necessary. It it's also necessary. It it's also necessary. It it's also necessary for blood pressure regulation, necessary for blood pressure regulation, necessary for blood pressure regulation, blood glucose regulation. That's blood glucose regulation. That's blood glucose regulation. That's important for exercise. And th those important for exercise. And th those important for exercise. And th those acute fluctuations are not contributing acute fluctuations are not contributing acute fluctuations are not contributing to fat storage or inability to lose fat. to fat storage or inability to lose fat. to fat storage or inability to lose fat. &gt;&gt; Yeah. presumably &gt;&gt; Yeah. presumably &gt;&gt; Yeah. presumably in the population of people who try and in the population of people who try and in the population of people who try and um self soothe with eating excess um self soothe with eating excess um self soothe with eating excess [clears throat] calories when they're [clears throat] calories when they're [clears throat] calories when they're stressed that the correlation just stressed that the correlation just stressed that the correlation just becomes to them obvious but it's like becomes to them obvious but it's like becomes to them obvious but it's like cryptic correlation as we call it right cryptic correlation as we call it right cryptic correlation as we call it right because two things are happening. because two things are happening. because two things are happening. They're stressed and they're eating more They're stressed and they're eating more They're stressed and they're eating more and yes their cortisol is probably and yes their cortisol is probably and yes their cortisol is probably elevated. So it all hangs together elevated. So it all hangs together elevated. So it all hangs together rationally but the food part is never rationally but the food part is never rationally but the food part is never really discussed. how being stressed really discussed. how being stressed really discussed. how being stressed causes some people to eat far less and causes some people to eat far less and causes some people to eat far less and how being stressed causes some people to how being stressed causes some people to how being stressed causes some people to eat far more in particular unhealthy eat far more in particular unhealthy eat far more in particular unhealthy foods. So, I feel like the real foods. So, I feel like the real foods. So, I feel like the real world puzzle pieces kind of fit together world puzzle pieces kind of fit together world puzzle pieces kind of fit together at the level of kind of perfect storm of at the level of kind of perfect storm of at the level of kind of perfect storm of people with thinking that cortisol is people with thinking that cortisol is people with thinking that cortisol is the culprit, the culprit, the culprit, forgetting what cortisol does to eating forgetting what cortisol does to eating forgetting what cortisol does to eating when food is most likely the I don't when food is most likely the I don't when food is most likely the I don't like to call food a culprit, but in this like to call food a culprit, but in this like to call food a culprit, but in this instance, I think it's appropriate. instance, I think it's appropriate. instance, I think it's appropriate. Well, I think that is not a exciting Well, I think that is not a exciting Well, I think that is not a exciting message that makes you feel [laughter] message that makes you feel [laughter] message that makes you feel [laughter] like &gt;&gt; really. &gt;&gt; really. &gt;&gt; really. &gt;&gt; So, if you say, "Oh, you know, what's &gt;&gt; So, if you say, "Oh, you know, what's &gt;&gt; So, if you say, "Oh, you know, what's your diet look like?" No, we as your diet look like?" No, we as your diet look like?" No, we as humans, we want a different answer. We humans, we want a different answer. We humans, we want a different answer. We want to look for something else to want to look for something else to want to look for something else to blame. And so, the flavor of this year blame. And so, the flavor of this year blame. And so, the flavor of this year or maybe the last couple years has or maybe the last couple years has or maybe the last couple years has definitely been cortisol. Maybe we'll definitely been cortisol. Maybe we'll definitely been cortisol. Maybe we'll move on to blame a different hormone in move on to blame a different hormone in move on to blame a different hormone in 2026. in 2026. in 2026. &gt;&gt; Just as supplements go through broad &gt;&gt; Just as supplements go through broad &gt;&gt; Just as supplements go through broad trends, hormones go through broad trends, hormones go through broad trends, hormones go through broad trends, neurotransmitters. Like a few trends, neurotransmitters. Like a few trends, neurotransmitters. Like a few years back, it was all oxytocin. years back, it was all oxytocin. years back, it was all oxytocin. Everything was oxytocin. Then it was Everything was oxytocin. Then it was Everything was oxytocin. Then it was serotonin. Dopamine had its big moments. serotonin. Dopamine had its big moments. serotonin. Dopamine had its big moments. And um and then now it really does seem And um and then now it really does seem And um and then now it really does seem to be like cortisol is the thing. Um and to be like cortisol is the thing. Um and to be like cortisol is the thing. Um and I I'm only being half facitious. I mean, I I'm only being half facitious. I mean, I I'm only being half facitious. I mean, I love that people are interested in I love that people are interested in I love that people are interested in this stuff and they want to learn. I this stuff and they want to learn. I this stuff and they want to learn. I think can't give them so much detail think can't give them so much detail think can't give them so much detail that they you know dissolve into a that they you know dissolve into a that they you know dissolve into a puddle of their own confusion and yet puddle of their own confusion and yet puddle of their own confusion and yet the oversimplification the oversimplification the oversimplification can be tough can be tough can be tough &gt;&gt; and Cushing syndrome is not very common. &gt;&gt; and Cushing syndrome is not very common. &gt;&gt; and Cushing syndrome is not very common. It's typically you know a manifestation It's typically you know a manifestation It's typically you know a manifestation of somebody who's taking a lot of somebody who's taking a lot of somebody who's taking a lot of steroids and then you you're ending up steroids and then you you're ending up steroids and then you you're ending up with this chronically elevated cortisol with this chronically elevated cortisol with this chronically elevated cortisol as a side effect. And so it's not the as a side effect. And so it's not the as a side effect. And so it's not the case that everybody on the internet case that everybody on the internet case that everybody on the internet [laughter] actually has Cushing syndrome [laughter] actually has Cushing syndrome [laughter] actually has Cushing syndrome and should be concerned and needs to and should be concerned and needs to and should be concerned and needs to go see an endocrinologist. It's more the go see an endocrinologist. It's more the go see an endocrinologist. It's more the case that people are again borrowing case that people are again borrowing case that people are again borrowing from some of the side effects of Cushing from some of the side effects of Cushing from some of the side effects of Cushing syndrome and then kind of tugging at syndrome and then kind of tugging at syndrome and then kind of tugging at people's vulnerabilities and desires to change vulnerabilities and desires to change vulnerabilities and desires to change their body composition and saying, you their body composition and saying, you their body composition and saying, you know, it's not your behaviors, it's not know, it's not your behaviors, it's not know, it's not your behaviors, it's not your lifestyle, it's your cortisol. Mhm. your lifestyle, it's your cortisol. Mhm. your lifestyle, it's your cortisol. Mhm. As you and I both know, a good solid As you and I both know, a good solid As you and I both know, a good solid resistance training session of about, resistance training session of about, resistance training session of about, you know, 30 minutes to an hour will you know, 30 minutes to an hour will you know, 30 minutes to an hour will triple or quadruple circulating cortisol triple or quadruple circulating cortisol triple or quadruple circulating cortisol levels. Uh I think if people understood levels. Uh I think if people understood levels. Uh I think if people understood that they might look at cortisol a that they might look at cortisol a that they might look at cortisol a little bit differently. How do you think little bit differently. How do you think little bit differently. How do you think people should feel when they finish a people should feel when they finish a people should feel when they finish a workout? I know that might seem very workout? I know that might seem very workout? I know that might seem very subjective, but it's something that we subjective, but it's something that we subjective, but it's something that we can all get in touch with because I know can all get in touch with because I know can all get in touch with because I know that if I train for an hour or 75 that if I train for an hour or 75 that if I train for an hour or 75 minutes, feel great. If I push hard past minutes, feel great. If I push hard past minutes, feel great. If I push hard past 90 minutes in the gym, I'm pretty 90 minutes in the gym, I'm pretty 90 minutes in the gym, I'm pretty depleted for a while. And often times depleted for a while. And often times depleted for a while. And often times that leads to less progress and minor, that leads to less progress and minor, that leads to less progress and minor, you know, uh I think more susceptibility you know, uh I think more susceptibility you know, uh I think more susceptibility to infection and things like that. Is it to infection and things like that. Is it to infection and things like that. Is it reasonable to assume that cortisol is reasonable to assume that cortisol is reasonable to assume that cortisol is somehow involved? Is overtraining at the somehow involved? Is overtraining at the somehow involved? Is overtraining at the level of an individual workout a real level of an individual workout a real level of an individual workout a real thing? Most importantly, how should thing? Most importantly, how should thing? Most importantly, how should people walk out of the gym feeling, people walk out of the gym feeling, people walk out of the gym feeling, assuming they're sleeping well and the assuming they're sleeping well and the assuming they're sleeping well and the rest of their life is in order? rest of their life is in order? rest of their life is in order? &gt;&gt; I think most people are not at risk of &gt;&gt; I think most people are not at risk of &gt;&gt; I think most people are not at risk of overtraining. I think especially overtraining. I think especially overtraining. I think especially your average female population. I your average female population. I your average female population. I think there are issues with female think there are issues with female think there are issues with female athletes certainly, but I think there's athletes certainly, but I think there's athletes certainly, but I think there's a lot of concern about, you know, a lot of concern about, you know, a lot of concern about, you know, needing recovery or inflammation needing recovery or inflammation needing recovery or inflammation that it's probably overblown because, that it's probably overblown because, that it's probably overblown because, you know, true overtraining, we get red you know, true overtraining, we get red you know, true overtraining, we get red flags that would manifest in other ways. flags that would manifest in other ways. flags that would manifest in other ways. So, you would have difficulty sleeping So, you would have difficulty sleeping So, you would have difficulty sleeping or you would feel sore for days and or you would feel sore for days and or you would feel sore for days and really underreovered or under the really underreovered or under the really underreovered or under the weather and those might be some weather and those might be some weather and those might be some signs that you're really signs that you're really signs that you're really overdoing it. But I so I think it's overdoing it. But I so I think it's overdoing it. But I so I think it's probably not an issue for most people, probably not an issue for most people, probably not an issue for most people, but I think some days it depends on when but I think some days it depends on when but I think some days it depends on when we're training, what time of day we're training, what time of day we're training, what time of day we're training. And that might dictate your training. And that might dictate your training. And that might dictate your personal decisions for how hard to push, personal decisions for how hard to push, personal decisions for how hard to push, and how long to train. There are some and how long to train. There are some and how long to train. There are some people if they train in the evening, people if they train in the evening, people if they train in the evening, then that disrupts their sleep. And then that disrupts their sleep. And then that disrupts their sleep. And there are other people who when they there are other people who when they there are other people who when they train in the morning and feel like they train in the morning and feel like they train in the morning and feel like that's a great start to their day. that's a great start to their day. that's a great start to their day. Really pushes energy and productivity Really pushes energy and productivity Really pushes energy and productivity for the rest of the day. for the rest of the day. for the rest of the day. &gt;&gt; Are you a morning trainer or an evening &gt;&gt; Are you a morning trainer or an evening &gt;&gt; Are you a morning trainer or an evening trainer? &gt;&gt; I prefer mornings. I'll go in the &gt;&gt; I prefer mornings. I'll go in the &gt;&gt; I prefer mornings. I'll go in the afternoon. I won't go in the evening. I afternoon. I won't go in the evening. I afternoon. I won't go in the evening. I don't like it. What about you? don't like it. What about you? don't like it. What about you? &gt;&gt; I used to train in the afternoon &gt;&gt; I used to train in the afternoon &gt;&gt; I used to train in the afternoon evenings when I was in college and then evenings when I was in college and then evenings when I was in college and then over the years I've just shifted to over the years I've just shifted to over the years I've just shifted to training in the morning. I would like training in the morning. I would like training in the morning. I would like everyone to ask themselves um everyone to ask themselves um everyone to ask themselves um the following question. I if you train the following question. I if you train the following question. I if you train at different times of day, does it at different times of day, does it at different times of day, does it impact your energy the rest of the day? impact your energy the rest of the day? impact your energy the rest of the day? Because what I've found, and this is Because what I've found, and this is Because what I've found, and this is less about my experience, I the reason less about my experience, I the reason less about my experience, I the reason I like to prompt people's questions I like to prompt people's questions I like to prompt people's questions about themselves is if I about themselves is if I about themselves is if I &gt;&gt; do resistance training before say 10:00 &gt;&gt; do resistance training before say 10:00 &gt;&gt; do resistance training before say 10:00 a.m., I have more energy all day long. a.m., I have more energy all day long. a.m., I have more energy all day long. If I do it somewhere around noon, 2:00 If I do it somewhere around noon, 2:00 If I do it somewhere around noon, 2:00 p.m., I just afterwards I'm just beat. p.m., I just afterwards I'm just beat. p.m., I just afterwards I'm just beat. And I like to think that I'm dare I say And I like to think that I'm dare I say And I like to think that I'm dare I say riding the morning cortisol wave and I'm riding the morning cortisol wave and I'm riding the morning cortisol wave and I'm or collapsing whatever cortisol I'm or collapsing whatever cortisol I'm or collapsing whatever cortisol I'm getting from my training into that and I getting from my training into that and I getting from my training into that and I just feel really good. I don't like to just feel really good. I don't like to just feel really good. I don't like to train in after train in after train in after 2 p.m. because I like to drink a lot of 2 p.m. because I like to drink a lot of 2 p.m. because I like to drink a lot of caffeine before I train and it messes up caffeine before I train and it messes up caffeine before I train and it messes up my sleep. my sleep. my sleep. &gt;&gt; I do not like to train uncaffeinated. So &gt;&gt; I do not like to train uncaffeinated. So &gt;&gt; I do not like to train uncaffeinated. So that's the biggie for me. Um, but in that's the biggie for me. Um, but in that's the biggie for me. Um, but in college when I was more of going to college when I was more of going to college when I was more of going to sleep at midnight, 1:00 am, and sleeping sleep at midnight, 1:00 am, and sleeping sleep at midnight, 1:00 am, and sleeping in till, you know, 8 or 9ine because I in till, you know, 8 or 9ine because I in till, you know, 8 or 9ine because I could afford to do that, I'd go to the could afford to do that, I'd go to the could afford to do that, I'd go to the gym at night. And it's also when it was gym at night. And it's also when it was gym at night. And it's also when it was social and it I think some of those social and it I think some of those social and it I think some of those factors change over time. factors change over time. factors change over time. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think one thing to keep in mind &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think one thing to keep in mind &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think one thing to keep in mind for people is if you are used to for people is if you are used to for people is if you are used to training at a certain time of day and training at a certain time of day and training at a certain time of day and then you switch it, particularly if you then you switch it, particularly if you then you switch it, particularly if you transition from late afternoon or transition from late afternoon or transition from late afternoon or evening training to morning training, evening training to morning training, evening training to morning training, you might see a kind of hit in you might see a kind of hit in you might see a kind of hit in performance initially, but that should performance initially, but that should performance initially, but that should resolve in a couple weeks. resolve in a couple weeks. resolve in a couple weeks. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Cardio whenever because I don't &gt;&gt; Mhm. Cardio whenever because I don't &gt;&gt; Mhm. Cardio whenever because I don't need caffeine to do it, need caffeine to do it, need caffeine to do it, &gt;&gt; but I prefer caffeine to do it. Prefer &gt;&gt; but I prefer caffeine to do it. Prefer &gt;&gt; but I prefer caffeine to do it. Prefer caffeine for most things. What are your caffeine for most things. What are your caffeine for most things. What are your thoughts on hormone therapies that are thoughts on hormone therapies that are thoughts on hormone therapies that are not replacement? And I'm not talking not replacement? And I'm not talking not replacement? And I'm not talking about blasting anabolic steroids. I'm about blasting anabolic steroids. I'm about blasting anabolic steroids. I'm talking about because this is happening talking about because this is happening talking about because this is happening in now in mass with women be because of in now in mass with women be because of in now in mass with women be because of the understandable um interest in the understandable um interest in the understandable um interest in hormone replacement therapy for hormone replacement therapy for hormone replacement therapy for permenopause, menopause, um estrogen permenopause, menopause, um estrogen permenopause, menopause, um estrogen therapy, testosterone therapy. So for a therapy, testosterone therapy. So for a therapy, testosterone therapy. So for a woman who feels like, hey, like they're woman who feels like, hey, like they're woman who feels like, hey, like they're feeling less vigor, their sleep, muscle, feeling less vigor, their sleep, muscle, feeling less vigor, their sleep, muscle, etc., and they get, it's very easy etc., and they get, it's very easy etc., and they get, it's very easy nowadays to find a doctor to prescribe nowadays to find a doctor to prescribe nowadays to find a doctor to prescribe them estrogen or testosterone cream or a them estrogen or testosterone cream or a them estrogen or testosterone cream or a injection. They're like, I feel awesome. injection. They're like, I feel awesome. injection. They're like, I feel awesome. I talked to someone the other day. I'm I talked to someone the other day. I'm I talked to someone the other day. I'm taking this I think it's progesterone. I taking this I think it's progesterone. I taking this I think it's progesterone. I have to be I a progesterone. And she have to be I a progesterone. And she have to be I a progesterone. And she said, I feel awesome. The progesterone said, I feel awesome. The progesterone said, I feel awesome. The progesterone thing fixed my sleep. I have so much thing fixed my sleep. I have so much thing fixed my sleep. I have so much energy. I'm up in the morning. She's energy. I'm up in the morning. She's energy. I'm up in the morning. She's like, I feel like I did in my 30s. It's like, I feel like I did in my 30s. It's like, I feel like I did in my 30s. It's now we're not talking supplements. now we're not talking supplements. now we're not talking supplements. &gt;&gt; We're talking prescription drugs. &gt;&gt; We're talking prescription drugs. &gt;&gt; We're talking prescription drugs. &gt;&gt; But none of them had a measurable &gt;&gt; But none of them had a measurable &gt;&gt; But none of them had a measurable deficiency. They're just giving some deficiency. They're just giving some deficiency. They're just giving some what I call hormone augmentation. It's, what I call hormone augmentation. It's, what I call hormone augmentation. It's, you know, and the language gets you know, and the language gets you know, and the language gets tricky here. They're just augmenting tricky here. They're just augmenting tricky here. They're just augmenting their hormone levels. So, they're going their hormone levels. So, they're going their hormone levels. So, they're going from whatever they were to higher, from whatever they were to higher, from whatever they were to higher, &gt;&gt; and they are thrilled about it. I don't &gt;&gt; and they are thrilled about it. I don't &gt;&gt; and they are thrilled about it. I don't know that they're not creating other know that they're not creating other know that they're not creating other issues, but I think we're going to see issues, but I think we're going to see issues, but I think we're going to see tons of this in the years to come. tons of this in the years to come. tons of this in the years to come. Menopause hormone therapy, you know, as Menopause hormone therapy, you know, as Menopause hormone therapy, you know, as you said, is not intended to replace you said, is not intended to replace you said, is not intended to replace because you're not supposed to have the because you're not supposed to have the because you're not supposed to have the same hormone levels after menopause that same hormone levels after menopause that same hormone levels after menopause that as you did premenopause. So, the goal as you did premenopause. So, the goal as you did premenopause. So, the goal there with these estrogenbased therapies there with these estrogenbased therapies there with these estrogenbased therapies is really to target symptoms, not to is really to target symptoms, not to is really to target symptoms, not to treat to a hormone level. And there's a treat to a hormone level. And there's a treat to a hormone level. And there's a wealth of data that this can be really wealth of data that this can be really wealth of data that this can be really effective for symptom management, which effective for symptom management, which effective for symptom management, which has a ton of downstream effects. So, we has a ton of downstream effects. So, we has a ton of downstream effects. So, we don't have good data to suggest that don't have good data to suggest that don't have good data to suggest that it is going to attenuate the loss of it is going to attenuate the loss of it is going to attenuate the loss of muscle mass or increase muscle mass. But muscle mass or increase muscle mass. But muscle mass or increase muscle mass. But if you're somebody who is suffering with if you're somebody who is suffering with if you're somebody who is suffering with hot flashes and poor sleep and with hot flashes and poor sleep and with hot flashes and poor sleep and night sweats and then you can get some night sweats and then you can get some night sweats and then you can get some relief from that, then certainly you're relief from that, then certainly you're relief from that, then certainly you're more likely to be adherent to your diet more likely to be adherent to your diet more likely to be adherent to your diet or going to the gym on a on with or going to the gym on a on with or going to the gym on a on with greater frequency and feeling better. greater frequency and feeling better. greater frequency and feeling better. And so we can't discount the And so we can't discount the And so we can't discount the ability to lean on some of these to ability to lean on some of these to ability to lean on some of these to improve the way that you feel. The improve the way that you feel. The improve the way that you feel. The testosterone conversation gets a little testosterone conversation gets a little testosterone conversation gets a little bit trickier because right now it's bit trickier because right now it's bit trickier because right now it's really only kind of proven to be really only kind of proven to be really only kind of proven to be effective for low sexual desire, low effective for low sexual desire, low effective for low sexual desire, low libido in women. And so there are a lot libido in women. And so there are a lot libido in women. And so there are a lot of people who are experimenting with it of people who are experimenting with it of people who are experimenting with it for other reasons. for other reasons. for other reasons. But we need to remember that the But we need to remember that the But we need to remember that the testosterone levels that people are testosterone levels that people are testosterone levels that people are using or should be using for are using or should be using for are using or should be using for this kind of supplement are fairly low this kind of supplement are fairly low this kind of supplement are fairly low because you're trying to treat to low because you're trying to treat to low because you're trying to treat to low normal. And then if you start to go normal. And then if you start to go normal. And then if you start to go beyond that low normal, then we can get beyond that low normal, then we can get beyond that low normal, then we can get a lot of those unwanted side effects a lot of those unwanted side effects a lot of those unwanted side effects that we would get if we were taking that we would get if we were taking that we would get if we were taking testosterone for the bodybuilding testosterone for the bodybuilding testosterone for the bodybuilding purpose. And so you might see voice purpose. And so you might see voice purpose. And so you might see voice deepening or unwanted hair growth or we deepening or unwanted hair growth or we deepening or unwanted hair growth or we so that's typically why I if you're a so that's typically why I if you're a so that's typically why I if you're a woman you you'd only want to use this in woman you you'd only want to use this in woman you you'd only want to use this in really low doses and we don't have the really low doses and we don't have the really low doses and we don't have the evidence to say that low dose is evidence to say that low dose is evidence to say that low dose is going to do anything for muscle and it's going to do anything for muscle and it's going to do anything for muscle and it's probably not worth the risk to take the probably not worth the risk to take the probably not worth the risk to take the high dose when you could just lift the high dose when you could just lift the high dose when you could just lift weights. &gt;&gt; When you could just lift weights. Thank &gt;&gt; When you could just lift weights. Thank &gt;&gt; When you could just lift weights. Thank you for entertaining that somewhat, you for entertaining that somewhat, you for entertaining that somewhat, you know, tricky question because I think know, tricky question because I think know, tricky question because I think we're in a um we're in a whole new we're in a um we're in a whole new we're in a um we're in a whole new self-directed medical care landscape. self-directed medical care landscape. self-directed medical care landscape. Meaning, even if people are working with Meaning, even if people are working with Meaning, even if people are working with doctors, they can generally find a doctors, they can generally find a doctors, they can generally find a doctor to make them feel better, even if doctor to make them feel better, even if doctor to make them feel better, even if it's not dealing with the specific it's not dealing with the specific it's not dealing with the specific issue. We need to be careful with the issue. We need to be careful with the issue. We need to be careful with the hormone therapy conversation though hormone therapy conversation though hormone therapy conversation though because the data to date doesn't support because the data to date doesn't support because the data to date doesn't support the use of it for preventing cognitive the use of it for preventing cognitive the use of it for preventing cognitive decline or preventing cardiovascular decline or preventing cardiovascular decline or preventing cardiovascular disease. And there's a lot of messaging disease. And there's a lot of messaging disease. And there's a lot of messaging out there that is sort of telling women out there that is sort of telling women out there that is sort of telling women if you don't take hormone therapy you're if you don't take hormone therapy you're if you don't take hormone therapy you're doomed. And that's not accurate. and doomed. And that's not accurate. and doomed. And that's not accurate. and some women can't take hormone therapy. some women can't take hormone therapy. some women can't take hormone therapy. So, we need to kind of hold two So, we need to kind of hold two So, we need to kind of hold two truths where this is really powerful truths where this is really powerful truths where this is really powerful and can be really effective for and can be really effective for and can be really effective for symptoms. Perhaps down the road we'll symptoms. Perhaps down the road we'll symptoms. Perhaps down the road we'll learn that it has these other learn that it has these other learn that it has these other benefits or it could go the other benefits or it could go the other benefits or it could go the other direction. You know, we've uh we don't direction. You know, we've uh we don't direction. You know, we've uh we don't know. but prematurely making claims know. but prematurely making claims know. but prematurely making claims about all of these benefits that it's about all of these benefits that it's about all of these benefits that it's going to, you know, improve your going to, you know, improve your going to, you know, improve your lifespan, increase longevity, prevent lifespan, increase longevity, prevent lifespan, increase longevity, prevent disease. That's not accurate and women disease. That's not accurate and women disease. That's not accurate and women need to understand that something can be need to understand that something can be need to understand that something can be really valuable but not a panacea, really valuable but not a panacea, really valuable but not a panacea, right? &gt;&gt; Do you feel isolated because you're like &gt;&gt; Do you feel isolated because you're like &gt;&gt; Do you feel isolated because you're like won't join this, hey, things are won't join this, hey, things are won't join this, hey, things are different for women message? Well, if it different for women message? Well, if it different for women message? Well, if it were true, I would say it. I mean, when were true, I would say it. I mean, when were true, I would say it. I mean, when I got into this field, of course, that I got into this field, of course, that I got into this field, of course, that was a question. That was one of the was a question. That was one of the was a question. That was one of the major questions that I had. And at the major questions that I had. And at the major questions that I had. And at the time, there were reasonable the time, there were reasonable the time, there were reasonable hypotheses to explore. And as hypotheses to explore. And as hypotheses to explore. And as scientists, we test those and then we scientists, we test those and then we scientists, we test those and then we look at the data and we form our look at the data and we form our look at the data and we form our opinions based on the data. As a woman, opinions based on the data. As a woman, opinions based on the data. As a woman, if I honestly thought there were things if I honestly thought there were things if I honestly thought there were things we should do differently to optimize our we should do differently to optimize our we should do differently to optimize our results, of course, I would be doing results, of course, I would be doing results, of course, I would be doing them myself and telling other women to them myself and telling other women to them myself and telling other women to do them, too. do them, too. do them, too. But the narrative that women need a But the narrative that women need a But the narrative that women need a sexsp specific program or nutrient sexsp specific program or nutrient sexsp specific program or nutrient timing guidance or a timing guidance or a timing guidance or a particular intensity of exercise or rep range or intensity of exercise or rep range or intensity of exercise or rep range or all of it. It makes women feel like all of it. It makes women feel like all of it. It makes women feel like they're being spoken to and being considered and being spoken to and being considered and being spoken to and being considered and then they're part of this community then they're part of this community then they're part of this community instead of oh, you know, just do what instead of oh, you know, just do what instead of oh, you know, just do what your boyfriend does or what your husband your boyfriend does or what your husband your boyfriend does or what your husband does or so the narrative is very much um does or so the narrative is very much um does or so the narrative is very much um we know this works for men but women are we know this works for men but women are we know this works for men but women are not men and so obviously women need not men and so obviously women need not men and so obviously women need something different. The data says something different. The data says something different. The data says men and women respond to exercise very men and women respond to exercise very men and women respond to exercise very similarly. I think the fitness space is similarly. I think the fitness space is similarly. I think the fitness space is so saturated that a lot of people think so saturated that a lot of people think so saturated that a lot of people think they need to kind of reinvent the wheel they need to kind of reinvent the wheel they need to kind of reinvent the wheel or that message that you and I have or that message that you and I have or that message that you and I have discussed which is you know consistent discussed which is you know consistent discussed which is you know consistent effective progressive training that's effective progressive training that's effective progressive training that's it's not exciting enough that doesn't it's not exciting enough that doesn't it's not exciting enough that doesn't give you the edge and so you need give you the edge and so you need give you the edge and so you need something else and that something else something else and that something else something else and that something else is often misinformation or something is often misinformation or something is often misinformation or something that just over complicates everything that just over complicates everything that just over complicates everything and makes but when it's more complicated and makes but when it's more complicated and makes but when it's more complicated people are convinced that you know people are convinced that you know people are convinced that you know something they don't and that's why something they don't and that's why something they don't and that's why misinformation spreads misinformation spreads misinformation spreads &gt;&gt; I don't think it could be made any &gt;&gt; I don't think it could be made any &gt;&gt; I don't think it could be made any clearer and I appreciate your clearer and I appreciate your clearer and I appreciate your directness about it um the scientist in directness about it um the scientist in directness about it um the scientist in you the uh the person who looks at data you the uh the person who looks at data you the uh the person who looks at data comes absolutely clear in that statement comes absolutely clear in that statement comes absolutely clear in that statement &gt;&gt; and I'll say this when I explored &gt;&gt; and I'll say this when I explored &gt;&gt; and I'll say this when I explored menstrual cycle phases is yes I was menstrual cycle phases is yes I was menstrual cycle phases is yes I was interested in you know were would there interested in you know were would there interested in you know were would there be differences in these different be differences in these different be differences in these different hormone profiles but the other reason hormone profiles but the other reason hormone profiles but the other reason the more exciting take-home from the more exciting take-home from the more exciting take-home from the fact that there was no difference is one fact that there was no difference is one fact that there was no difference is one of the biggest reasons why we don't have of the biggest reasons why we don't have of the biggest reasons why we don't have as much data in female participants is as much data in female participants is as much data in female participants is because of the challenge associated with because of the challenge associated with because of the challenge associated with standardizing the testing and the training and the testing and the training and the testing and the training and the recruitment for people with equal length recruitment for people with equal length recruitment for people with equal length phases and standardizing ovulation phases and standardizing ovulation phases and standardizing ovulation timing and excluding people who are on timing and excluding people who are on timing and excluding people who are on contraceptives and it adds in a whole contraceptives and it adds in a whole contraceptives and it adds in a whole study on top of a study. And so if we study on top of a study. And so if we study on top of a study. And so if we don't have to do that anymore, think don't have to do that anymore, think don't have to do that anymore, think about all the research we can do in about all the research we can do in about all the research we can do in women or in mixed sex samples or in women or in mixed sex samples or in women or in mixed sex samples or in combined people on and off combined people on and off combined people on and off contraceptives, especially for sports contraceptives, especially for sports contraceptives, especially for sports science labs with fewer resources. science labs with fewer resources. science labs with fewer resources. they can be part of that mission to do they can be part of that mission to do they can be part of that mission to do more research in women if we don't have more research in women if we don't have more research in women if we don't have to worry about what was a huge barrier to worry about what was a huge barrier to worry about what was a huge barrier historically. &gt;&gt; There are more funds now being directed &gt;&gt; There are more funds now being directed &gt;&gt; There are more funds now being directed towards um studies that include women or towards um studies that include women or towards um studies that include women or are solely directed at women's health are solely directed at women's health are solely directed at women's health and fitness. um having not come through and fitness. um having not come through and fitness. um having not come through science through that uh portal, I'm science through that uh portal, I'm science through that uh portal, I'm curious about how experiments are done curious about how experiments are done curious about how experiments are done in terms of resistance training and in terms of resistance training and in terms of resistance training and muscle growth and strength um increases. muscle growth and strength um increases. muscle growth and strength um increases. Um I'm familiar with some of Brad's work Um I'm familiar with some of Brad's work Um I'm familiar with some of Brad's work and your work. Um do you think it and your work. Um do you think it and your work. Um do you think it replicates the gym well enough? I'm not replicates the gym well enough? I'm not replicates the gym well enough? I'm not being critical. I just, you know, I've being critical. I just, you know, I've being critical. I just, you know, I've seen studies where it's like, oh, you seen studies where it's like, oh, you seen studies where it's like, oh, you know, leg extension, you know, and then know, leg extension, you know, and then know, leg extension, you know, and then you look at looking at one rep max on you look at looking at one rep max on you look at looking at one rep max on the curl or I'm not saying you guys did the curl or I'm not saying you guys did the curl or I'm not saying you guys did those studies, but a lot of times I those studies, but a lot of times I those studies, but a lot of times I think untrained subjects who then, you think untrained subjects who then, you think untrained subjects who then, you know, trained for eight weeks doing know, trained for eight weeks doing know, trained for eight weeks doing something and something and something and it it's hard for me to know if it it's hard for me to know if it it's hard for me to know if it really carries over. It could. I mean, I really carries over. It could. I mean, I really carries over. It could. I mean, I ran a lab where we used VR to study ran a lab where we used VR to study ran a lab where we used VR to study stress. You'd say, 'Well, is that real? stress. You'd say, 'Well, is that real? stress. You'd say, 'Well, is that real? It's better than just showing people It's better than just showing people It's better than just showing people pictures on a screen, but it's not like pictures on a screen, but it's not like pictures on a screen, but it's not like real life stress, right? real life stress, right? real life stress, right? &gt;&gt; You know, we had a falling thing and &gt;&gt; You know, we had a falling thing and &gt;&gt; You know, we had a falling thing and yeah, people think they're falling. We yeah, people think they're falling. We yeah, people think they're falling. We actually had people fall and physically actually had people fall and physically actually had people fall and physically in the lab think because the visual in the lab think because the visual in the lab think because the visual world's going up in VR, but it's not world's going up in VR, but it's not world's going up in VR, but it's not like falling off a building. So, are the like falling off a building. So, are the like falling off a building. So, are the studies of resistance training that you studies of resistance training that you studies of resistance training that you one can do in a lab, gymlab, one can do in a lab, gymlab, one can do in a lab, gymlab, do you like them? Are you satisfied with do you like them? Are you satisfied with do you like them? Are you satisfied with what's there in a lot of cases? Well, what's there in a lot of cases? Well, what's there in a lot of cases? Well, I've been involved in those more, you I've been involved in those more, you I've been involved in those more, you know, realworld gym like program studies know, realworld gym like program studies know, realworld gym like program studies and with that increase in ecological and with that increase in ecological and with that increase in ecological validity, you validity, you validity, you sacrifice some of the measurements that sacrifice some of the measurements that sacrifice some of the measurements that you can do. you take away some of that you can do. you take away some of that you can do. you take away some of that really tight control um or within really tight control um or within really tight control um or within subject designs where you're having you subject designs where you're having you subject designs where you're having you know one leg perform one protocol and know one leg perform one protocol and know one leg perform one protocol and another leg perform another um so I another leg perform another um so I another leg perform another um so I think there's a time and a place for think there's a time and a place for think there's a time and a place for both but if we want to look at molecular both but if we want to look at molecular both but if we want to look at molecular signaling if we want to do these tighter signaling if we want to do these tighter signaling if we want to do these tighter controls where we just want to know that controls where we just want to know that controls where we just want to know that there was a sufficient exercise there was a sufficient exercise there was a sufficient exercise stimulus and it's not necess necessarily stimulus and it's not necess necessarily stimulus and it's not necess necessarily about the fact that it was a leg about the fact that it was a leg about the fact that it was a leg extension versus a realworld leg extension versus a realworld leg extension versus a realworld leg training program, training program, training program, &gt;&gt; then those are those are better. Um &gt;&gt; then those are those are better. Um &gt;&gt; then those are those are better. Um because that kind of a study is not because that kind of a study is not because that kind of a study is not designed to say and therefore everyone designed to say and therefore everyone designed to say and therefore everyone should do unilateral leg extensions. should do unilateral leg extensions. should do unilateral leg extensions. It's designed to say under these It's designed to say under these It's designed to say under these conditions, you know, with this hormone conditions, you know, with this hormone conditions, you know, with this hormone profile or with this infusion of profile or with this infusion of profile or with this infusion of nutrition, then what happens to protein nutrition, then what happens to protein nutrition, then what happens to protein synthesis? And that can be um powerful synthesis? And that can be um powerful synthesis? And that can be um powerful and controlled in a way that a lot of and controlled in a way that a lot of and controlled in a way that a lot of the more translational exercise science the more translational exercise science the more translational exercise science studies are not. So I think both are studies are not. So I think both are studies are not. So I think both are important but it really depends on the important but it really depends on the important but it really depends on the research question as to which is the research question as to which is the research question as to which is the most appropriate design. most appropriate design. most appropriate design. &gt;&gt; How long have you been training? &gt;&gt; How long have you been training? &gt;&gt; How long have you been training? &gt;&gt; 14 years something like that. &gt;&gt; 14 years something like that. &gt;&gt; 14 years something like that. &gt;&gt; So with that caveat uh what is people &gt;&gt; So with that caveat uh what is people &gt;&gt; So with that caveat uh what is people are going to want to know. Uh what are going to want to know. Uh what are going to want to know. Uh what is your um kind of rout general routine is your um kind of rout general routine is your um kind of rout general routine now? Does it and how much does it look now? Does it and how much does it look now? Does it and how much does it look like or differ from what you described like or differ from what you described like or differ from what you described earlier. &gt;&gt; It's definitely changed over the years. &gt;&gt; It's definitely changed over the years. &gt;&gt; It's definitely changed over the years. Uh, I went through phases of really Uh, I went through phases of really Uh, I went through phases of really trying to maximize strength and I got trying to maximize strength and I got trying to maximize strength and I got injured a lot. And then when I' I've injured a lot. And then when I' I've injured a lot. And then when I' I've been in phases of doing data been in phases of doing data been in phases of doing data collection, I've had to really scale collection, I've had to really scale collection, I've had to really scale back from my training because your back from my training because your back from my training because your schedule is not your own. And now I'm at schedule is not your own. And now I'm at schedule is not your own. And now I'm at a point where I like more frequency. So, a point where I like more frequency. So, a point where I like more frequency. So, I tend to go more often, but um not I tend to go more often, but um not I tend to go more often, but um not necessarily for really long sessions. necessarily for really long sessions. necessarily for really long sessions. So, I go for a half hour, sometimes 45 So, I go for a half hour, sometimes 45 So, I go for a half hour, sometimes 45 minutes, but I like to go more minutes, but I like to go more minutes, but I like to go more frequently because then I feel like I'm frequently because then I feel like I'm frequently because then I feel like I'm better at kind of keeping up with the better at kind of keeping up with the better at kind of keeping up with the habit. &gt;&gt; And so, right now, I do a split of an &gt;&gt; And so, right now, I do a split of an &gt;&gt; And so, right now, I do a split of an upper body push, an upper body pull, and upper body push, an upper body pull, and upper body push, an upper body pull, and a lower body. And I just kind of rotate a lower body. And I just kind of rotate a lower body. And I just kind of rotate through that. through that. through that. &gt;&gt; So, do you take a day off after six days &gt;&gt; So, do you take a day off after six days &gt;&gt; So, do you take a day off after six days of that? So, push pull legs, push pull of that? So, push pull legs, push pull of that? So, push pull legs, push pull legs, take a day off. legs, take a day off. legs, take a day off. &gt;&gt; Or sometimes I'll do push pull legs and &gt;&gt; Or sometimes I'll do push pull legs and &gt;&gt; Or sometimes I'll do push pull legs and take a day off and then push pull legs take a day off and then push pull legs take a day off and then push pull legs and take another day off. I'm not as and take another day off. I'm not as and take another day off. I'm not as kind of strict with it because it does kind of strict with it because it does kind of strict with it because it does depend on my weekly schedule. But that depend on my weekly schedule. But that depend on my weekly schedule. But that rotation kind of allows me to always be rotation kind of allows me to always be rotation kind of allows me to always be able to go in and pick up where I left able to go in and pick up where I left able to go in and pick up where I left off. &gt;&gt; And you're doing the sets presumably the &gt;&gt; And you're doing the sets presumably the &gt;&gt; And you're doing the sets presumably the way you described before, getting close way you described before, getting close way you described before, getting close to failure or going to failure. to failure or going to failure. to failure or going to failure. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I will typically get close to &gt;&gt; Yeah, I will typically get close to &gt;&gt; Yeah, I will typically get close to failure. Occasionally I will go to failure. Occasionally I will go to failure. Occasionally I will go to failure. It kind of depends on the failure. It kind of depends on the failure. It kind of depends on the exercise, you know. I think if you're exercise, you know. I think if you're exercise, you know. I think if you're doing something particularly doing something particularly doing something particularly machine-based, then going to failure is machine-based, then going to failure is machine-based, then going to failure is like pretty risk-free. Either the weight like pretty risk-free. Either the weight like pretty risk-free. Either the weight moves or it doesn't. And cardio in moves or it doesn't. And cardio in moves or it doesn't. And cardio in addition to that dedicated cardio addition to that dedicated cardio addition to that dedicated cardio &gt;&gt; I will do some &gt;&gt; I will do some &gt;&gt; I will do some but not regularly because I tend to be but not regularly because I tend to be but not regularly because I tend to be physically active hiking with my dogs physically active hiking with my dogs physically active hiking with my dogs and uh I prefer to be outside if I can and uh I prefer to be outside if I can and uh I prefer to be outside if I can um getting my physical activity than you um getting my physical activity than you um getting my physical activity than you know on a stairmaster on an incline know on a stairmaster on an incline know on a stairmaster on an incline treadmill. But I'll do it if the treadmill. But I'll do it if the treadmill. But I'll do it if the weather's bad. I think the routine you weather's bad. I think the routine you weather's bad. I think the routine you just described sounds really doable. The just described sounds really doable. The just described sounds really doable. The routine you described earlier sounds routine you described earlier sounds routine you described earlier sounds really doable. Do you think mobility really doable. Do you think mobility really doable. Do you think mobility work is important um for women or men? work is important um for women or men? work is important um for women or men? Dedicated mobility work. Not really. Dedicated mobility work. Not really. Dedicated mobility work. Not really. Because I think if you are doing full Because I think if you are doing full Because I think if you are doing full body training through a full range of body training through a full range of body training through a full range of motion, then as you are warming up with motion, then as you are warming up with motion, then as you are warming up with those lighter sets and making sure that those lighter sets and making sure that those lighter sets and making sure that you are moving through your full range you are moving through your full range you are moving through your full range of motion, you're already getting that of motion, you're already getting that of motion, you're already getting that built-in mobility work. So, if it makes built-in mobility work. So, if it makes built-in mobility work. So, if it makes you feel good, then great. But I think you feel good, then great. But I think you feel good, then great. But I think a, you know, a dynamic general warm-up a, you know, a dynamic general warm-up a, you know, a dynamic general warm-up versus a specific like let's do some of versus a specific like let's do some of versus a specific like let's do some of the target exercise with lighter loads the target exercise with lighter loads the target exercise with lighter loads and move through that. They can be and move through that. They can be and move through that. They can be equally effective. equally effective. equally effective. &gt;&gt; Want to make sure I double click on &gt;&gt; Want to make sure I double click on &gt;&gt; Want to make sure I double click on something you said earlier. you said the something you said earlier. you said the something you said earlier. you said the long-term out uh outcomes of these um long-term out uh outcomes of these um long-term out uh outcomes of these um hormone replacement therapy studies on hormone replacement therapy studies on hormone replacement therapy studies on women uh do not show uh improvements women uh do not show uh improvements women uh do not show uh improvements in cognition etc. My understanding of in cognition etc. My understanding of in cognition etc. My understanding of the of that large data set was that the of that large data set was that the of that large data set was that women who started hormone replacement women who started hormone replacement women who started hormone replacement therapy as they entered menopause fared therapy as they entered menopause fared therapy as they entered menopause fared better than those that didn't. But those better than those that didn't. But those better than those that didn't. But those that started it after [clears throat] that started it after [clears throat] that started it after [clears throat] menopause, it didn't turn out well. Maybe I'm not it didn't turn out well. Maybe I'm not it didn't turn out well. Maybe I'm not up on the latest of these. up on the latest of these. up on the latest of these. &gt;&gt; Well, it depends which outcome &gt;&gt; Well, it depends which outcome &gt;&gt; Well, it depends which outcome you're interested in, but you you're interested in, but you you're interested in, but you know, one of the biggest issues know, one of the biggest issues know, one of the biggest issues historically was in the early 2000s, you historically was in the early 2000s, you historically was in the early 2000s, you know, women's health initiative was know, women's health initiative was know, women's health initiative was doing a set of studies looking at doing a set of studies looking at doing a set of studies looking at hormone therapy. it was older uh hormone therapy. it was older uh hormone therapy. it was older uh versions of hormone therapy. But versions of hormone therapy. But versions of hormone therapy. But ultimately the goal was to evaluate ultimately the goal was to evaluate ultimately the goal was to evaluate the utility of that estrogen-based the utility of that estrogen-based the utility of that estrogen-based hormone therapy for reduced risk of hormone therapy for reduced risk of hormone therapy for reduced risk of cardiovascular disease. and they stopped cardiovascular disease. and they stopped cardiovascular disease. and they stopped one of the trials early because they saw one of the trials early because they saw one of the trials early because they saw that, you know, it wasn't reducing risk that, you know, it wasn't reducing risk that, you know, it wasn't reducing risk and that perhaps it was going in the and that perhaps it was going in the and that perhaps it was going in the other direction and so they couldn't other direction and so they couldn't other direction and so they couldn't ethically continue the trial. But the ethically continue the trial. But the ethically continue the trial. But the media had a field day with this and kind of had a field day with this and kind of had a field day with this and kind of twisted things and the then the message twisted things and the then the message twisted things and the then the message to the public was that hormone therapy to the public was that hormone therapy to the public was that hormone therapy causes heart disease. hormone therapy causes heart disease. hormone therapy causes heart disease. hormone therapy causes cancer. And it took a lot of causes cancer. And it took a lot of causes cancer. And it took a lot of years to really unpack that to say, years to really unpack that to say, years to really unpack that to say, okay, what does the data actually say? okay, what does the data actually say? okay, what does the data actually say? What was that study designed to assess? What was that study designed to assess? What was that study designed to assess? Because it's one of the largest data Because it's one of the largest data Because it's one of the largest data sets to date on all sorts of outcome sets to date on all sorts of outcome sets to date on all sorts of outcome measures. But what it doesn't say is, measures. But what it doesn't say is, measures. But what it doesn't say is, you know, a blanket statement, hormone you know, a blanket statement, hormone you know, a blanket statement, hormone therapy is terrible for this person or therapy is terrible for this person or therapy is terrible for this person or for that reason or here is when everyone for that reason or here is when everyone for that reason or here is when everyone needs to start it because to your point, needs to start it because to your point, needs to start it because to your point, there were people who were a variety of there were people who were a variety of there were people who were a variety of ages and menopause status. So ages and menopause status. So ages and menopause status. So there's work that has come out since there's work that has come out since there's work that has come out since looking more specifically at outcomes looking more specifically at outcomes looking more specifically at outcomes like muscle mass, bone density, like muscle mass, bone density, like muscle mass, bone density, cognitive health. And then there's also cognitive health. And then there's also cognitive health. And then there's also trials that are more observational in trials that are more observational in trials that are more observational in nature or cross-sectional and saying, nature or cross-sectional and saying, nature or cross-sectional and saying, you know, can we look at this for to you know, can we look at this for to you know, can we look at this for to identify some patterns that we could identify some patterns that we could identify some patterns that we could then go investigate in a clinical trial. then go investigate in a clinical trial. then go investigate in a clinical trial. And there's a tendency to kind of jump And there's a tendency to kind of jump And there's a tendency to kind of jump the gun and say, well, based on this the gun and say, well, based on this the gun and say, well, based on this potential pattern, then it looks like potential pattern, then it looks like potential pattern, then it looks like there might be this health benefit. And there might be this health benefit. And there might be this health benefit. And then the message gets misconstrued into then the message gets misconstrued into then the message gets misconstrued into if you take it, you know, you'll never if you take it, you know, you'll never if you take it, you know, you'll never get Alzheimer's or you'll never get Alzheimer's or you'll never get Alzheimer's or you'll never get dementia. And that's not an appropriate dementia. And that's not an appropriate dementia. And that's not an appropriate representation of the data. representation of the data. representation of the data. &gt;&gt; I'm just curious. Uh, so deliberate cold &gt;&gt; I'm just curious. Uh, so deliberate cold &gt;&gt; I'm just curious. Uh, so deliberate cold exposure, yay, nay, meh. Depends. exposure, yay, nay, meh. Depends. exposure, yay, nay, meh. Depends. &gt;&gt; Depends. I think the most compelling &gt;&gt; Depends. I think the most compelling &gt;&gt; Depends. I think the most compelling benefits are probably the kind of mental benefits are probably the kind of mental benefits are probably the kind of mental clarity and psychological well-being clarity and psychological well-being clarity and psychological well-being as opposed to the physiology. as opposed to the physiology. as opposed to the physiology. &gt;&gt; Zone two, &gt;&gt; Zone two, &gt;&gt; Zone two, &gt;&gt; it's fine. It's certainly necessary with &gt;&gt; it's fine. It's certainly necessary with &gt;&gt; it's fine. It's certainly necessary with long-term endurance training goals, but long-term endurance training goals, but long-term endurance training goals, but if you prefer higher intensity or other if you prefer higher intensity or other if you prefer higher intensity or other forms of moderate physical activity, forms of moderate physical activity, forms of moderate physical activity, then do that instead. then do that instead. then do that instead. &gt;&gt; Weight vests &gt;&gt; Weight vests &gt;&gt; Weight vests &gt;&gt; skip. &gt;&gt; skip. &gt;&gt; skip. &gt;&gt; Really? I'm surprised you please tell me &gt;&gt; Really? I'm surprised you please tell me &gt;&gt; Really? I'm surprised you please tell me more. &gt;&gt; Because weighted vests are being &gt;&gt; Because weighted vests are being &gt;&gt; Because weighted vests are being marketed to women as an alternative for marketed to women as an alternative for marketed to women as an alternative for resistance training. resistance training. resistance training. &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; walking with a weighted vest. And so &gt;&gt; walking with a weighted vest. And so &gt;&gt; walking with a weighted vest. And so walking with a weighted vest is not walking with a weighted vest is not walking with a weighted vest is not going to improve muscle or bone. It's going to improve muscle or bone. It's going to improve muscle or bone. It's not the appropriate stimulus. So if you not the appropriate stimulus. So if you not the appropriate stimulus. So if you want to use the vest to maybe do some want to use the vest to maybe do some want to use the vest to maybe do some squats or lunges or jumping exercises, squats or lunges or jumping exercises, squats or lunges or jumping exercises, then that might be an appropriate uh then that might be an appropriate uh then that might be an appropriate uh use case for it. But just going on walks use case for it. But just going on walks use case for it. But just going on walks with a weighted vest is not a with a weighted vest is not a with a weighted vest is not a substitute for resistance training. substitute for resistance training. substitute for resistance training. armhang test uh as an indirect measure armhang test uh as an indirect measure armhang test uh as an indirect measure of longevity. of longevity. of longevity. &gt;&gt; I would skip that. I think we have a lot &gt;&gt; I would skip that. I think we have a lot &gt;&gt; I would skip that. I think we have a lot of data in grip strength because grip of data in grip strength because grip of data in grip strength because grip strength is really easy to measure in strength is really easy to measure in strength is really easy to measure in clinical settings in people who have clinical settings in people who have clinical settings in people who have never exercised including people who are never exercised including people who are never exercised including people who are on bed rest. So we know there's a on bed rest. So we know there's a on bed rest. So we know there's a relationship between grip strength and relationship between grip strength and relationship between grip strength and you know quote unquote longevity because you know quote unquote longevity because you know quote unquote longevity because grip strength is a proxy for grip strength is a proxy for grip strength is a proxy for overall strength. So instead of worrying overall strength. So instead of worrying overall strength. So instead of worrying about testing or training grip strength, about testing or training grip strength, about testing or training grip strength, we should be focusing on doing our full we should be focusing on doing our full we should be focusing on doing our full body resistance training, body resistance training, body resistance training, &gt;&gt; jumping up onto or off of things &gt;&gt; jumping up onto or off of things &gt;&gt; jumping up onto or off of things specifically to get uh a longevity or specifically to get uh a longevity or specifically to get uh a longevity or safety effect. safety effect. safety effect. &gt;&gt; I'd rather incorporate some sort of &gt;&gt; I'd rather incorporate some sort of &gt;&gt; I'd rather incorporate some sort of balance training into your resistance balance training into your resistance balance training into your resistance training session. So, we could do that training session. So, we could do that training session. So, we could do that through unilateral exercises or through unilateral exercises or through unilateral exercises or through something like a walking lunge. And then something like a walking lunge. And then something like a walking lunge. And then we're making sure that we're kind of we're making sure that we're kind of we're making sure that we're kind of working in full ranges of motion in working in full ranges of motion in working in full ranges of motion in different planes of motion because that different planes of motion because that different planes of motion because that way if we have good balance and we have way if we have good balance and we have way if we have good balance and we have our strength and muscle mass and we're our strength and muscle mass and we're our strength and muscle mass and we're able to coordinate that movement, then able to coordinate that movement, then able to coordinate that movement, then if we start to fall, we'll also be able if we start to fall, we'll also be able if we start to fall, we'll also be able to catch ourselves. to catch ourselves. to catch ourselves. &gt;&gt; Dedicated abdominal work. And if it's a &gt;&gt; Dedicated abdominal work. And if it's a &gt;&gt; Dedicated abdominal work. And if it's a yes, what's your favorite yes, what's your favorite yes, what's your favorite recommendation? &gt;&gt; Any kind of abdominal exercise is not &gt;&gt; Any kind of abdominal exercise is not &gt;&gt; Any kind of abdominal exercise is not going to burn off your belly fat. So if going to burn off your belly fat. So if going to burn off your belly fat. So if you want to hypertrophy your rectus you want to hypertrophy your rectus you want to hypertrophy your rectus abdominis, then you need to treat it abdominis, then you need to treat it abdominis, then you need to treat it like any other muscle group and load it like any other muscle group and load it like any other muscle group and load it progressively. But I think most women progressively. But I think most women progressively. But I think most women who are doing hundreds of crunches are who are doing hundreds of crunches are who are doing hundreds of crunches are hoping that it's going to make them hoping that it's going to make them hoping that it's going to make them leaner, not that it's going to grow leaner, not that it's going to grow leaner, not that it's going to grow their abs. their abs. their abs. &gt;&gt; Favorite um exercise that you don't see &gt;&gt; Favorite um exercise that you don't see &gt;&gt; Favorite um exercise that you don't see people doing that they might want to try people doing that they might want to try people doing that they might want to try with the appropriate instruction. with the appropriate instruction. with the appropriate instruction. just like a fun one that you like or just like a fun one that you like or just like a fun one that you like or &gt;&gt; I like a single leg RDL Romanian &gt;&gt; I like a single leg RDL Romanian &gt;&gt; I like a single leg RDL Romanian deadlift and you can hold on to deadlift and you can hold on to deadlift and you can hold on to something and so you're getting kind of something and so you're getting kind of something and so you're getting kind of a good glute and hamstring a good glute and hamstring a good glute and hamstring on a single side and you can also on a single side and you can also on a single side and you can also incorporate a kind of balance component incorporate a kind of balance component incorporate a kind of balance component into that if you don't want to hold on into that if you don't want to hold on into that if you don't want to hold on to something for stability. I like to something for stability. I like to something for stability. I like to put one of those barbell pads on a low put one of those barbell pads on a low put one of those barbell pads on a low bar in a squat rack. So then you can put bar in a squat rack. So then you can put bar in a squat rack. So then you can put the top of your foot on the pad and it's the top of your foot on the pad and it's the top of your foot on the pad and it's more comfortable than putting your foot more comfortable than putting your foot more comfortable than putting your foot on the bench. on the bench. on the bench. &gt;&gt; And do you hold the dumbbell on the &gt;&gt; And do you hold the dumbbell on the &gt;&gt; And do you hold the dumbbell on the side that's doing the work or on the side that's doing the work or on the side that's doing the work or on the side uh that with the leg back when you side uh that with the leg back when you side uh that with the leg back when you do those? do those? do those? &gt;&gt; You can do it either way. I prefer the &gt;&gt; You can do it either way. I prefer the &gt;&gt; You can do it either way. I prefer the let the to hold it on the same side. let the to hold it on the same side. let the to hold it on the same side. &gt;&gt; Last question. Is there anything &gt;&gt; Last question. Is there anything &gt;&gt; Last question. Is there anything [clears throat] that's been [clears throat] that's been [clears throat] that's been scientifically shown to accelerate scientifically shown to accelerate scientifically shown to accelerate recovery from resistance training? Not recovery from resistance training? Not recovery from resistance training? Not just move out soreness, although if it just move out soreness, although if it just move out soreness, although if it does that, great, but to accelerate does that, great, but to accelerate does that, great, but to accelerate recovery, meaning to get you from the recovery, meaning to get you from the recovery, meaning to get you from the stimulus to the adaptation more quickly. stimulus to the adaptation more quickly. stimulus to the adaptation more quickly. &gt;&gt; A lot to attenuate soreness, but to &gt;&gt; A lot to attenuate soreness, but to &gt;&gt; A lot to attenuate soreness, but to accelerate the adaptation. If you want accelerate the adaptation. If you want accelerate the adaptation. If you want to accelerate recovery, then you're to accelerate recovery, then you're to accelerate recovery, then you're potentially compromising adaptation. So, potentially compromising adaptation. So, potentially compromising adaptation. So, ice baths are a perfect example of that. ice baths are a perfect example of that. ice baths are a perfect example of that. You know, you're getting more recovery, You know, you're getting more recovery, You know, you're getting more recovery, but you're possibly blunting the but you're possibly blunting the but you're possibly blunting the hypertrophic stimulus. So, hypertrophic stimulus. So, hypertrophic stimulus. So, same with NSAIDs. same with NSAIDs. same with NSAIDs. &gt;&gt; Same with NSAIDs. Yeah. Um, they will &gt;&gt; Same with NSAIDs. Yeah. Um, they will &gt;&gt; Same with NSAIDs. Yeah. Um, they will block hypertrophy because they reduce block hypertrophy because they reduce block hypertrophy because they reduce inflammation, &gt;&gt; right? Right. And we want that &gt;&gt; right? Right. And we want that &gt;&gt; right? Right. And we want that inflammation at least, you know, short inflammation at least, you know, short inflammation at least, you know, short term. [clears throat] term. [clears throat] term. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Well, Lauren, uh, Dr. Ken, so simple. &gt;&gt; Well, Lauren, uh, Dr. Ken, so simple. &gt;&gt; Well, Lauren, uh, Dr. Ken, so simple. Um, this was amazing. Uh, first of all, Um, this was amazing. Uh, first of all, Um, this was amazing. Uh, first of all, thank you so much for, uh, coming here thank you so much for, uh, coming here thank you so much for, uh, coming here and talking with us with the and talking with us with the and talking with us with the audience today. Um, thank you for being audience today. Um, thank you for being audience today. Um, thank you for being a rational scientific voice online. I a rational scientific voice online. I a rational scientific voice online. I will say with a high degree of will say with a high degree of will say with a high degree of confidence that what you described confidence that what you described confidence that what you described before that, you know, it's very hard to before that, you know, it's very hard to before that, you know, it's very hard to get attention for the basics and for get attention for the basics and for get attention for the basics and for what's known in a landscape where, you what's known in a landscape where, you what's known in a landscape where, you know, other things seem to lend favor. I know, other things seem to lend favor. I know, other things seem to lend favor. I think there's been a lot of that now and think there's been a lot of that now and think there's been a lot of that now and I I'm confident that you're going to be I I'm confident that you're going to be I I'm confident that you're going to be the signal in a lot of noise. Um, so the signal in a lot of noise. Um, so the signal in a lot of noise. Um, so that things invert. Uh, and it's a that things invert. Uh, and it's a that things invert. Uh, and it's a wonderful thing that you're doing what wonderful thing that you're doing what wonderful thing that you're doing what you're doing. I really appreciate the you're doing. I really appreciate the you're doing. I really appreciate the clarity of your answers and I also have clarity of your answers and I also have clarity of your answers and I also have to say I really appreciate your to say I really appreciate your to say I really appreciate your Instagram etc. Are there other things Instagram etc. Are there other things Instagram etc. Are there other things that you're doing now that people can that you're doing now that people can that you're doing now that people can find you? Yeah, I write a monthly find you? Yeah, I write a monthly find you? Yeah, I write a monthly research review with three other PhDs, research review with three other PhDs, research review with three other PhDs, uh, Eric Trexler, Eric Helms, and uh, Eric Trexler, Eric Helms, and uh, Eric Trexler, Eric Helms, and Michael Zordos. And we release that, Michael Zordos. And we release that, Michael Zordos. And we release that, like I said, monthly. And it's all sorts like I said, monthly. And it's all sorts like I said, monthly. And it's all sorts of topics in health, fitness, wellness, of topics in health, fitness, wellness, of topics in health, fitness, wellness, and we kind of break down the latest and we kind of break down the latest and we kind of break down the latest science and give you actionable science and give you actionable science and give you actionable take-homes. So if you're someone who take-homes. So if you're someone who take-homes. So if you're someone who likes the deep dive into the science and likes the deep dive into the science and likes the deep dive into the science and also wants to know, you know, in the also wants to know, you know, in the also wants to know, you know, in the context of the literature as a whole, context of the literature as a whole, context of the literature as a whole, what should I do, then check out Mass what should I do, then check out Mass what should I do, then check out Mass Research Review. Research Review. Research Review. &gt;&gt; Great. All right, we'll put a link to &gt;&gt; Great. All right, we'll put a link to &gt;&gt; Great. All right, we'll put a link to that also. Well, thank you so much. Uh that also. Well, thank you so much. Uh that also. Well, thank you so much. Uh definitely come back when there are more definitely come back when there are more definitely come back when there are more data to discuss. Um I'm sure it won't be data to discuss. Um I'm sure it won't be data to discuss. Um I'm sure it won't be long and um it'll be interesting to see long and um it'll be interesting to see long and um it'll be interesting to see how the landscape changes. But like I how the landscape changes. But like I how the landscape changes. But like I said before, thanks for being the signal said before, thanks for being the signal said before, thanks for being the signal in the noise. Appreciate you. in the noise. Appreciate you. in the noise. Appreciate you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Lauren Keno today's discussion with Dr. Lauren Keno today's discussion with Dr. Lauren Keno Simple. To learn more about her work, Simple. To learn more about her work, Simple. To learn more about her work, please see the links in the show note please see the links in the show note please see the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from andor captions. If you're learning from andor captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Lauren Kenzo today's discussion with Dr. Lauren Kenzo today's discussion with Dr. Lauren Kenzo Simple. And last, but certainly not Simple. And last, but certainly not Simple. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [music]