Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker analyzes your blood and InsideTracker analyzes your blood and InsideTracker analyzes your blood and DNA to give you an accurate assessment DNA to give you an accurate assessment DNA to give you an accurate assessment of your health and your biological age. of your health and your biological age. of your health and your biological age. There are many things about our health There are many things about our health There are many things about our health that can only be analyzed from blood and that can only be analyzed from blood and that can only be analyzed from blood and DNA tests. I've been getting my blood DNA tests. I've been getting my blood DNA tests. I've been getting my blood assessed for many years now and about a assessed for many years now and about a assessed for many years now and about a year ago I switched to InsideTracker. year ago I switched to InsideTracker. year ago I switched to InsideTracker. What I like about InsideTracker is that What I like about InsideTracker is that What I like about InsideTracker is that you get all this information back about you get all this information back about you get all this information back about metabolic factors, endocrine factors, metabolic factors, endocrine factors, metabolic factors, endocrine factors, etc., that are really important to your etc., that are really important to your etc., that are really important to your health. But, unlike a lot of blood tests health. But, unlike a lot of blood tests health. But, unlike a lot of blood tests where you just get all the numbers back where you just get all the numbers back where you just get all the numbers back and it tells you whether or not things and it tells you whether or not things and it tells you whether or not things are high, normal, or low, InsideTracker are high, normal, or low, InsideTracker are high, normal, or low, InsideTracker also has this really useful and really also has this really useful and really also has this really useful and really easy to use dashboard that takes the easy to use dashboard that takes the easy to use dashboard that takes the information for your blood and DNA tests information for your blood and DNA tests information for your blood and DNA tests and points you toward particular and points you toward particular and points you toward particular behavioral, nutritional, and other sorts behavioral, nutritional, and other sorts behavioral, nutritional, and other sorts of protocols that you can use to get the of protocols that you can use to get the of protocols that you can use to get the numbers where you want them for your numbers where you want them for your numbers where you want them for your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman and they will give you 25% off any of and they will give you 25% off any of and they will give you 25% off any of their programs. Again, their programs their programs. Again, their programs their programs. Again, their programs allow you to assess your health from the allow you to assess your health from the allow you to assess your health from the inside, things that you could just never inside, things that you could just never inside, things that you could just never assess from any kind of test that didn't assess from any kind of test that didn't assess from any kind of test that didn't involve blood and DNA. And it also has involve blood and DNA. And it also has involve blood and DNA. And it also has this really interesting feature that it this really interesting feature that it this really interesting feature that it can measure your inner age, which is can measure your inner age, which is can measure your inner age, which is based on biology. Your chronological based on biology. Your chronological based on biology. Your chronological age, of course, is very informative age, of course, is very informative age, of course, is very informative about your health and where you ought to about your health and where you ought to about your health and where you ought to be in terms of health metrics, but be in terms of health metrics, but be in terms of health metrics, but people vary. We know people, of course, people vary. We know people, of course, people vary. We know people, of course, that are in their late 90s who are doing that are in their late 90s who are doing that are in their late 90s who are doing well. We know people that are in their well. We know people that are in their well. We know people that are in their 50s who are struggling or even in their 50s who are struggling or even in their 50s who are struggling or even in their 20s. So, blood and DNA are the way to 20s. So, blood and DNA are the way to 20s. So, blood and DNA are the way to analyze your health. That's my belief. analyze your health. That's my belief. analyze your health. That's my belief. That's why I use InsideTracker. So, go That's why I use InsideTracker. So, go That's why I use InsideTracker. So, go to insidetracker.com/huberman to insidetracker.com/huberman to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of their products and to get 25% off any of their products and to get 25% off any of their products and use Huberman at checkout. use Huberman at checkout. use Huberman at checkout. Our second sponsor of today's episode is Our second sponsor of today's episode is Our second sponsor of today's episode is Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are ideally mattresses and pillows that are ideally mattresses and pillows that are ideally suited to your needs for the best suited to your needs for the best suited to your needs for the best night's sleep possible. night's sleep possible. night's sleep possible. I switched to using a Helix mattress and I switched to using a Helix mattress and I switched to using a Helix mattress and Helix pillow Helix pillow Helix pillow this last year and I'm sleeping better this last year and I'm sleeping better this last year and I'm sleeping better than I ever have before. than I ever have before. than I ever have before. The way that Helix mattresses work and The way that Helix mattresses work and The way that Helix mattresses work and the reason they're different is that the reason they're different is that the reason they're different is that they are tailored to your individual they are tailored to your individual they are tailored to your individual sleep style. sleep style. sleep style. Your sleep style can be assessed by Your sleep style can be assessed by Your sleep style can be assessed by going to their website. You take a brief going to their website. You take a brief going to their website. You take a brief 2-minute questionnaire quiz. Ask you 2-minute questionnaire quiz. Ask you 2-minute questionnaire quiz. Ask you questions like do you sleep on your back questions like do you sleep on your back questions like do you sleep on your back or your side or your stomach? Maybe you or your side or your stomach? Maybe you or your side or your stomach? Maybe you don't know or maybe you move around a don't know or maybe you move around a don't know or maybe you move around a lot during the night. It also asks you lot during the night. It also asks you lot during the night. It also asks you questions such as do you tend to run hot questions such as do you tend to run hot questions such as do you tend to run hot or wake up cold? Things of that sort and or wake up cold? Things of that sort and or wake up cold? Things of that sort and then they tailor a particular mattress then they tailor a particular mattress then they tailor a particular mattress to your sleep needs. For me, I matched to your sleep needs. For me, I matched to your sleep needs. For me, I matched to the so-called Dusk DUSK mattress and to the so-called Dusk DUSK mattress and to the so-called Dusk DUSK mattress and I love it. I sleep better than ever. And I love it. I sleep better than ever. And I love it. I sleep better than ever. And right now, if you want to try Helix right now, if you want to try Helix right now, if you want to try Helix Sleep, you can go to Sleep, you can go to Sleep, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman and if you do that, you'll get $200 off and if you do that, you'll get $200 off and if you do that, you'll get $200 off your order plus two free pillows. They your order plus two free pillows. They your order plus two free pillows. They also have a great warranty. They have a also have a great warranty. They have a also have a great warranty. They have a 10-year warranty on their mattresses. If 10-year warranty on their mattresses. If 10-year warranty on their mattresses. If you don't like the mattress for any you don't like the mattress for any you don't like the mattress for any reason, they'll pick it up for free from reason, they'll pick it up for free from reason, they'll pick it up for free from your home and it they just make the your home and it they just make the your home and it they just make the whole thing really easy to try and whole thing really easy to try and whole thing really easy to try and determine whether or not it's right for determine whether or not it's right for determine whether or not it's right for you. So, again, it's you. So, again, it's you. So, again, it's helixsleep.com/huberman to get $200 off and two free pillows on to get $200 off and two free pillows on to get $200 off and two free pillows on your first order. your first order. your first order. Some of you have asked how you can help Some of you have asked how you can help Some of you have asked how you can help support the podcast in yet other ways support the podcast in yet other ways support the podcast in yet other ways besides just checking out our sponsors. besides just checking out our sponsors. besides just checking out our sponsors. We really appreciate the question and We really appreciate the question and We really appreciate the question and we've set up a account at we've set up a account at we've set up a account at patreon.com/andrewhuberman, which allows you to donate to the which allows you to donate to the which allows you to donate to the podcast at a variety of different podcast at a variety of different podcast at a variety of different levels. We have, for instance, the levels. We have, for instance, the levels. We have, for instance, the 5-HTP, which is in honor of serotonin. 5-HTP is which is in honor of serotonin. 5-HTP is which is in honor of serotonin. 5-HTP is the name for serotonin. That it allows the name for serotonin. That it allows the name for serotonin. That it allows you to donate $5 per month. We have the you to donate $5 per month. We have the you to donate $5 per month. We have the circadian, which, as many of you, of circadian, which, as many of you, of circadian, which, as many of you, of course, will know is 24-hour day. Uh so, course, will know is 24-hour day. Uh so, course, will know is 24-hour day. Uh so, you can donate $24 a month if you like. you can donate $24 a month if you like. you can donate $24 a month if you like. You can also pick any value that you You can also pick any value that you You can also pick any value that you want. We even have the Costello, want. We even have the Costello, want. We even have the Costello, which is $10 a month, which allows you which is $10 a month, which allows you which is $10 a month, which allows you to support the podcast in honor of to support the podcast in honor of to support the podcast in honor of Costello, the fact that he's 10 years Costello, the fact that he's 10 years Costello, the fact that he's 10 years old, that he eats 10 lb of food a day, old, that he eats 10 lb of food a day, old, that he eats 10 lb of food a day, and the fact that he takes 10 1-hour and the fact that he takes 10 1-hour and the fact that he takes 10 1-hour naps per day on average. So, again, naps per day on average. So, again, naps per day on average. So, again, that's patreon.com/andrewhuberman that's patreon.com/andrewhuberman that's patreon.com/andrewhuberman if you like to support the podcast that if you like to support the podcast that if you like to support the podcast that way. Today's episode is going to be all about Today's episode is going to be all about Today's episode is going to be all about the science of emotions. the science of emotions. the science of emotions. The first month of the podcast, we The first month of the podcast, we The first month of the podcast, we talked about sleep and wakefulness. talked about sleep and wakefulness. talked about sleep and wakefulness. Last month, we were talking about neural Last month, we were talking about neural Last month, we were talking about neural plasticity, the brain's ability to plasticity, the brain's ability to plasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. change in response to experience. change in response to experience. And this month, And this month, And this month, we're going to talk about these things we're going to talk about these things we're going to talk about these things that we call emotions. that we call emotions. that we call emotions. We're going to decipher what they are, We're going to decipher what they are, We're going to decipher what they are, how they work, how they work, how they work, how we can control them, when we might how we can control them, when we might how we can control them, when we might not want to control them. not want to control them. not want to control them. There are going to be four episodes on There are going to be four episodes on There are going to be four episodes on emotions. And today, we're going to talk in And today, we're going to talk in And today, we're going to talk in particular about something that most often is about something that most often is about something that most often is called stress. called stress. called stress. Now, you might be thinking, "Wait, Now, you might be thinking, "Wait, Now, you might be thinking, "Wait, stress isn't an emotion." stress isn't an emotion." stress isn't an emotion." But, stress really lies at the heart of But, stress really lies at the heart of But, stress really lies at the heart of whether or not our internal experience whether or not our internal experience whether or not our internal experience is matched well or not to our external is matched well or not to our external is matched well or not to our external experience or the events that are experience or the events that are experience or the events that are happening to us and around us. happening to us and around us. happening to us and around us. And, as you'll soon see, those converge And, as you'll soon see, those converge And, as you'll soon see, those converge or combine to create what we call or combine to create what we call or combine to create what we call emotions. Now, I want to be very clear that we're Now, I want to be very clear that we're Now, I want to be very clear that we're going to talk about the biology of going to talk about the biology of going to talk about the biology of emotions. We're going to talk a little emotions. We're going to talk a little emotions. We're going to talk a little bit about some psychological concepts bit about some psychological concepts bit about some psychological concepts related to emotion. related to emotion. related to emotion. And we are definitely going to talk And we are definitely going to talk And we are definitely going to talk about tools to control what we call about tools to control what we call about tools to control what we call stress or commonly think of as stress. stress or commonly think of as stress. stress or commonly think of as stress. We're also going to clean up some common We're also going to clean up some common We're also going to clean up some common myths about stress. For instance, that myths about stress. For instance, that myths about stress. For instance, that stress impairs your immune system. impairs your immune system. impairs your immune system. That's true in certain contexts. And in That's true in certain contexts. And in That's true in certain contexts. And in other contexts, stress actually enhances other contexts, stress actually enhances other contexts, stress actually enhances your immune system and makes it function your immune system and makes it function your immune system and makes it function better. There is going to be a lot of discussion about is going to be a lot of discussion about is going to be a lot of discussion about whether or not our internal state, whether or not our internal state, whether or not our internal state, whether or not we are alert or calm, is whether or not we are alert or calm, is whether or not we are alert or calm, is good or bad depending on the good or bad depending on the good or bad depending on the circumstances. So, circumstances. So, circumstances. So, where we're headed here is I'd like you where we're headed here is I'd like you where we're headed here is I'd like you to come away from today's episode with to come away from today's episode with to come away from today's episode with what I call an organizational logic, a what I call an organizational logic, a what I call an organizational logic, a framework for thinking about these framework for thinking about these framework for thinking about these things that typically we just call happy things that typically we just call happy things that typically we just call happy or sad or depressed or anxious. or sad or depressed or anxious. or sad or depressed or anxious. And I'm going to make sure that you have And I'm going to make sure that you have And I'm going to make sure that you have tools that are grounded in physiology tools that are grounded in physiology tools that are grounded in physiology and neuroscience that will allow you to and neuroscience that will allow you to and neuroscience that will allow you to navigate this otherwise complex space navigate this otherwise complex space navigate this otherwise complex space that we call emotions that will allow that we call emotions that will allow that we call emotions that will allow you to ground yourself better when you to ground yourself better when you to ground yourself better when you're feeling you're feeling you're feeling like life is weighing on you or you're like life is weighing on you or you're like life is weighing on you or you're kind of being pulled by the currents of kind of being pulled by the currents of kind of being pulled by the currents of life, as well as to support other people, as well as to support other people, as well as to support other people, whether or not that's in a psychological whether or not that's in a psychological whether or not that's in a psychological practice, if you're a if you're a practice, if you're a if you're a practice, if you're a if you're a practitioner, or you have clients or practitioner, or you have clients or practitioner, or you have clients or children or spouses, really to be able children or spouses, really to be able children or spouses, really to be able to support other people in your to support other people in your to support other people in your environment better. environment better. environment better. And the tools that I'm going to focus on And the tools that I'm going to focus on And the tools that I'm going to focus on today range from behavioral tools. We will range from behavioral tools. We will range from behavioral tools. We will talk about some of the more valuable talk about some of the more valuable talk about some of the more valuable supplementation tools that are out supplementation tools that are out supplementation tools that are out there. And we're going to talk a little bit And we're going to talk a little bit And we're going to talk a little bit about things like depression, PTSD, but about things like depression, PTSD, but about things like depression, PTSD, but we will be devoting entire episodes to we will be devoting entire episodes to we will be devoting entire episodes to things like depression, PTSD, and even things like depression, PTSD, and even things like depression, PTSD, and even attention deficit and attention deficit and attention deficit and obsessive-compulsive disorder, which obsessive-compulsive disorder, which obsessive-compulsive disorder, which believe it or not, believe it or not, believe it or not, although this might not surprise many of although this might not surprise many of although this might not surprise many of you have a very strong emotional you have a very strong emotional you have a very strong emotional component. It's just not just about component. It's just not just about component. It's just not just about compulsive behaviors and intrusive compulsive behaviors and intrusive compulsive behaviors and intrusive thoughts. It's also about the emotional thoughts. It's also about the emotional thoughts. It's also about the emotional load of being in that state. load of being in that state. load of being in that state. So, I promise that So, I promise that So, I promise that today we're going to clean up a lot of today we're going to clean up a lot of today we're going to clean up a lot of misunderstanding. We're going to give you a lot of tools We're going to give you a lot of tools We're going to give you a lot of tools and you're going to learn a lot about and you're going to learn a lot about and you're going to learn a lot about the biology of how your body and brain the biology of how your body and brain the biology of how your body and brain work together. Because if ever there was work together. Because if ever there was work together. Because if ever there was a topic that brought together the brain a topic that brought together the brain a topic that brought together the brain and body or mind-body relationship, and body or mind-body relationship, and body or mind-body relationship, it's stress and emotions. It's also the it's stress and emotions. It's also the it's stress and emotions. It's also the positive emotions. When we feel positive emotions. When we feel positive emotions. When we feel something, whether or not we're super something, whether or not we're super something, whether or not we're super happy or just feeling kind of pleasant happy or just feeling kind of pleasant happy or just feeling kind of pleasant or we are feeling stressed, anxious, and or we are feeling stressed, anxious, and or we are feeling stressed, anxious, and overwhelmed, it isn't just in our head, overwhelmed, it isn't just in our head, overwhelmed, it isn't just in our head, it's also in our body. it's also in our body. it's also in our body. And as you may recall, the nervous And as you may recall, the nervous And as you may recall, the nervous system, which includes the brain and the system, which includes the brain and the system, which includes the brain and the eyes and the spinal cord, but also all eyes and the spinal cord, but also all eyes and the spinal cord, but also all the connections with the organs of the connections with the organs of the connections with the organs of the body, includes the brain and body. And those includes the brain and body. And those includes the brain and body. And those organs of the body, organs of the body, organs of the body, your gut and your liver and your spleen, your gut and your liver and your spleen, your gut and your liver and your spleen, they're also communicating with the they're also communicating with the they're also communicating with the brain. So, I look forward to a day in fact when So, I look forward to a day in fact when So, I look forward to a day in fact when we no longer think about neuroscience as we no longer think about neuroscience as we no longer think about neuroscience as just the brain. And many neuroscientists just the brain. And many neuroscientists just the brain. And many neuroscientists now also think about the body, of now also think about the body, of now also think about the body, of course. The brain controls the body, but course. The brain controls the body, but course. The brain controls the body, but the body is also having a very profound the body is also having a very profound the body is also having a very profound and concrete influence on the brain. and concrete influence on the brain. and concrete influence on the brain. I think I think I think up until recently, up until recently, up until recently, people would hear about kind of people would hear about kind of people would hear about kind of brain-body and always think about brain-body and always think about brain-body and always think about mindfulness. We're actually not going to mindfulness. We're actually not going to mindfulness. We're actually not going to talk that much about mindfulness at all talk that much about mindfulness at all talk that much about mindfulness at all today. Mindfulness is kind of a vague today. Mindfulness is kind of a vague today. Mindfulness is kind of a vague concept, in fact. When you think about concept, in fact. When you think about concept, in fact. When you think about mindfulness, it's good to take the mindfulness, it's good to take the mindfulness, it's good to take the opposite. What's the opposite of opposite. What's the opposite of opposite. What's the opposite of mindfulness would be mindlessness. Well, mindfulness would be mindlessness. Well, mindfulness would be mindlessness. Well, all of a sudden we're into territory all of a sudden we're into territory all of a sudden we're into territory that isn't really easy for one person to that isn't really easy for one person to that isn't really easy for one person to describe their experience or to help describe their experience or to help describe their experience or to help others with their experience. Today, others with their experience. Today, others with their experience. Today, we're going to talk about objective we're going to talk about objective we're going to talk about objective tools that match the brain-body tools that match the brain-body tools that match the brain-body experience or separate the brain-body experience or separate the brain-body experience or separate the brain-body experience in ways that leverage your experience in ways that leverage your experience in ways that leverage your ability to lean into life better, to ability to lean into life better, to ability to lean into life better, to feel better, literally, to just feel better, literally, to just feel better, literally, to just feel better about what you're experiencing, better about what you're experiencing, better about what you're experiencing, and believe it or not, to be able to and believe it or not, to be able to and believe it or not, to be able to control your emotions when that's control your emotions when that's control your emotions when that's appropriate. This isn't about becoming appropriate. This isn't about becoming appropriate. This isn't about becoming robotic. This isn't about trying not to robotic. This isn't about trying not to robotic. This isn't about trying not to feel human. This is actually about being feel human. This is actually about being feel human. This is actually about being able to lean into life better able to lean into life better able to lean into life better as a consequence of being able to as a consequence of being able to as a consequence of being able to control some of your inner real estate. control some of your inner real estate. control some of your inner real estate. This nervous system that includes the This nervous system that includes the This nervous system that includes the brain and body, and how that nervous brain and body, and how that nervous brain and body, and how that nervous system is interacting with the outside system is interacting with the outside system is interacting with the outside world. So, it's to place you in a world. So, it's to place you in a world. So, it's to place you in a greater position of power, and so let's greater position of power, and so let's greater position of power, and so let's get started in deciphering what is get started in deciphering what is get started in deciphering what is stress, what are emotions, and why did I stress, what are emotions, and why did I stress, what are emotions, and why did I batch stress and emotions into one batch stress and emotions into one batch stress and emotions into one discussion today. discussion today. discussion today. Okay, so what is stress? We hear all the Okay, so what is stress? We hear all the Okay, so what is stress? We hear all the time that stress is bad. We hear people time that stress is bad. We hear people time that stress is bad. We hear people saying they're really stressed out. saying they're really stressed out. saying they're really stressed out. What is stress? What is stress? What is stress? You've all presumably heard the You've all presumably heard the You've all presumably heard the arguments or the framework that stress arguments or the framework that stress arguments or the framework that stress is this horrible ancient carryover from is this horrible ancient carryover from is this horrible ancient carryover from times in which humans were pursued by times in which humans were pursued by times in which humans were pursued by animals or other human predators, and animals or other human predators, and animals or other human predators, and that whenever we feel what we call that whenever we feel what we call that whenever we feel what we call stress or feel stressed out, that it's stress or feel stressed out, that it's stress or feel stressed out, that it's just this unfortunate invasion of just this unfortunate invasion of just this unfortunate invasion of something that we no longer need in something that we no longer need in something that we no longer need in modern life, that this was designed for modern life, that this was designed for modern life, that this was designed for when we were being attacked by bears or when we were being attacked by bears or when we were being attacked by bears or tigers or lions or whatever it is. tigers or lions or whatever it is. tigers or lions or whatever it is. And gosh, what an unfortunate thing. And gosh, what an unfortunate thing. And gosh, what an unfortunate thing. And we have so many creature comforts we have so many creature comforts we have so many creature comforts nowadays, but we have not eliminated nowadays, but we have not eliminated nowadays, but we have not eliminated this stress. Almost as if it was like an this stress. Almost as if it was like an this stress. Almost as if it was like an organ or a system in our body that was organ or a system in our body that was organ or a system in our body that was bad for us, that we're stuck with just bad for us, that we're stuck with just bad for us, that we're stuck with just because of the species that we are. because of the species that we are. because of the species that we are. But first of all, all species experience But first of all, all species experience But first of all, all species experience stress. And I think that it's fair to say, I think that it's fair to say, I think that it's fair to say, even though I wasn't there, that yes, in even though I wasn't there, that yes, in even though I wasn't there, that yes, in fact, throughout our evolutionary fact, throughout our evolutionary fact, throughout our evolutionary history, we were vulnerable to animal history, we were vulnerable to animal history, we were vulnerable to animal attack and other human attacks attack and other human attacks attack and other human attacks on a regular basis up until a point on a regular basis up until a point on a regular basis up until a point where we started developing, you know, where we started developing, you know, where we started developing, you know, weapons and structures and fire and weapons and structures and fire and weapons and structures and fire and other things that allow us to protect other things that allow us to protect other things that allow us to protect ourselves better from those animals and ourselves better from those animals and ourselves better from those animals and invaders of various kinds, but it is and invaders of various kinds, but it is and invaders of various kinds, but it is entirely naive for us to think that in entirely naive for us to think that in entirely naive for us to think that in ancient times ancient times ancient times ancient times being kind of loose term ancient times being kind of loose term ancient times being kind of loose term for previous time, medieval times, you know, previous time, medieval times, you know, previous time, medieval times, you know, 100 years ago, 1,000 years ago, 10,000 100 years ago, 1,000 years ago, 10,000 100 years ago, 1,000 years ago, 10,000 years ago. years ago. years ago. Of course, there were infidelities, Of course, there were infidelities, Of course, there were infidelities, right? Partners cheated. right? Partners cheated. right? Partners cheated. People died. In fact, before the advent People died. In fact, before the advent People died. In fact, before the advent of phones, which we're going to talk of phones, which we're going to talk of phones, which we're going to talk about today, about today, about today, you can imagine that someone might head you can imagine that someone might head you can imagine that someone might head off on a hunt or to go visit a relative off on a hunt or to go visit a relative off on a hunt or to go visit a relative and never come back and you would never and never come back and you would never and never come back and you would never know why. That would be very stressful. know why. That would be very stressful. know why. That would be very stressful. So, there was psychosocial stress. There So, there was psychosocial stress. There So, there was psychosocial stress. There was a stress of losing loved ones. There was a stress of losing loved ones. There was a stress of losing loved ones. There was the stress of cold, of famine. There was the stress of cold, of famine. There was the stress of cold, of famine. There was the stress probably also of just was the stress probably also of just was the stress probably also of just worry. This idea that you know, ancient worry. This idea that you know, ancient worry. This idea that you know, ancient versions of the of humans 1,000 years versions of the of humans 1,000 years versions of the of humans 1,000 years ago, 100 years ago didn't worry, I think ago, 100 years ago didn't worry, I think ago, 100 years ago didn't worry, I think that's that is entirely inconsistent that's that is entirely inconsistent that's that is entirely inconsistent with everything we know about the with everything we know about the with everything we know about the structure of the human brain 100 years, structure of the human brain 100 years, structure of the human brain 100 years, 1,000 years ago. So, all the problems 1,000 years ago. So, all the problems 1,000 years ago. So, all the problems that we're struggling with existed for that we're struggling with existed for that we're struggling with existed for ever. It's just that It's just that It's just that stress at its core is a generalized stress at its core is a generalized stress at its core is a generalized system. It wasn't designed for tiger system. It wasn't designed for tiger system. It wasn't designed for tiger tigers attacking us or people attacking tigers attacking us or people attacking tigers attacking us or people attacking us. It's a system to mobilize other us. It's a system to mobilize other us. It's a system to mobilize other systems in the brain and body. systems in the brain and body. systems in the brain and body. That's what stress really is. It's That's what stress really is. It's That's what stress really is. It's designed to be generic and that's the designed to be generic and that's the designed to be generic and that's the most important thing that I'd like you most important thing that I'd like you most important thing that I'd like you to understand today is that the system to understand today is that the system to understand today is that the system that governs what we call stress is that governs what we call stress is that governs what we call stress is generic. It wasn't designed for one thing. It wasn't designed for one thing. It wasn't designed for one thing. And that gives it a certain advantage in And that gives it a certain advantage in And that gives it a certain advantage in taking over our the state of our brain taking over our the state of our brain taking over our the state of our brain and body, but it also gives you, all of and body, but it also gives you, all of and body, but it also gives you, all of us, an advantage in controlling it us, an advantage in controlling it us, an advantage in controlling it because it's based on hardwired because it's based on hardwired because it's based on hardwired biological mechanisms biological mechanisms biological mechanisms and there are hardwired biological there are hardwired biological there are hardwired biological mechanisms, meaning cells and chemicals mechanisms, meaning cells and chemicals mechanisms, meaning cells and chemicals and pathways and tissues that exist in and pathways and tissues that exist in and pathways and tissues that exist in you right now you right now you right now that require no neural plasticity that require no neural plasticity that require no neural plasticity that allow you to put a break on stress. And allow you to put a break on stress. And allow you to put a break on stress. And so we're going to talk about those. so we're going to talk about those. so we're going to talk about those. So you have a system for stress and you So you have a system for stress and you So you have a system for stress and you have a system for destress that are have a system for destress that are have a system for destress that are baked into you. They were genetically baked into you. They were genetically baked into you. They were genetically encoded and they you were born with them encoded and they you were born with them encoded and they you were born with them and you still have them now. and you still have them now. and you still have them now. So if you're alive and listening you So if you're alive and listening you So if you're alive and listening you have the capacity to control your have the capacity to control your have the capacity to control your stress. And today I'm going to talk stress. And today I'm going to talk stress. And today I'm going to talk about ways that you can control your about ways that you can control your about ways that you can control your stress not just by doing some offline stress not just by doing some offline stress not just by doing some offline practice of meditation or breathwork or practice of meditation or breathwork or practice of meditation or breathwork or something like that, but real-time something like that, but real-time something like that, but real-time tools. Tools that allow you to push back tools. Tools that allow you to push back tools. Tools that allow you to push back on stress when stress hits in real time. on stress when stress hits in real time. on stress when stress hits in real time. You know, this is something that my lab You know, this is something that my lab You know, this is something that my lab works actively on in developing and works actively on in developing and works actively on in developing and testing these tools and evolving these testing these tools and evolving these testing these tools and evolving these tools. And there are other laboratories that And there are other laboratories that And there are other laboratories that have that do this as well. have that do this as well. have that do this as well. So let's talk about the stress response So let's talk about the stress response So let's talk about the stress response and by doing that you will understand and by doing that you will understand and by doing that you will understand exactly why the tools I'm going to give exactly why the tools I'm going to give exactly why the tools I'm going to give you work. For those of you that are you work. For those of you that are you work. For those of you that are saying, "Wait, I just want the tools. saying, "Wait, I just want the tools. saying, "Wait, I just want the tools. Just give me a summary." Just give me a summary." Just give me a summary." Trust me, if you understand mechanism, Trust me, if you understand mechanism, Trust me, if you understand mechanism, you are going to be in a far better you are going to be in a far better you are going to be in a far better position to incorporate these tools, to position to incorporate these tools, to position to incorporate these tools, to teach these tools to others, and to teach these tools to others, and to teach these tools to others, and to modify them as your life circumstances modify them as your life circumstances modify them as your life circumstances change. If you'd like the cheat sheet or change. If you'd like the cheat sheet or change. If you'd like the cheat sheet or you just want the one-page PDF, you just want the one-page PDF, you just want the one-page PDF, eventually we'll get that stuff out to eventually we'll get that stuff out to eventually we'll get that stuff out to people, but it's really important to people, but it's really important to people, but it's really important to understand the underlying mechanism. understand the underlying mechanism. understand the underlying mechanism. Okay, so what is stress? Well, let's Okay, so what is stress? Well, let's Okay, so what is stress? Well, let's just distinguish between stressors, just distinguish between stressors, just distinguish between stressors, which are the things that stress us out which are the things that stress us out which are the things that stress us out and stress, which is the psychological and stress, which is the psychological and stress, which is the psychological and physiological response to stressors. and physiological response to stressors. and physiological response to stressors. I'm mainly going to talk about stress, I'm mainly going to talk about stress, I'm mainly going to talk about stress, which is your response to things. which is your response to things. which is your response to things. Let's be clear about what we already Let's be clear about what we already Let's be clear about what we already know, which is that know, which is that know, which is that stressors can be psychological stressors can be psychological stressors can be psychological or they can be physical. or they can be physical. or they can be physical. Okay? If I put you outside on a cold day Okay? If I put you outside on a cold day Okay? If I put you outside on a cold day without a jacket for a very long time, without a jacket for a very long time, without a jacket for a very long time, that is stressful. that is stressful. that is stressful. If I have you prepare for too many exams If I have you prepare for too many exams If I have you prepare for too many exams at once and you can't balance it all at once and you can't balance it all at once and you can't balance it all with your sleep schedule and your other with your sleep schedule and your other with your sleep schedule and your other needs for comfort and well-being like needs for comfort and well-being like needs for comfort and well-being like food, rest, sleep, and social food, rest, sleep, and social food, rest, sleep, and social connection, that is stressful. connection, that is stressful. connection, that is stressful. So, stress, and as I mentioned before, So, stress, and as I mentioned before, So, stress, and as I mentioned before, is generic. It doesn't distinguish is generic. It doesn't distinguish is generic. It doesn't distinguish between physical and emotional stress. So, what physical and emotional stress. So, what physical and emotional stress. So, what happens when the stress response hits? happens when the stress response hits? happens when the stress response hits? Let's talk about the immediate or what Let's talk about the immediate or what Let's talk about the immediate or what we call the acute stress response. We we call the acute stress response. We we call the acute stress response. We could also think of this as short-term could also think of this as short-term could also think of this as short-term stress. So, you have a collection of neurons. They you have a collection of neurons. They you have a collection of neurons. They have a name. It's called the sympathetic have a name. It's called the sympathetic have a name. It's called the sympathetic chain ganglia, and it has nothing to do chain ganglia, and it has nothing to do chain ganglia, and it has nothing to do with sympathy. Sympa means together, and with sympathy. Sympa means together, and with sympathy. Sympa means together, and there is a group of neurons that start there is a group of neurons that start there is a group of neurons that start right about at your neck and run down to right about at your neck and run down to right about at your neck and run down to about your navel, a little bit lower, about your navel, a little bit lower, about your navel, a little bit lower, and those are called the sympathetic and those are called the sympathetic and those are called the sympathetic chain ganglia. You don't need to chain ganglia. You don't need to chain ganglia. You don't need to memorize that name. There will not be a memorize that name. There will not be a memorize that name. There will not be a quiz, but it's important to know that in quiz, but it's important to know that in quiz, but it's important to know that in the middle of your body, you have a the middle of your body, you have a the middle of your body, you have a chain of neurons that when something chain of neurons that when something chain of neurons that when something stresses us out either in our mind or stresses us out either in our mind or stresses us out either in our mind or because something enters our environment because something enters our environment because something enters our environment and we see something that stresses us and we see something that stresses us and we see something that stresses us out that we don't like heights if you're out that we don't like heights if you're out that we don't like heights if you're afraid of heights, somebody you dislike afraid of heights, somebody you dislike afraid of heights, somebody you dislike walks into the room, et cetera, that chain of neurons becomes activated that chain of neurons becomes activated that chain of neurons becomes activated like a bunch of dominoes falling like a bunch of dominoes falling like a bunch of dominoes falling all at once. It's very fast. all at once. It's very fast. all at once. It's very fast. When that happens, those neurons release When that happens, those neurons release When that happens, those neurons release a neuromodulator, a neurochemical that a neuromodulator, a neurochemical that a neuromodulator, a neurochemical that I've talked about before on this podcast I've talked about before on this podcast I've talked about before on this podcast called acetylcholine. They release that called acetylcholine. They release that called acetylcholine. They release that at various sites within the body. at various sites within the body. at various sites within the body. Now, this is important because normally Now, this is important because normally Now, this is important because normally acetylcholine would be used to move acetylcholine would be used to move acetylcholine would be used to move muscles. Actually, every time we move a muscles. Actually, every time we move a muscles. Actually, every time we move a muscle, pick up a cup of coffee, write muscle, pick up a cup of coffee, write muscle, pick up a cup of coffee, write with a pen, walk down the street, it's with a pen, walk down the street, it's with a pen, walk down the street, it's spinal neurons connecting to muscle and spinal neurons connecting to muscle and spinal neurons connecting to muscle and releasing acetylcholine. So, in the releasing acetylcholine. So, in the releasing acetylcholine. So, in the brain, it's involved in focus, and in brain, it's involved in focus, and in brain, it's involved in focus, and in muscles, it's involved in making muscles muscles, it's involved in making muscles muscles, it's involved in making muscles twitch. But, what if we were stressed, twitch. But, what if we were stressed, twitch. But, what if we were stressed, we wouldn't want all our muscles to we wouldn't want all our muscles to we wouldn't want all our muscles to contract at once because we would just contract at once because we would just contract at once because we would just be kind of like paralyzed like this. You be kind of like paralyzed like this. You be kind of like paralyzed like this. You know, in what tonic activation is know, in what tonic activation is know, in what tonic activation is it's called. We wouldn't want that. it's called. We wouldn't want that. it's called. We wouldn't want that. Something they call tetanus, believe it Something they call tetanus, believe it Something they call tetanus, believe it or not, because the tetanus toxin will or not, because the tetanus toxin will or not, because the tetanus toxin will cause that kind of rigor of the of the cause that kind of rigor of the of the cause that kind of rigor of the of the entire body. You do not want that. entire body. You do not want that. entire body. You do not want that. When those neurons are activated, When those neurons are activated, When those neurons are activated, acetylcholine is released, but there's acetylcholine is released, but there's acetylcholine is released, but there's some other neurons for the aficionados some other neurons for the aficionados some other neurons for the aficionados out there, they're called the out there, they're called the out there, they're called the postganglionic neurons. Those ones postganglionic neurons. Those ones postganglionic neurons. Those ones respond to that acetylcholine, and then respond to that acetylcholine, and then respond to that acetylcholine, and then they release epinephrine, which is the they release epinephrine, which is the they release epinephrine, which is the equivalent to adrenaline. equivalent to adrenaline. equivalent to adrenaline. So, we have this system where it's very So, we have this system where it's very So, we have this system where it's very fast. Whenever we're stressed, the core fast. Whenever we're stressed, the core fast. Whenever we're stressed, the core of our body, these neurons down the of our body, these neurons down the of our body, these neurons down the middle of our body, release these middle of our body, release these middle of our body, release these chemicals, and then there's adrenaline chemicals, and then there's adrenaline chemicals, and then there's adrenaline or epinephrine or epinephrine or epinephrine released at particular organs and acts released at particular organs and acts released at particular organs and acts in particular ways. We're going down in particular ways. We're going down in particular ways. We're going down into the weeds here, so just stay with into the weeds here, so just stay with into the weeds here, so just stay with me cuz it's going to make a lot of me cuz it's going to make a lot of me cuz it's going to make a lot of sense, and you will appreciate having sense, and you will appreciate having sense, and you will appreciate having this knowledge in hand. That epinephrine this knowledge in hand. That epinephrine this knowledge in hand. That epinephrine acts in two different ways. acts in two different ways. acts in two different ways. Some things like the muscles of your Some things like the muscles of your Some things like the muscles of your legs and your heart and other things legs and your heart and other things legs and your heart and other things that need to be active when you're that need to be active when you're that need to be active when you're stressed, they have a certain kind of receptor they have a certain kind of receptor they have a certain kind of receptor which is called the which is called the which is called the beta receptor. And that beta receptor beta receptor. And that beta receptor beta receptor. And that beta receptor responds to epinephrine, and blood responds to epinephrine, and blood responds to epinephrine, and blood vessels dilate, they get bigger, and vessels dilate, they get bigger, and vessels dilate, they get bigger, and blood rushes into our legs. The heart blood rushes into our legs. The heart blood rushes into our legs. The heart rate speeds up. Lots of things happen rate speeds up. Lots of things happen rate speeds up. Lots of things happen that get activated. And at the same that get activated. And at the same that get activated. And at the same time, that epinephrine activates other time, that epinephrine activates other time, that epinephrine activates other receptors on certain tissues that we don't need, on certain tissues that we don't need, on certain tissues that we don't need, the ones involved in digestion, the ones involved in digestion, the ones involved in digestion, reproduction, and things of that sort reproduction, and things of that sort reproduction, and things of that sort that are luxuries that are luxuries that are luxuries for when things are going well, not for when things are going well, not for when things are going well, not things to pay attention to when we're things to pay attention to when we're things to pay attention to when we're stressed, and that binds to other stressed, and that binds to other stressed, and that binds to other receptors that contract the blood receptors that contract the blood receptors that contract the blood vessels. So, basically, the stress vessels. So, basically, the stress vessels. So, basically, the stress response, this is the key phrase here, response, this is the key phrase here, response, this is the key phrase here, the stress response A is generic, I said the stress response A is generic, I said the stress response A is generic, I said that before, and B, that before, and B, that before, and B, it basically pushes certain systems to it basically pushes certain systems to it basically pushes certain systems to be activated and other systems to not be activated and other systems to not be activated and other systems to not be activated. So, the stress response is activated. So, the stress response is activated. So, the stress response is two-pronged. It It's a yes for certain two-pronged. It It's a yes for certain two-pronged. It It's a yes for certain things, and it's a no, you may not right things, and it's a no, you may not right things, and it's a no, you may not right now for other things. So, that's the key now for other things. So, that's the key now for other things. So, that's the key thing to understand about the stress thing to understand about the stress thing to understand about the stress response. That's why your heart speeds response. That's why your heart speeds response. That's why your heart speeds up. That's why you feel blood in certain up. That's why you feel blood in certain up. That's why you feel blood in certain organs and tissues of your body, but not organs and tissues of your body, but not organs and tissues of your body, but not in others. That's why your throat goes in others. That's why your throat goes in others. That's why your throat goes dry, because it turns out that when you dry, because it turns out that when you dry, because it turns out that when you get stressed, the salivary glands are get stressed, the salivary glands are get stressed, the salivary glands are shut down. There's a lot less blood flow shut down. There's a lot less blood flow shut down. There's a lot less blood flow to the neurons that control salivation, to the neurons that control salivation, to the neurons that control salivation, and so, you're going to start and so, you're going to start and so, you're going to start swallowing. You feel like your throat is swallowing. You feel like your throat is swallowing. You feel like your throat is getting dry. There are a lot of getting dry. There are a lot of getting dry. There are a lot of different effects. I'm not going to list different effects. I'm not going to list different effects. I'm not going to list them all off, but basically, you are them all off, but basically, you are them all off, but basically, you are activated in ways that support you activated in ways that support you activated in ways that support you moving. So, that's the third thing. It's moving. So, that's the third thing. It's moving. So, that's the third thing. It's First of all, it's generic. Second of First of all, it's generic. Second of First of all, it's generic. Second of all, the stress response activates all, the stress response activates all, the stress response activates certain things and shuts down other certain things and shuts down other certain things and shuts down other features of our body, and then, it's a features of our body, and then, it's a features of our body, and then, it's a sense of agitation that makes you want sense of agitation that makes you want sense of agitation that makes you want to move. And that's because, to move. And that's because, to move. And that's because, fundamentally, the stress response is fundamentally, the stress response is fundamentally, the stress response is just this generic thing that says, just this generic thing that says, just this generic thing that says, "Do something." And movement in this "Do something." And movement in this "Do something." And movement in this case can either be the bias to move in case can either be the bias to move in case can either be the bias to move in terms of action, or it can be the bias terms of action, or it can be the bias terms of action, or it can be the bias to say something. When we are stressed, to say something. When we are stressed, to say something. When we are stressed, we are more likely to say something that we are more likely to say something that we are more likely to say something that probably we shouldn't say. We are more probably we shouldn't say. We are more probably we shouldn't say. We are more likely to move, and if you're trying to likely to move, and if you're trying to likely to move, and if you're trying to suppress movement, you'll feel that as a suppress movement, you'll feel that as a suppress movement, you'll feel that as a tremor. You're going to feel agitated, tremor. You're going to feel agitated, tremor. You're going to feel agitated, and that's because it was designed to and that's because it was designed to and that's because it was designed to move you. move you. move you. So, this is important because if you So, this is important because if you So, this is important because if you want to control stress, you need to want to control stress, you need to want to control stress, you need to learn how to work with that agitation. learn how to work with that agitation. learn how to work with that agitation. I'd like to give you a tool at this I'd like to give you a tool at this I'd like to give you a tool at this point because point because point because I think if we go any further with a lot I think if we go any further with a lot I think if we go any further with a lot more science, people are going to begin more science, people are going to begin more science, people are going to begin to wonder if this is just going to be a to wonder if this is just going to be a to wonder if this is just going to be a kind of standard university lecture kind of standard university lecture kind of standard university lecture about the stress response. I'm going to about the stress response. I'm going to about the stress response. I'm going to give you more science about the stress give you more science about the stress give you more science about the stress response, but I want to take what we now response, but I want to take what we now response, but I want to take what we now already know about the stress response already know about the stress response already know about the stress response and use that and use that and use that as a framework for thinking about as a framework for thinking about as a framework for thinking about how one might reduce or even eliminate how one might reduce or even eliminate how one might reduce or even eliminate the stress response quickly in real time the stress response quickly in real time the stress response quickly in real time should it arise when we don't want it. should it arise when we don't want it. should it arise when we don't want it. So, we're taking the podium or we're So, we're taking the podium or we're So, we're taking the podium or we're sitting down at a Zoom call sitting down at a Zoom call sitting down at a Zoom call and all of a sudden we're feeling and all of a sudden we're feeling and all of a sudden we're feeling flushed. We're feeling like our heart is flushed. We're feeling like our heart is flushed. We're feeling like our heart is racing. We're feeling a little too racing. We're feeling a little too racing. We're feeling a little too alert. We're feeling a little worked up alert. We're feeling a little worked up alert. We're feeling a little worked up and we want to calm down. and we want to calm down. and we want to calm down. As far as I am aware of As far as I am aware of As far as I am aware of the best tools to reduce stress quickly the best tools to reduce stress quickly the best tools to reduce stress quickly so-called real-time tools are going to so-called real-time tools are going to so-called real-time tools are going to be tools that have a direct line to the be tools that have a direct line to the be tools that have a direct line to the so-called autonomic nervous system. The so-called autonomic nervous system. The so-called autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is a name autonomic nervous system is a name autonomic nervous system is a name given to given to given to the kind of general features of the kind of general features of the kind of general features of alertness or calmness in the body. It's alertness or calmness in the body. It's alertness or calmness in the body. It's typically it means automatic, although typically it means automatic, although typically it means automatic, although we do have some control over it at we do have some control over it at we do have some control over it at certain what so-called levers or entry certain what so-called levers or entry certain what so-called levers or entry points. Here's what doesn't work to control Here's what doesn't work to control Here's what doesn't work to control stress. Telling yourself to calm down. In fact, Telling yourself to calm down. In fact, Telling yourself to calm down. In fact, that tends to just exacerbate stress. that tends to just exacerbate stress. that tends to just exacerbate stress. Telling someone else to calm down also Telling someone else to calm down also Telling someone else to calm down also tends to exacerbate their stress. tends to exacerbate their stress. tends to exacerbate their stress. If you want to reduce the magnitude of If you want to reduce the magnitude of If you want to reduce the magnitude of the stress response the stress response the stress response the best thing you can do is activate the best thing you can do is activate the best thing you can do is activate the other system in the body which is the other system in the body which is the other system in the body which is designed for calming and relaxation. designed for calming and relaxation. designed for calming and relaxation. And that system is called the And that system is called the And that system is called the parasympathetic nervous system because parasympathetic nervous system because parasympathetic nervous system because as I mentioned before, the neurons that as I mentioned before, the neurons that as I mentioned before, the neurons that control stress run from about your neck control stress run from about your neck control stress run from about your neck to your navel. to your navel. to your navel. The parasympathetic neurons, para just The parasympathetic neurons, para just The parasympathetic neurons, para just means near, exist in they are the some means near, exist in they are the some means near, exist in they are the some of the cranial nerves. So, it's kind of the cranial nerves. So, it's kind of the cranial nerves. So, it's kind of let neck and lower brain stem, kind of let neck and lower brain stem, kind of let neck and lower brain stem, kind of back of the brain and in the neck, and back of the brain and in the neck, and back of the brain and in the neck, and in the pelvic area. in the pelvic area. in the pelvic area. And the parasympathetic nervous system And the parasympathetic nervous system And the parasympathetic nervous system is really is really is really because especially the cranial nerves, because especially the cranial nerves, because especially the cranial nerves, the ones that are up in the brain stem the ones that are up in the brain stem the ones that are up in the brain stem and in the neck area, those have a and in the neck area, those have a and in the neck area, those have a direct line to various features of your direct line to various features of your direct line to various features of your face, in particular the eyes. They face, in particular the eyes. They face, in particular the eyes. They control things like eye movements, pupil control things like eye movements, pupil control things like eye movements, pupil dilation, things of that sort, as well as the things of that sort, as well as the things of that sort, as well as the tongue, the facial muscles, et cetera. tongue, the facial muscles, et cetera. tongue, the facial muscles, et cetera. The parasympathetic nervous system, many The parasympathetic nervous system, many The parasympathetic nervous system, many people don't realize this, is the system people don't realize this, is the system people don't realize this, is the system by which we control the face and the by which we control the face and the by which we control the face and the eyes and to some extent our airway, the eyes and to some extent our airway, the eyes and to some extent our airway, the trachea. And it's these neurons that reside And it's these neurons that reside And it's these neurons that reside within the pelvic area. Now, the neurons within the pelvic area. Now, the neurons within the pelvic area. Now, the neurons within the pelvic area are involved in within the pelvic area are involved in within the pelvic area are involved in control of control of control of the genitals, the bladder, and the genitals, the bladder, and the genitals, the bladder, and the rectum. And those don't have a direct rectum. And those don't have a direct rectum. And those don't have a direct line. You don't have a direct way to line. You don't have a direct way to line. You don't have a direct way to control those. It actually has to go control those. It actually has to go control those. It actually has to go from brain to spinal cord and then out from brain to spinal cord and then out from brain to spinal cord and then out to those organs. Whereas the to those organs. Whereas the to those organs. Whereas the parasympathetic nervous system has parasympathetic nervous system has parasympathetic nervous system has certain entry points or what I'll call certain entry points or what I'll call certain entry points or what I'll call levers, right? That will allow you to levers, right? That will allow you to levers, right? That will allow you to push back on the stress response in real push back on the stress response in real push back on the stress response in real time and diminish it and feel more time and diminish it and feel more time and diminish it and feel more relaxed really quickly. So, I'm going to relaxed really quickly. So, I'm going to relaxed really quickly. So, I'm going to teach you the first tool now so I don't teach you the first tool now so I don't teach you the first tool now so I don't overwhelm you with all this academic overwhelm you with all this academic overwhelm you with all this academic knowledge without giving you something knowledge without giving you something knowledge without giving you something useful. And the tool that at least to my And the tool that at least to my And the tool that at least to my knowledge is the fastest and most knowledge is the fastest and most knowledge is the fastest and most thoroughly grounded in physiology and thoroughly grounded in physiology and thoroughly grounded in physiology and neuroscience for calming down in a neuroscience for calming down in a neuroscience for calming down in a self-directed way is what's called the self-directed way is what's called the self-directed way is what's called the physiological sigh. S I G H. Now, some physiological sigh. S I G H. Now, some physiological sigh. S I G H. Now, some of you might have heard me talk about of you might have heard me talk about of you might have heard me talk about this on previous podcast, but I'm going this on previous podcast, but I'm going this on previous podcast, but I'm going to explain this in the context of how to explain this in the context of how to explain this in the context of how respiration in general is used to calm respiration in general is used to calm respiration in general is used to calm us down. It turns out you're all doing us down. It turns out you're all doing us down. It turns out you're all doing this all the time, but you are doing it this all the time, but you are doing it this all the time, but you are doing it involuntarily. And when you stress, you involuntarily. And when you stress, you involuntarily. And when you stress, you tend to forget that you can also tend to forget that you can also tend to forget that you can also activate these systems voluntarily. This activate these systems voluntarily. This activate these systems voluntarily. This is an extremely powerful set of is an extremely powerful set of is an extremely powerful set of techniques that we know from techniques that we know from techniques that we know from scientific studies that have being done scientific studies that have being done scientific studies that have being done in my lab, Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, in my lab, Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, in my lab, Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, and others now and others now and others now that are very, very useful for reducing that are very, very useful for reducing that are very, very useful for reducing your stress response in real time. your stress response in real time. your stress response in real time. And here's how they work. These days And here's how they work. These days And here's how they work. These days there seems to be a lot of interest in there seems to be a lot of interest in there seems to be a lot of interest in breath work. Breath work typically is breath work. Breath work typically is breath work. Breath work typically is when you go and you sit down or you lie when you go and you sit down or you lie when you go and you sit down or you lie down and you deliberately breathe in a down and you deliberately breathe in a down and you deliberately breathe in a particular way for a series of minutes particular way for a series of minutes particular way for a series of minutes in order to shift your physiology, in order to shift your physiology, in order to shift your physiology, access some states, and it does have access some states, and it does have access some states, and it does have some utility that we're going to talk some utility that we're going to talk some utility that we're going to talk about. That is not what I'm talking about. That is not what I'm talking about. That is not what I'm talking about now. about now. about now. What I'm talking about when I refer to What I'm talking about when I refer to What I'm talking about when I refer to physiological size is the very real physiological size is the very real physiological size is the very real medical school textbook relationship medical school textbook relationship medical school textbook relationship between the brain, between the brain, between the brain, the body, the body, the body, and the body as it relates to the and the body as it relates to the and the body as it relates to the breathing apparatus, meaning the breathing apparatus, meaning the breathing apparatus, meaning the diaphragm and lungs, and the heart. diaphragm and lungs, and the heart. diaphragm and lungs, and the heart. Let's take the hallmark of the stress Let's take the hallmark of the stress Let's take the hallmark of the stress response. The heart starts beating response. The heart starts beating response. The heart starts beating faster. Blood is shuttled to the big faster. Blood is shuttled to the big faster. Blood is shuttled to the big muscles of the body to move you muscles of the body to move you muscles of the body to move you away from whatever it is the stressor is away from whatever it is the stressor is away from whatever it is the stressor is or just make you feel like you need to or just make you feel like you need to or just make you feel like you need to move or talk. Your face goes flushed, move or talk. Your face goes flushed, move or talk. Your face goes flushed, etc. Heart rate, many of us feel is Heart rate, many of us feel is Heart rate, many of us feel is involuntary. Just kind of functions involuntary. Just kind of functions involuntary. Just kind of functions whether or not we're moving fast or whether or not we're moving fast or whether or not we're moving fast or moving slow. If you think about it, it's moving slow. If you think about it, it's moving slow. If you think about it, it's not really not really not really purely autonomic because you can speed purely autonomic because you can speed purely autonomic because you can speed up your heart rate by running or you can up your heart rate by running or you can up your heart rate by running or you can slow it down by slowing down by slow it down by slowing down by slow it down by slowing down by your run. You can move to a walk or lie your run. You can move to a walk or lie your run. You can move to a walk or lie down, but that's indirect control. down, but that's indirect control. down, but that's indirect control. There is, however, a way in which you There is, however, a way in which you There is, however, a way in which you can breathe that directly controls your can breathe that directly controls your can breathe that directly controls your heart rate through heart rate through heart rate through the interactions between the sympathetic the interactions between the sympathetic the interactions between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system. and the parasympathetic nervous system. and the parasympathetic nervous system. Here's how it works. Here's how it works. Here's how it works. When you inhale, When you inhale, When you inhale, so whether or not it's through the nose so whether or not it's through the nose so whether or not it's through the nose or through the mouth, or through the mouth, or through the mouth, this skeletal muscle that's inside your this skeletal muscle that's inside your this skeletal muscle that's inside your body, called the diaphragm, body, called the diaphragm, body, called the diaphragm, it moves down and that's because the it moves down and that's because the it moves down and that's because the lungs expand, the diaphragm moves down. lungs expand, the diaphragm moves down. lungs expand, the diaphragm moves down. Your heart actually gets a little bit Your heart actually gets a little bit Your heart actually gets a little bit bigger in that expanded space. There's bigger in that expanded space. There's bigger in that expanded space. There's more space for the heart. So I'm not more space for the heart. So I'm not more space for the heart. So I'm not talking about your emotional heart talking about your emotional heart talking about your emotional heart getting bigger. I'm talking about your getting bigger. I'm talking about your getting bigger. I'm talking about your actual physical heart getting a little actual physical heart getting a little actual physical heart getting a little bit bigger. The volume grows. And as a bit bigger. The volume grows. And as a bit bigger. The volume grows. And as a consequence, whatever blood is in there consequence, whatever blood is in there consequence, whatever blood is in there is now at a lower volume or moving a is now at a lower volume or moving a is now at a lower volume or moving a little bit more slowly in that larger little bit more slowly in that larger little bit more slowly in that larger volume than it was a before you inhaled. volume than it was a before you inhaled. volume than it was a before you inhaled. Okay? So, more space, heart gets bigger, Okay? So, more space, heart gets bigger, Okay? So, more space, heart gets bigger, blood moves more slowly, and there's a blood moves more slowly, and there's a blood moves more slowly, and there's a little group of neurons called the little group of neurons called the little group of neurons called the sinoatrial node in the heart sinoatrial node in the heart sinoatrial node in the heart that registers its pay Believe it or that registers its pay Believe it or that registers its pay Believe it or not, those neurons pay attention to the not, those neurons pay attention to the not, those neurons pay attention to the rate of blood flow through the heart and rate of blood flow through the heart and rate of blood flow through the heart and send a signal up to the brain that blood send a signal up to the brain that blood send a signal up to the brain that blood is moving more slowly through the heart. is moving more slowly through the heart. is moving more slowly through the heart. The brain then sends a signal back to The brain then sends a signal back to The brain then sends a signal back to the heart to speed the heart up. So, the heart to speed the heart up. So, the heart to speed the heart up. So, what this means is if you want your what this means is if you want your what this means is if you want your heart to beat faster inhale longer heart to beat faster inhale longer heart to beat faster inhale longer inhale more vigorously more vigorously more vigorously than your exhales. than your exhales. than your exhales. Now, there are a variety of ways that Now, there are a variety of ways that Now, there are a variety of ways that one could do that, but it doesn't matter one could do that, but it doesn't matter one could do that, but it doesn't matter if it's through the nose or through the if it's through the nose or through the if it's through the nose or through the mouth. If your inhales are longer than mouth. If your inhales are longer than mouth. If your inhales are longer than your exhales, you're speeding up your exhales, you're speeding up your exhales, you're speeding up your heart. If your inhales are more vigorous, so If your inhales are more vigorous, so If your inhales are more vigorous, so even if your inhales are shorter than even if your inhales are shorter than even if your inhales are shorter than your exhales, you are speeding up your exhales, you are speeding up your exhales, you are speeding up your heart rate. heart rate. heart rate. Now, the opposite is also true. If you Now, the opposite is also true. If you Now, the opposite is also true. If you want to slow your heart rate down, so want to slow your heart rate down, so want to slow your heart rate down, so stress response hits, you want to slow stress response hits, you want to slow stress response hits, you want to slow your heart rate down. your heart rate down. your heart rate down. What you want to do is again capitalize What you want to do is again capitalize What you want to do is again capitalize on this relationship between the body, on this relationship between the body, on this relationship between the body, meaning the diaphragm and the heart, and meaning the diaphragm and the heart, and meaning the diaphragm and the heart, and the brain. Here's how it works. When you the brain. Here's how it works. When you the brain. Here's how it works. When you exhale the diaphragm moves up, which makes the diaphragm moves up, which makes the diaphragm moves up, which makes the heart a little bit smaller. It actually heart a little bit smaller. It actually heart a little bit smaller. It actually gets a little more compact. Blood flows gets a little more compact. Blood flows gets a little more compact. Blood flows more quickly through that compact space, more quickly through that compact space, more quickly through that compact space, sort of like a just a pipe getting sort of like a just a pipe getting sort of like a just a pipe getting smaller. The sinoatrial node registers that blood The sinoatrial node registers that blood The sinoatrial node registers that blood is going more quickly, sends a signal up is going more quickly, sends a signal up is going more quickly, sends a signal up to the brain, and the parasympathetic to the brain, and the parasympathetic to the brain, and the parasympathetic nervous system, some neurons in your nervous system, some neurons in your nervous system, some neurons in your brainstem, send a signal back to the brainstem, send a signal back to the brainstem, send a signal back to the heart to slow the heart down. heart to slow the heart down. heart to slow the heart down. So, if you want to calm down quickly, So, if you want to calm down quickly, So, if you want to calm down quickly, you need to make your exhales longer you need to make your exhales longer you need to make your exhales longer and or more vigorous than your inhales. and or more vigorous than your inhales. and or more vigorous than your inhales. Now, the reason this is so attractive as Now, the reason this is so attractive as Now, the reason this is so attractive as a tool for controlling stress is that a tool for controlling stress is that a tool for controlling stress is that it works in real time. This doesn't it works in real time. This doesn't it works in real time. This doesn't involve a practice that you have to go involve a practice that you have to go involve a practice that you have to go and sit there and do anything separate and sit there and do anything separate and sit there and do anything separate from life. And we are going to get to from life. And we are going to get to from life. And we are going to get to emotion emotions and stress happen in emotion emotions and stress happen in emotion emotions and stress happen in real time. And so while it's wonderful real time. And so while it's wonderful real time. And so while it's wonderful to have a breathwork practice or to have to have a breathwork practice or to have to have a breathwork practice or to have the opportunity to get a massage or sit the opportunity to get a massage or sit the opportunity to get a massage or sit in a sauna or do whatever it is that you in a sauna or do whatever it is that you in a sauna or do whatever it is that you do in order to set your stress controls do in order to set your stress controls do in order to set your stress controls in the right direction, having tools in the right direction, having tools in the right direction, having tools that you can reach to in real time that you can reach to in real time that you can reach to in real time that require no learning. I mean, I had to require no learning. I mean, I had to require no learning. I mean, I had to teach it to you. You had to learn that, teach it to you. You had to learn that, teach it to you. You had to learn that, but it doesn't require any plasticity to but it doesn't require any plasticity to but it doesn't require any plasticity to activate these pathways. So if you're activate these pathways. So if you're activate these pathways. So if you're feeling stressed, you still need to feeling stressed, you still need to feeling stressed, you still need to inhale of course, but you need to inhale of course, but you need to inhale of course, but you need to lengthen your exhales. lengthen your exhales. lengthen your exhales. Now, there's a tool that capitalizes on this there's a tool that capitalizes on this there's a tool that capitalizes on this in a kind of unique way, a kind of a in a kind of unique way, a kind of a in a kind of unique way, a kind of a twist, which is the physiological sigh. twist, which is the physiological sigh. twist, which is the physiological sigh. The physiological sigh was discovered in The physiological sigh was discovered in The physiological sigh was discovered in the '30s. It's now been explored at the '30s. It's now been explored at the '30s. It's now been explored at the neurobiological level and neurobiological level and neurobiological level and mechanistically in far more detail by mechanistically in far more detail by mechanistically in far more detail by Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, also Mark Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, also Mark Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, also Mark Krasnow's lab at Stanford. Krasnow's lab at Stanford. Krasnow's lab at Stanford. And the physiological sigh is something that the physiological sigh is something that the physiological sigh is something that humans and animals do anytime they are humans and animals do anytime they are humans and animals do anytime they are about to fall asleep. about to fall asleep. about to fall asleep. You also do it throughout sleep from You also do it throughout sleep from You also do it throughout sleep from time to time when carbon dioxide, which time to time when carbon dioxide, which time to time when carbon dioxide, which we'll talk about in a moment, builds up we'll talk about in a moment, builds up we'll talk about in a moment, builds up too much in your system. too much in your system. too much in your system. And the physiological sigh is something And the physiological sigh is something And the physiological sigh is something that people naturally start doing when that people naturally start doing when that people naturally start doing when they've been crying and they're trying they've been crying and they're trying they've been crying and they're trying to recover some air or calm down to recover some air or calm down to recover some air or calm down when they've been sobbing very hard or when they've been sobbing very hard or when they've been sobbing very hard or when they are in claustrophobic when they are in claustrophobic when they are in claustrophobic environments. However, environments. However, environments. However, the amazing thing about this thing that the amazing thing about this thing that the amazing thing about this thing that we call the diaphragm, the skeletal we call the diaphragm, the skeletal we call the diaphragm, the skeletal muscle, is that it's an internal organ muscle, is that it's an internal organ muscle, is that it's an internal organ that you can control voluntarily, unlike that you can control voluntarily, unlike that you can control voluntarily, unlike your spleen or your heart or your spleen or your heart or your spleen or your heart or your pancreas where you can't just say, your pancreas where you can't just say, your pancreas where you can't just say, "Oh, I want to make my pancreas turn out "Oh, I want to make my pancreas turn out "Oh, I want to make my pancreas turn out a little more insulin right now. I'm a little more insulin right now. I'm a little more insulin right now. I'm just going to do that with my mind just going to do that with my mind just going to do that with my mind directly." You can't do that. You could directly." You can't do that. You could directly." You can't do that. You could do that by smelling a really good donut do that by smelling a really good donut do that by smelling a really good donut or something, but you can't just do it or something, but you can't just do it or something, but you can't just do it directly. You can move your diaphragm You can move your diaphragm You can move your diaphragm intentionally, right? You can do it intentionally, right? You can do it intentionally, right? You can do it anytime you want and it'll run anytime you want and it'll run anytime you want and it'll run in the background if you're not thinking in the background if you're not thinking in the background if you're not thinking about it. So, this incredible pathway about it. So, this incredible pathway about it. So, this incredible pathway that goes from brain to diaphragm that goes from brain to diaphragm that goes from brain to diaphragm through what's called the phrenic nerve, through what's called the phrenic nerve, through what's called the phrenic nerve, p h r e n i c phrenic. The phrenic nerve p h r e n i c phrenic. The phrenic nerve p h r e n i c phrenic. The phrenic nerve innervates the diaphragm. You can innervates the diaphragm. You can innervates the diaphragm. You can control anytime you want. You can double control anytime you want. You can double control anytime you want. You can double up your inhales or triple up your up your inhales or triple up your up your inhales or triple up your inhales. You can exhale more than your inhales. You can exhale more than your inhales. You can exhale more than your inhales. Whatever you want to do. inhales. Whatever you want to do. inhales. Whatever you want to do. Such an incredible organ and the Such an incredible organ and the Such an incredible organ and the physiological sigh is something that we physiological sigh is something that we physiological sigh is something that we do spontaneously, but when you're do spontaneously, but when you're do spontaneously, but when you're feeling stressed, you can do a double feeling stressed, you can do a double feeling stressed, you can do a double inhale. Long exhale. Now, I just told you a Long exhale. Now, I just told you a Long exhale. Now, I just told you a minute ago that if you inhale more than minute ago that if you inhale more than minute ago that if you inhale more than you exhale, you're going to speed the you exhale, you're going to speed the you exhale, you're going to speed the heart rate up, which would promote more heart rate up, which would promote more heart rate up, which would promote more stress and activation. Now, I'm telling stress and activation. Now, I'm telling stress and activation. Now, I'm telling you to do a double inhale exhale in you to do a double inhale exhale in you to do a double inhale exhale in order to calm down. And the reason is order to calm down. And the reason is order to calm down. And the reason is the double inhale exhale, which is the double inhale exhale, which is the double inhale exhale, which is the physiological sigh, physiological sigh, physiological sigh, takes advantage of the fact that when we takes advantage of the fact that when we takes advantage of the fact that when we do a double inhale, even if the second do a double inhale, even if the second do a double inhale, even if the second inhale is sneaking in just a tiny bit inhale is sneaking in just a tiny bit inhale is sneaking in just a tiny bit more air, cuz it's kind of hard to get more air, cuz it's kind of hard to get more air, cuz it's kind of hard to get two deep inhales back to back. You do two deep inhales back to back. You do two deep inhales back to back. You do big deep inhale and then another little big deep inhale and then another little big deep inhale and then another little one sneaking it in. The little sacs in one sneaking it in. The little sacs in one sneaking it in. The little sacs in your lungs, the alveoli of the lungs. your lungs, the alveoli of the lungs. your lungs, the alveoli of the lungs. Your lungs aren't just two big bags, but Your lungs aren't just two big bags, but Your lungs aren't just two big bags, but you got millions of little sacs you got millions of little sacs you got millions of little sacs throughout the lungs that actually throughout the lungs that actually throughout the lungs that actually make the surface area of your lungs as make the surface area of your lungs as make the surface area of your lungs as big as a tennis court. It's amazing. If big as a tennis court. It's amazing. If big as a tennis court. It's amazing. If we were to just spread that out, what we were to just spread that out, what we were to just spread that out, what those tend to collapse those tend to collapse those tend to collapse as we get stressed and carbon di- carbon as we get stressed and carbon di- carbon as we get stressed and carbon di- carbon dioxide builds up in our bloodstream and dioxide builds up in our bloodstream and dioxide builds up in our bloodstream and that's one of the reasons we feel that's one of the reasons we feel that's one of the reasons we feel agitated as well. So, and it makes us agitated as well. So, and it makes us agitated as well. So, and it makes us very jittery. I mean, there's some other very jittery. I mean, there's some other very jittery. I mean, there's some other effects of carbon dioxide I don't want effects of carbon dioxide I don't want effects of carbon dioxide I don't want to get into, but when you do the double to get into, but when you do the double to get into, but when you do the double inhale exhale, the double inhale exhale, the double inhale exhale, the double inhale reinflates those little sacs of the reinflates those little sacs of the reinflates those little sacs of the lungs and then when you do the long lungs and then when you do the long lungs and then when you do the long exhale, that long exhale is now much more that long exhale is now much more that long exhale is now much more effective at ridding your body and effective at ridding your body and effective at ridding your body and bloodstream of carbon dioxide, which bloodstream of carbon dioxide, which bloodstream of carbon dioxide, which relaxes you very quickly. My lab, in relaxes you very quickly. My lab, in relaxes you very quickly. My lab, in collaboration with David Spiegel's lab, collaboration with David Spiegel's lab, collaboration with David Spiegel's lab, David's the associate chair of David's the associate chair of David's the associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford, are doing a psychiatry at Stanford, are doing a psychiatry at Stanford, are doing a study right now exploring how study right now exploring how study right now exploring how physiological sighs and other patterns physiological sighs and other patterns physiological sighs and other patterns of breathing done deliberately can of breathing done deliberately can of breathing done deliberately can modulate the stress response and other modulate the stress response and other modulate the stress response and other things related to emotionality. Those things related to emotionality. Those things related to emotionality. Those work are ongoing. I want to be clear work are ongoing. I want to be clear work are ongoing. I want to be clear those studies aren't done. But it's very those studies aren't done. But it's very those studies aren't done. But it's very clear from work in our labs, from work in Jack from work in our labs, from work in Jack from work in our labs, from work in Jack Feldman's lab, and others that the Feldman's lab, and others that the Feldman's lab, and others that the physiological sigh is the fastest physiological sigh is the fastest physiological sigh is the fastest hardwired way for us to eliminate this hardwired way for us to eliminate this hardwired way for us to eliminate this stressful response in our body quickly stressful response in our body quickly stressful response in our body quickly in real time. And so, I'm excited to in real time. And so, I'm excited to in real time. And so, I'm excited to give you this tool because I think most give you this tool because I think most give you this tool because I think most people have heard that mindfulness and people have heard that mindfulness and people have heard that mindfulness and meditation is good, exercise is good for meditation is good, exercise is good for meditation is good, exercise is good for us, we all need to be getting enough us, we all need to be getting enough us, we all need to be getting enough sleep, etc. But life happens. And when sleep, etc. But life happens. And when sleep, etc. But life happens. And when you find yourself in a position where you find yourself in a position where you find yourself in a position where you are more alert and activated than you are more alert and activated than you are more alert and activated than you would like to be, regardless of you would like to be, regardless of you would like to be, regardless of whether or not the stressor is whether or not the stressor is whether or not the stressor is relationship-based, or it's financial, relationship-based, or it's financial, relationship-based, or it's financial, or it's physical, or anything like that, or it's physical, or anything like that, or it's physical, or anything like that, you can look to the physiological sigh you can look to the physiological sigh you can look to the physiological sigh because it bypasses because it bypasses because it bypasses a very important feature of how we a very important feature of how we a very important feature of how we function, which is that it's very hard function, which is that it's very hard function, which is that it's very hard to control the mind with the mind, to control the mind with the mind, to control the mind with the mind, especially when we are in heightened states of when we are in heightened states of when we are in heightened states of activation. When we are very alert or activation. When we are very alert or activation. When we are very alert or very sleepy, it is very hard to use the very sleepy, it is very hard to use the very sleepy, it is very hard to use the so-called top-down mechanisms of so-called top-down mechanisms of so-called top-down mechanisms of intention and gratitude and all these intention and gratitude and all these intention and gratitude and all these things that are really powerful tools things that are really powerful tools things that are really powerful tools when we are not super activated and when we are not super activated and when we are not super activated and stressed, or not super tired. But when stressed, or not super tired. But when stressed, or not super tired. But when we are anywhere in the range of very we are anywhere in the range of very we are anywhere in the range of very alert and stressed to very sleepy, alert and stressed to very sleepy, alert and stressed to very sleepy, physiological sighs are a powerful way physiological sighs are a powerful way physiological sighs are a powerful way of bringing our level of so-called of bringing our level of so-called of bringing our level of so-called autonomic activation, which just means autonomic activation, which just means autonomic activation, which just means our level of alertness, down. And so, our level of alertness, down. And so, our level of alertness, down. And so, whether or not it's in line at the bank, whether or not it's in line at the bank, whether or not it's in line at the bank, or not you're wearing a mask or not you're wearing a mask or not you're wearing a mask nowadays, or you're not. Whatever I nowadays, or you're not. Whatever I nowadays, or you're not. Whatever I don't you know, whatever the conditions don't you know, whatever the conditions don't you know, whatever the conditions may be where you're at and your needs may be where you're at and your needs may be where you're at and your needs when you're feeling stressed the when you're feeling stressed the when you're feeling stressed the physiological sigh done just one to physiological sigh done just one to physiological sigh done just one to three times. So, it'll be double inhale, three times. So, it'll be double inhale, three times. So, it'll be double inhale, exhale, double inhale, exhale, maybe exhale, double inhale, exhale, maybe exhale, double inhale, exhale, maybe just two times will bring down your just two times will bring down your just two times will bring down your level of level of level of stress very, very fast. And as far as I stress very, very fast. And as far as I stress very, very fast. And as far as I know, it's the fastest way to accomplish know, it's the fastest way to accomplish know, it's the fastest way to accomplish that. An important note about the An important note about the An important note about the physiological sigh or exhale emphasized physiological sigh or exhale emphasized physiological sigh or exhale emphasized breathing for lowering the stress breathing for lowering the stress breathing for lowering the stress response. Many people Many people Many people worry that their heart rate does not worry that their heart rate does not worry that their heart rate does not come down fast enough. come down fast enough. come down fast enough. I want to tell you do not want your I want to tell you do not want your I want to tell you do not want your heart rate to reduce very fast. There's heart rate to reduce very fast. There's heart rate to reduce very fast. There's actually something called the vasovagal actually something called the vasovagal actually something called the vasovagal response where people will stand up or response where people will stand up or response where people will stand up or they'll get up in the middle of the they'll get up in the middle of the they'll get up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom and then all night to use the bathroom and then all night to use the bathroom and then all of a sudden they'll collapse, they'll of a sudden they'll collapse, they'll of a sudden they'll collapse, they'll faint. That's because the heart rate was That's because the heart rate was That's because the heart rate was reduced too much. Some people will see reduced too much. Some people will see reduced too much. Some people will see blood or they'll see something really blood or they'll see something really blood or they'll see something really troubling and stressful and they'll pass out. and stressful and they'll pass out. and stressful and they'll pass out. That's an over activation That's an over activation That's an over activation or an acceleration of the calming or an acceleration of the calming or an acceleration of the calming response. They're not so stressed that response. They're not so stressed that response. They're not so stressed that they kind of fall off the cliff of they kind of fall off the cliff of they kind of fall off the cliff of stress. They get so stressed that the rebound They get so stressed that the rebound They get so stressed that the rebound mechanism for calming themselves down mechanism for calming themselves down mechanism for calming themselves down goes too high, too fast. They calm down goes too high, too fast. They calm down goes too high, too fast. They calm down too fast and they collapse and faint. too fast and they collapse and faint. too fast and they collapse and faint. And so, be aware that if you're going to And so, be aware that if you're going to And so, be aware that if you're going to use the physiological sigh or exhale use the physiological sigh or exhale use the physiological sigh or exhale emphasized breathing to calm down emphasized breathing to calm down emphasized breathing to calm down that your heart rate will take about 20 that your heart rate will take about 20 that your heart rate will take about 20 to 30 seconds to come down to baseline. to 30 seconds to come down to baseline. to 30 seconds to come down to baseline. And you may need to repeat the And you may need to repeat the And you may need to repeat the physiological sigh a few times. So, physiological sigh a few times. So, physiological sigh a few times. So, that's an important that's an important that's an important note about the use of breathing to note about the use of breathing to note about the use of breathing to control levels of stress. control levels of stress. control levels of stress. The other thing is that The other thing is that The other thing is that when you decide to look to the body to when you decide to look to the body to when you decide to look to the body to control the mind control the mind control the mind it does something else that's very it does something else that's very it does something else that's very powerful. When you are stressed in your powerful. When you are stressed in your powerful. When you are stressed in your mind and body, so you're feeling really mind and body, so you're feeling really mind and body, so you're feeling really agitated, activated, and worried agitated, activated, and worried agitated, activated, and worried and you use a tool like the and you use a tool like the and you use a tool like the physiological sigh or exhale emphasized physiological sigh or exhale emphasized physiological sigh or exhale emphasized breathing you will notice that then your brain and you will notice that then your brain and you will notice that then your brain and your mind becomes more available for your mind becomes more available for your mind becomes more available for controlling the stress response and controlling the stress response and controlling the stress response and reacting to it, which is great because reacting to it, which is great because reacting to it, which is great because the sweet spot in life is to be the sweet spot in life is to be the sweet spot in life is to be provided you're not trying to sleep is provided you're not trying to sleep is provided you're not trying to sleep is to be alert and calm. And so that's the to be alert and calm. And so that's the to be alert and calm. And so that's the idea is to be alert and calm and to idea is to be alert and calm and to idea is to be alert and calm and to bring you back into that sort of plane bring you back into that sort of plane bring you back into that sort of plane of alertness. of alertness. of alertness. For those of you that have trouble For those of you that have trouble For those of you that have trouble sleeping or just relaxing through the sleeping or just relaxing through the sleeping or just relaxing through the day, the physiological sigh can be day, the physiological sigh can be day, the physiological sigh can be repeated for 10 15 cycles if you like. repeated for 10 15 cycles if you like. repeated for 10 15 cycles if you like. Some people find that it actually puts Some people find that it actually puts Some people find that it actually puts them to sleep. So if they lie down and them to sleep. So if they lie down and them to sleep. So if they lie down and they're reading and they do too many of they're reading and they do too many of they're reading and they do too many of these that actually can put them to these that actually can put them to these that actually can put them to sleep. And what you'll find is that most sleep. And what you'll find is that most sleep. And what you'll find is that most breath work protocols, the kind of stuff breath work protocols, the kind of stuff breath work protocols, the kind of stuff that's done away from real life that you that's done away from real life that you that's done away from real life that you set aside time and decide to do quote set aside time and decide to do quote set aside time and decide to do quote unquote breath work, unquote breath work, unquote breath work, most of that works such that if you're most of that works such that if you're most of that works such that if you're in doing inhales that are longer and in doing inhales that are longer and in doing inhales that are longer and more vigorous than exhales, it tends to more vigorous than exhales, it tends to more vigorous than exhales, it tends to be activating and alert you. If you're be activating and alert you. If you're be activating and alert you. If you're doing exhales that are longer and more doing exhales that are longer and more doing exhales that are longer and more vigorous than the inhales, it tends to vigorous than the inhales, it tends to vigorous than the inhales, it tends to put you to sleep. And many of the put you to sleep. And many of the put you to sleep. And many of the protocols that are out there from protocols that are out there from protocols that are out there from laboratories and that are on you know, laboratories and that are on you know, laboratories and that are on you know, populate the internet and wellness sites populate the internet and wellness sites populate the internet and wellness sites and whatnot, if it's exhale emphasized and whatnot, if it's exhale emphasized and whatnot, if it's exhale emphasized breathing, often times it's been used as breathing, often times it's been used as breathing, often times it's been used as a tool for trying to teach people to a tool for trying to teach people to a tool for trying to teach people to fall asleep. Physiological sigh is a fall asleep. Physiological sigh is a fall asleep. Physiological sigh is a little different. It's designed to be little different. It's designed to be little different. It's designed to be used in real time. Just think of it is used in real time. Just think of it is used in real time. Just think of it is just kind of in your kit of things that just kind of in your kit of things that just kind of in your kit of things that you can do as life uh happens and as you can do as life uh happens and as you can do as life uh happens and as you need to react to life. need to react to life. need to react to life. A note about nasal versus mouth A note about nasal versus mouth A note about nasal versus mouth breathing. There's a plethora of breathing. There's a plethora of breathing. There's a plethora of information out there now information out there now information out there now because of James Nestor's book Breath, because of James Nestor's book Breath, because of James Nestor's book Breath, the new science of a lost art, um which the new science of a lost art, um which the new science of a lost art, um which came out this last year, excellent book, came out this last year, excellent book, came out this last year, excellent book, as well as Jaws, which is from uh Sandra as well as Jaws, which is from uh Sandra as well as Jaws, which is from uh Sandra Kahn, Paul Ehrlich with a forward by uh Kahn, Paul Ehrlich with a forward by uh Kahn, Paul Ehrlich with a forward by uh Jared Diamond and Robert Sapolsky, um so Jared Diamond and Robert Sapolsky, um so Jared Diamond and Robert Sapolsky, um so a collection of people from Stanford, a collection of people from Stanford, a collection of people from Stanford, Jared Diamond's not at Stanford, but the Jared Diamond's not at Stanford, but the Jared Diamond's not at Stanford, but the rest are, and um some heavy hitters on rest are, and um some heavy hitters on rest are, and um some heavy hitters on that book, which is about the that book, which is about the that book, which is about the benefits of nasal breathing. And in benefits of nasal breathing. And in benefits of nasal breathing. And in many cases nasal breathing is more many cases nasal breathing is more many cases nasal breathing is more advantageous than mouth breathing for advantageous than mouth breathing for advantageous than mouth breathing for all sorts of things, cosmetic features all sorts of things, cosmetic features all sorts of things, cosmetic features of the face, especially in kids, of the face, especially in kids, of the face, especially in kids, um warding off infection, etc. um warding off infection, etc. um warding off infection, etc. With the physiological sigh, the best With the physiological sigh, the best With the physiological sigh, the best way to do it would be double inhale way to do it would be double inhale way to do it would be double inhale through the nose, exhale through the through the nose, exhale through the through the nose, exhale through the mouth, but if you can't and you can only mouth, but if you can't and you can only mouth, but if you can't and you can only do that through your mouth, just do it do that through your mouth, just do it do that through your mouth, just do it through your mouth. If you do want to do through your mouth. If you do want to do through your mouth. If you do want to do it all through your nose, do it through it all through your nose, do it through it all through your nose, do it through your nose. your nose. your nose. This anchors back to some underlying This anchors back to some underlying This anchors back to some underlying neurology or neuro- neuroscience. neurology or neuro- neuroscience. neurology or neuro- neuroscience. Um so, for those of you that want to Um so, for those of you that want to Um so, for those of you that want to know, you have two breathing centers, know, you have two breathing centers, know, you have two breathing centers, one that's involved in rhythmic one that's involved in rhythmic one that's involved in rhythmic breathing for inhales followed by breathing for inhales followed by breathing for inhales followed by exhales followed by inhales followed by exhales followed by inhales followed by exhales followed by inhales followed by exhales, the so-called pre-Bötzinger exhales, the so-called pre-Bötzinger exhales, the so-called pre-Bötzinger nucleus, named after a bottle of wine nucleus, named after a bottle of wine nucleus, named after a bottle of wine and discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA, and discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA, and discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA, and a nearby nucleus called the and a nearby nucleus called the and a nearby nucleus called the parafacial nucleus, also discovered by parafacial nucleus, also discovered by parafacial nucleus, also discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA. And the parafacial Jack Feldman at UCLA. And the parafacial Jack Feldman at UCLA. And the parafacial nucleus is involved in anytime you nucleus is involved in anytime you nucleus is involved in anytime you double up the inhales or double up the double up the inhales or double up the double up the inhales or double up the exhales. It was designed so that you exhales. It was designed so that you exhales. It was designed so that you could breathe while you're could breathe while you're could breathe while you're speaking, because you can't always go speaking, because you can't always go speaking, because you can't always go inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale when inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale when inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale when you're speaking. So, I tell you this not you're speaking. So, I tell you this not you're speaking. So, I tell you this not to overwhelm you with knowledge, but to overwhelm you with knowledge, but to overwhelm you with knowledge, but just know that when you double up your just know that when you double up your just know that when you double up your inhales or you double up your exhales, inhales or you double up your exhales, inhales or you double up your exhales, you're activating this parafacial you're activating this parafacial you're activating this parafacial nucleus, and it has other cool effects. nucleus, and it has other cool effects. nucleus, and it has other cool effects. Because it's located near the neurons Because it's located near the neurons Because it's located near the neurons that control the face, it also has a that control the face, it also has a that control the face, it also has a tendency to relax the jaw. There's some tendency to relax the jaw. There's some tendency to relax the jaw. There's some interplay between the neurons that interplay between the neurons that interplay between the neurons that control the speaking stuff and the stuff control the speaking stuff and the stuff control the speaking stuff and the stuff for your tongue. So, all of a sudden for your tongue. So, all of a sudden for your tongue. So, all of a sudden when we do this physiological sigh, we when we do this physiological sigh, we when we do this physiological sigh, we tap into neural circuitry that allows us tap into neural circuitry that allows us tap into neural circuitry that allows us to speak more clearly, to speak more clearly, to speak more clearly, to control the muscles of the face and to control the muscles of the face and to control the muscles of the face and jaw. Maybe that means not saying certain jaw. Maybe that means not saying certain jaw. Maybe that means not saying certain things when we're stressed. things when we're stressed. things when we're stressed. And just generally to relax. And just generally to relax. And just generally to relax. And so, this brings us back to the And so, this brings us back to the And so, this brings us back to the neuroscience of this parasympathetic neuroscience of this parasympathetic neuroscience of this parasympathetic nervous system, this calming system in nervous system, this calming system in nervous system, this calming system in that's been genetically encoded into us that's been genetically encoded into us that's been genetically encoded into us that we all have regardless of who our that we all have regardless of who our that we all have regardless of who our parents are, which is that the neurons parents are, which is that the neurons parents are, which is that the neurons that control all this stuff, the face, that control all this stuff, the face, that control all this stuff, the face, the eyes, etc., the eyes, etc., the eyes, etc., are all working together. are all working together. are all working together. And that's why when we get stressed, And that's why when we get stressed, And that's why when we get stressed, it's hard for us to speak or we tend to it's hard for us to speak or we tend to it's hard for us to speak or we tend to jitter and these kinds of things. Just jitter and these kinds of things. Just jitter and these kinds of things. Just like all the neurons that cause stress like all the neurons that cause stress like all the neurons that cause stress in the center of the spinal cord are in the center of the spinal cord are in the center of the spinal cord are working together to get our body working together to get our body working together to get our body activated. Okay, a lot of science today. You've now Okay, a lot of science today. You've now Okay, a lot of science today. You've now got the physiological sigh as a tool. got the physiological sigh as a tool. got the physiological sigh as a tool. You know that exhale emphasized You know that exhale emphasized You know that exhale emphasized breathing will slow your heart down and breathing will slow your heart down and breathing will slow your heart down and inhale emphasized breathing will speed inhale emphasized breathing will speed inhale emphasized breathing will speed your heart up. So, let's think about your heart up. So, let's think about your heart up. So, let's think about something now. Let's think about stress something now. Let's think about stress something now. Let's think about stress from not whether or not it's acute or from not whether or not it's acute or from not whether or not it's acute or chronic, whether or not it's good for us chronic, whether or not it's good for us chronic, whether or not it's good for us or bad for us, but on three different or bad for us, but on three different or bad for us, but on three different time scales because then we can arrive time scales because then we can arrive time scales because then we can arrive at what this is all about as it relates at what this is all about as it relates at what this is all about as it relates to emotions because trust me, this has to emotions because trust me, this has to emotions because trust me, this has everything to do with emotions and everything to do with emotions and everything to do with emotions and whether or not you're functioning well whether or not you're functioning well whether or not you're functioning well emotionally or you're not functioning emotionally or you're not functioning emotionally or you're not functioning well emotionally, whether or not you're well emotionally, whether or not you're well emotionally, whether or not you're coping or not coping. So, those are coping or not coping. So, those are coping or not coping. So, those are typically psychological terms and typically psychological terms and typically psychological terms and psychological discussions. We are psychological discussions. We are psychological discussions. We are entering this through the portal of entering this through the portal of entering this through the portal of physiology, the stuff of medical physiology, the stuff of medical physiology, the stuff of medical textbooks, and we will arrive at the textbooks, and we will arrive at the textbooks, and we will arrive at the psychology soon, but I really want you psychology soon, but I really want you psychology soon, but I really want you to understand the difference between the to understand the difference between the to understand the difference between the three kinds of stress on three different three kinds of stress on three different three kinds of stress on three different time scales, short-term, medium-term, time scales, short-term, medium-term, time scales, short-term, medium-term, and long-term, and what it's good for and long-term, and what it's good for and long-term, and what it's good for and what it's bad for. I think we've all and what it's bad for. I think we've all and what it's bad for. I think we've all heard that stress is bad for us. We've heard that stress is bad for us. We've heard that stress is bad for us. We've seen these seen these seen these pictures intended to frighten us and pictures intended to frighten us and pictures intended to frighten us and indeed they are frightening. You see the indeed they are frightening. You see the indeed they are frightening. You see the nice, really plump brain on the left nice, really plump brain on the left nice, really plump brain on the left that says healthy or control and then that says healthy or control and then that says healthy or control and then you see the brain that says stressed above see the brain that says stressed above see the brain that says stressed above it on the right and then it's like it on the right and then it's like it on the right and then it's like withered or we see that the hippocampus, withered or we see that the hippocampus, withered or we see that the hippocampus, an area involved in memory, is smaller an area involved in memory, is smaller an area involved in memory, is smaller people that are stressed. We see that people that are stressed. We see that people that are stressed. We see that the Alzheimer's brain is made worse by the Alzheimer's brain is made worse by the Alzheimer's brain is made worse by stress, that people who have a stress, that people who have a stress, that people who have a predisposition to schizophrenia when predisposition to schizophrenia when predisposition to schizophrenia when they get stressed, higher incidence of they get stressed, higher incidence of they get stressed, higher incidence of schizophrenic episodes. schizophrenic episodes. schizophrenic episodes. You hear that addicts will relapse when You hear that addicts will relapse when You hear that addicts will relapse when they're stressed. I mean, okay, we get they're stressed. I mean, okay, we get they're stressed. I mean, okay, we get it. And it's very important, but I think And it's very important, but I think And it's very important, but I think we've all heard now so many times that we've all heard now so many times that we've all heard now so many times that stress is bad, stress is bad, stress is bad, but in that conversation, unfortunately, but in that conversation, unfortunately, but in that conversation, unfortunately, it's eclipsed some of the really it's eclipsed some of the really it's eclipsed some of the really positive things that stress does for us positive things that stress does for us positive things that stress does for us in the short-term. in the short-term. in the short-term. So, stress can be short-term, So, stress can be short-term, So, stress can be short-term, medium-term, or long-term. Long-term medium-term, or long-term. Long-term medium-term, or long-term. Long-term stress is indeed bad for all the reasons stress is indeed bad for all the reasons stress is indeed bad for all the reasons I just mentioned and many others. I just mentioned and many others. I just mentioned and many others. But, what's never actually been But, what's never actually been But, what's never actually been discussed is discussed is discussed is what stress is so terrific for, positive what stress is so terrific for, positive what stress is so terrific for, positive for in the short-term and in the short-term and in the short-term and I think we tend to overlook the I think we tend to overlook the I think we tend to overlook the important question, which is what is important question, which is what is important question, which is what is short-term and what is long-term. No one short-term and what is long-term. No one short-term and what is long-term. No one ever bothers to tell us what is chronic, ever bothers to tell us what is chronic, ever bothers to tell us what is chronic, what is acute, right? Is it 5 minutes? what is acute, right? Is it 5 minutes? what is acute, right? Is it 5 minutes? Is it 5 days? Is it for the duration of Is it 5 days? Is it for the duration of Is it 5 days? Is it for the duration of final exams or is it for the duration of final exams or is it for the duration of final exams or is it for the duration of a senior thesis in college? No one No a senior thesis in college? No one No a senior thesis in college? No one No one actually draws boundaries around the one actually draws boundaries around the one actually draws boundaries around the stuff or even general guidelines. And stuff or even general guidelines. And stuff or even general guidelines. And so, it's become a bit of a mess, frankly, to it's become a bit of a mess, frankly, to it's become a bit of a mess, frankly, to try and decipher this whole space around try and decipher this whole space around try and decipher this whole space around stress. So, I'm going to try and clean stress. So, I'm going to try and clean stress. So, I'm going to try and clean some of this up for you based on what we some of this up for you based on what we some of this up for you based on what we know from the scientific data. know from the scientific data. know from the scientific data. First of all, First of all, First of all, acute stress, when the stress response acute stress, when the stress response acute stress, when the stress response hits, that is good for your immune hits, that is good for your immune hits, that is good for your immune system. I know that might be a tough system. I know that might be a tough system. I know that might be a tough pill to swallow, but it's absolutely pill to swallow, but it's absolutely pill to swallow, but it's absolutely true. In fact, In fact, In fact, stress often comes in the form of stress often comes in the form of stress often comes in the form of bacterial or viral infection. bacterial or viral infection. bacterial or viral infection. And the stress response And the stress response And the stress response is in part organized to combat bacterial is in part organized to combat bacterial is in part organized to combat bacterial and viral infection. There are pathways and viral infection. There are pathways and viral infection. There are pathways from the same brain centers that from the same brain centers that from the same brain centers that activate these uh neurons in your in activate these uh neurons in your in activate these uh neurons in your in your spinal cord to make you feel like your spinal cord to make you feel like your spinal cord to make you feel like you want to move. you want to move. you want to move. There are other neurons in your brain There are other neurons in your brain There are other neurons in your brain that activate things like your spleen, that activate things like your spleen, that activate things like your spleen, which will deploy killer cells to go out which will deploy killer cells to go out which will deploy killer cells to go out and scavenge for incoming bacteria and scavenge for incoming bacteria and scavenge for incoming bacteria and viruses and try and viruses and try and viruses and try and eat them up and kill them. eat them up and kill them. eat them up and kill them. So, short-term stress So, short-term stress So, short-term stress and the release of adrenaline in and the release of adrenaline in and the release of adrenaline in particular or epinephrine, same thing, particular or epinephrine, same thing, particular or epinephrine, same thing, adrenaline, epinephrine, is good for adrenaline, epinephrine, is good for adrenaline, epinephrine, is good for combating infection. And this to me is just not discussed And this to me is just not discussed And this to me is just not discussed enough, so that's why I'm discussing it enough, so that's why I'm discussing it enough, so that's why I'm discussing it here. And it relates to a particular here. And it relates to a particular here. And it relates to a particular tool that many of you ask about, tool that many of you ask about, tool that many of you ask about, but I don't often get the opportunity to I don't often get the opportunity to I don't often get the opportunity to talk about in such an appropriate talk about in such an appropriate talk about in such an appropriate context. It's not that it's ever context. It's not that it's ever context. It's not that it's ever inappropriate to talk about, but what inappropriate to talk about, but what inappropriate to talk about, but what I'm about to talk about now is the use I'm about to talk about now is the use I'm about to talk about now is the use of, again, respiration, breathing, of, again, respiration, breathing, of, again, respiration, breathing, to somewhat artificially activate the somewhat artificially activate the somewhat artificially activate the stress response, and that will stress response, and that will stress response, and that will accomplish two things, okay? I'll return accomplish two things, okay? I'll return accomplish two things, okay? I'll return to medium and long-term stress, but I to medium and long-term stress, but I to medium and long-term stress, but I want to say short-term stress is good want to say short-term stress is good want to say short-term stress is good because the dilation of the pupils, the because the dilation of the pupils, the because the dilation of the pupils, the changes in the optics of the eyes, the changes in the optics of the eyes, the changes in the optics of the eyes, the quickening of the heart rate, the quickening of the heart rate, the quickening of the heart rate, the sharpening of your cognition, and in sharpening of your cognition, and in sharpening of your cognition, and in fact, that short-term stress brings fact, that short-term stress brings fact, that short-term stress brings certain elements of the brain online certain elements of the brain online certain elements of the brain online that allow you to focus. Now, it narrows that allow you to focus. Now, it narrows that allow you to focus. Now, it narrows your focus. You're not good at seeing your focus. You're not good at seeing your focus. You're not good at seeing the so-called big picture, but it the so-called big picture, but it the so-called big picture, but it narrows your focus. It allows you to do narrows your focus. It allows you to do narrows your focus. It allows you to do these what I call duration path outcome these what I call duration path outcome these what I call duration path outcome types of analysis. It allows you to types of analysis. It allows you to types of analysis. It allows you to evaluate your environment, evaluate what evaluate your environment, evaluate what evaluate your environment, evaluate what you need to do. It primes your whole you need to do. It primes your whole you need to do. It primes your whole system for better cognition. system for better cognition. system for better cognition. It primes your immune system to combat It primes your immune system to combat It primes your immune system to combat infection, and that all makes sense when infection, and that all makes sense when infection, and that all makes sense when you think about the fact that famine, you think about the fact that famine, you think about the fact that famine, thirst, bacterial infections, viral infections, bacterial infections, viral infections, bacterial infections, viral infections, invaders, all of this stuff liberates a invaders, all of this stuff liberates a invaders, all of this stuff liberates a response in the body that's designed to response in the body that's designed to response in the body that's designed to get you to fight back about against get you to fight back about against get you to fight back about against whatever stressor that happens to be, whatever stressor that happens to be, whatever stressor that happens to be, psychological, physical, bacterial, psychological, physical, bacterial, psychological, physical, bacterial, viral. Again, the stress response is viral. Again, the stress response is viral. Again, the stress response is generic. The tool The tool The tool takes advantage of the fact that when takes advantage of the fact that when takes advantage of the fact that when adrenaline is released in the body adrenaline is released in the body adrenaline is released in the body from the adrenals, it has the effect of from the adrenals, it has the effect of from the adrenals, it has the effect of also liberating a lot of these killer also liberating a lot of these killer also liberating a lot of these killer cells from the immune organs, cells from the immune organs, cells from the immune organs, in particular from the spleen, but from in particular from the spleen, but from in particular from the spleen, but from elsewhere as well, and interactions with elsewhere as well, and interactions with elsewhere as well, and interactions with the lymphatic system, that combat the lymphatic system, that combat the lymphatic system, that combat infection. The way this works in the real world is The way this works in the real world is The way this works in the real world is best captured by a study that can be best captured by a study that can be best captured by a study that can be mapped back to so-called Wim Hof mapped back to so-called Wim Hof mapped back to so-called Wim Hof breathing. Now, Wim Hof breathing is so breathing. Now, Wim Hof breathing is so breathing. Now, Wim Hof breathing is so named after the so-called Iceman Wim named after the so-called Iceman Wim named after the so-called Iceman Wim Hof. Wim, of course, being this uh Dutch he I Wim, of course, being this uh Dutch he I Wim, of course, being this uh Dutch he I think he his self-titled daredevil. And think he his self-titled daredevil. And think he his self-titled daredevil. And indeed, he has many, many Guinness uh indeed, he has many, many Guinness uh indeed, he has many, many Guinness uh Book of World Records for things like Book of World Records for things like Book of World Records for things like swimming under icebergs and going up swimming under icebergs and going up swimming under icebergs and going up Kilimanjaro in his shorts and um Kilimanjaro in his shorts and um Kilimanjaro in his shorts and um crossing the desert um you know, without crossing the desert um you know, without crossing the desert um you know, without water, etc. Things that um are quite water, etc. Things that um are quite water, etc. Things that um are quite dangerous if you don't know what you're dangerous if you don't know what you're dangerous if you don't know what you're doing. Um and Wim obviously uh survived doing. Um and Wim obviously uh survived doing. Um and Wim obviously uh survived or I'm telling you he survived. or I'm telling you he survived. or I'm telling you he survived. But, there are two components to a sort But, there are two components to a sort But, there are two components to a sort of breathing protocol that he developed of breathing protocol that he developed of breathing protocol that he developed that was based also on what's called that was based also on what's called that was based also on what's called tummo breathing, t u m o. So, before tummo breathing, t u m o. So, before tummo breathing, t u m o. So, before Wim, there was tummo breathing. And many Wim, there was tummo breathing. And many Wim, there was tummo breathing. And many people call this now super oxygenation people call this now super oxygenation people call this now super oxygenation breathing, although the breath work breathing, although the breath work breathing, although the breath work aficionados will probably say, "Well, aficionados will probably say, "Well, aficionados will probably say, "Well, it's not super oxygenation cuz you're it's not super oxygenation cuz you're it's not super oxygenation cuz you're also blowing a lot awful lot of carbon also blowing a lot awful lot of carbon also blowing a lot awful lot of carbon dioxide." What I'm talking about here, dioxide." What I'm talking about here, dioxide." What I'm talking about here, regardless of whether or not it's called regardless of whether or not it's called regardless of whether or not it's called Wim Hof, tummo, or super oxygenation, is Wim Hof, tummo, or super oxygenation, is Wim Hof, tummo, or super oxygenation, is rapid, deliberate breathing. So, it's deliberate breathing. So, it's deliberate breathing. So, it's deliberate hyperventilation. deliberate hyperventilation. deliberate hyperventilation. Why would somebody want to do this? Why would somebody want to do this? Why would somebody want to do this? Well, deliberate hyperventilation done for deliberate hyperventilation done for deliberate hyperventilation done for maybe 25 cycles. So, inhale, exhale, maybe 25 cycles. So, inhale, exhale, maybe 25 cycles. So, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. Typically, it's done in through the Typically, it's done in through the Typically, it's done in through the nose, out through the mouth, although nose, out through the mouth, although nose, out through the mouth, although sometimes it's um just through the sometimes it's um just through the sometimes it's um just through the mouth. If you do that mouth. If you do that mouth. If you do that for 15 breaths, 20 breaths, 25 breaths, you 15 breaths, 20 breaths, 25 breaths, you 15 breaths, 20 breaths, 25 breaths, you will feel very alert. People who have will feel very alert. People who have will feel very alert. People who have anxiety will feel anxious. They might anxiety will feel anxious. They might anxiety will feel anxious. They might even have an anxiety attack. even have an anxiety attack. even have an anxiety attack. However, we need to ask why that kind of we need to ask why that kind of we need to ask why that kind of breathing feels that way. And it's breathing feels that way. And it's breathing feels that way. And it's because that pattern of breathing, rapid because that pattern of breathing, rapid because that pattern of breathing, rapid movements of the diaphragm, movements of the diaphragm, movements of the diaphragm, will liberate adrenaline from the will liberate adrenaline from the will liberate adrenaline from the adrenals. So, it's the release of adrenals. So, it's the release of adrenals. So, it's the release of adrenaline. I mentioned that Wim is also called the I mentioned that Wim is also called the I mentioned that Wim is also called the Iceman. Well, that's because he actually Iceman. Well, that's because he actually Iceman. Well, that's because he actually discovered this pattern of breathing discovered this pattern of breathing discovered this pattern of breathing somewhat. And again, it maps back to tummo And again, it maps back to tummo And again, it maps back to tummo breathing by going into cold water. When you go by going into cold water. When you go by going into cold water. When you go cold water, that too is a stressor and cold water, that too is a stressor and cold water, that too is a stressor and you liberate adrenaline in response to you liberate adrenaline in response to you liberate adrenaline in response to cold water. So, if you get into an ice cold water. So, if you get into an ice cold water. So, if you get into an ice bath or a cold shower, you will bath or a cold shower, you will bath or a cold shower, you will immediately release adrenaline from your immediately release adrenaline from your immediately release adrenaline from your adrenals. Now, there are all sorts of things Now, there are all sorts of things Now, there are all sorts of things related to this about psychological related to this about psychological related to this about psychological control and stress thresholds that we'll control and stress thresholds that we'll control and stress thresholds that we'll talk about. But, I really want people to talk about. But, I really want people to talk about. But, I really want people to understand that when adrenaline is understand that when adrenaline is understand that when adrenaline is released in the body, you are in a released in the body, you are in a released in the body, you are in a better position to combat infections. better position to combat infections. better position to combat infections. And so, whether or not you breathe very And so, whether or not you breathe very And so, whether or not you breathe very quickly in these cycles of 25 breaths, quickly in these cycles of 25 breaths, quickly in these cycles of 25 breaths, and regardless of what you call it, and regardless of what you call it, and regardless of what you call it, doesn't matter, adrenaline is released. doesn't matter, adrenaline is released. doesn't matter, adrenaline is released. If you take a cold shower, adrenaline is If you take a cold shower, adrenaline is If you take a cold shower, adrenaline is released. If you go into an ice bath released. If you go into an ice bath released. If you go into an ice bath deliberately, and deliberately, and deliberately, and even if you do it non-deliberately, even if you do it non-deliberately, even if you do it non-deliberately, adrenaline is released. You are adrenaline is released. You are adrenaline is released. You are mimicking the stress response, and that mimicking the stress response, and that mimicking the stress response, and that adrenaline serves to suppress serves to suppress serves to suppress or combat or combat or combat incoming infections. And this was incoming infections. And this was incoming infections. And this was beautifully shown in a study that was beautifully shown in a study that was beautifully shown in a study that was published in a very fine journal, the published in a very fine journal, the published in a very fine journal, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Proceedings of the National Academy of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences for the US. Sciences for the US. Sciences for the US. It's literally called Proceedings of the It's literally called Proceedings of the It's literally called Proceedings of the National Academy USA to distinguish it National Academy USA to distinguish it National Academy USA to distinguish it from other proceedings of other national from other proceedings of other national from other proceedings of other national academies in other countries. The way the experiment went is that The way the experiment went is that The way the experiment went is that people were injected with endotoxin people were injected with endotoxin people were injected with endotoxin or in some cases they were injected with or in some cases they were injected with or in some cases they were injected with a bacterial wall that mimics with a bacterial wall that mimics with a bacterial wall that mimics infection. It gives you a fever. It infection. It gives you a fever. It infection. It gives you a fever. It makes you feel nauseous. It makes you makes you feel nauseous. It makes you makes you feel nauseous. It makes you feel sick. It is not pleasant. feel sick. It is not pleasant. feel sick. It is not pleasant. Half of the people did a particular Half of the people did a particular Half of the people did a particular pattern of breathing that looked very pattern of breathing that looked very pattern of breathing that looked very much like the pattern of breathing I much like the pattern of breathing I much like the pattern of breathing I described a moment ago of doing 25 deep described a moment ago of doing 25 deep described a moment ago of doing 25 deep inhales and exhales followed by an inhales and exhales followed by an inhales and exhales followed by an exhale holding their breath, then exhale holding their breath, then exhale holding their breath, then repeating 25 inhales, exhales, repeating 25 inhales, exhales, repeating 25 inhales, exhales, holding their breath. So, this would holding their breath. So, this would holding their breath. So, this would look something like this, or if you're look something like this, or if you're look something like this, or if you're listening, it sounds like 25, 30 times you'll start feeling heated 25, 30 times you'll start feeling heated 25, 30 times you'll start feeling heated up. You'll start feeling the adrenaline up. You'll start feeling the adrenaline up. You'll start feeling the adrenaline response. You're liberating adrenaline response. You're liberating adrenaline response. You're liberating adrenaline in your body, then exhale, hold your in your body, then exhale, hold your in your body, then exhale, hold your breath for 15 seconds, breath for 15 seconds, breath for 15 seconds, and then repeat. And then typically and then repeat. And then typically and then repeat. And then typically after doing three or four rounds of after doing three or four rounds of after doing three or four rounds of that, they would inhale very deeply and that, they would inhale very deeply and that, they would inhale very deeply and hold their breath. Now, I want to hold their breath. Now, I want to hold their breath. Now, I want to emphasize, never ever do this emphasize, never ever do this emphasize, never ever do this anywhere near water. People have passed anywhere near water. People have passed anywhere near water. People have passed out. So-called shallow water blackout, people So-called shallow water blackout, people So-called shallow water blackout, people have died. Don't do it in the bathtub, have died. Don't do it in the bathtub, have died. Don't do it in the bathtub, do it in the hot tub, don't do it before do it in the hot tub, don't do it before do it in the hot tub, don't do it before swimming. Please don't do it anywhere swimming. Please don't do it anywhere swimming. Please don't do it anywhere near water. Please don't do it at all near water. Please don't do it at all near water. Please don't do it at all unless you get clearance to do it from unless you get clearance to do it from unless you get clearance to do it from your doctor because there are some your doctor because there are some your doctor because there are some pulmonary effects and whatnot. And the pulmonary effects and whatnot. And the pulmonary effects and whatnot. And the breath holds should definitely not be breath holds should definitely not be breath holds should definitely not be done by anyone that has glaucoma or done by anyone that has glaucoma or done by anyone that has glaucoma or pressure uh you know, concerns for the pressure uh you know, concerns for the pressure uh you know, concerns for the eyes. But these repeated eyes. But these repeated eyes. But these repeated cycles of breathing that liberate cycles of breathing that liberate cycles of breathing that liberate adrenaline allowed the group that did that protocol allowed the group that did that protocol allowed the group that did that protocol to essentially experience zero symptoms to essentially experience zero symptoms to essentially experience zero symptoms from the injection of this E. coli, from the injection of this E. coli, from the injection of this E. coli, which is remarkable. They had much which is remarkable. They had much which is remarkable. They had much reduced or no symptoms. They didn't feel reduced or no symptoms. They didn't feel reduced or no symptoms. They didn't feel feverish, they didn't feel sick, they feverish, they didn't feel sick, they feverish, they didn't feel sick, they weren't vomiting, no diarrhea, which is weren't vomiting, no diarrhea, which is weren't vomiting, no diarrhea, which is remarkable but makes total sense when remarkable but makes total sense when remarkable but makes total sense when you think about the fact that the you think about the fact that the you think about the fact that the short-term stress response that what's short-term stress response that what's short-term stress response that what's typically called the acute stress typically called the acute stress typically called the acute stress response, is designed to combat all response, is designed to combat all response, is designed to combat all stressors. In fact, were you to cut yourself In fact, were you to cut yourself In fact, were you to cut yourself very deeply while out on a hike in the very deeply while out on a hike in the very deeply while out on a hike in the woods, the other thing that would happen woods, the other thing that would happen woods, the other thing that would happen is that there would be a rapid is that there would be a rapid is that there would be a rapid inflammation response. inflammation response. inflammation response. And we always hear inflammation is bad, And we always hear inflammation is bad, And we always hear inflammation is bad, inflammation gives us Alzheimer's, inflammation gives us Alzheimer's, inflammation gives us Alzheimer's, inflammation is the worst thing. But the inflammation is the worst thing. But the inflammation is the worst thing. But the swelling is associated, the inflammation swelling is associated, the inflammation swelling is associated, the inflammation is associated with the recruitment of is associated with the recruitment of is associated with the recruitment of things like macrophages or microglia if things like macrophages or microglia if things like macrophages or microglia if it's a neural tissue. Cells in our brain it's a neural tissue. Cells in our brain it's a neural tissue. Cells in our brain and body whose job is to act like little and body whose job is to act like little and body whose job is to act like little ambulances and rush to that site and ambulances and rush to that site and ambulances and rush to that site and clean it up. And indeed, the clean it up. And indeed, the clean it up. And indeed, the inflammation response looks horrible, it inflammation response looks horrible, it inflammation response looks horrible, it sounds horrible, but it's a great thing sounds horrible, but it's a great thing sounds horrible, but it's a great thing in the short-term. You want to have that in the short-term. You want to have that in the short-term. You want to have that tissue marked as in trouble and you want tissue marked as in trouble and you want tissue marked as in trouble and you want the body and brain to react to it. the body and brain to react to it. the body and brain to react to it. So, if you're getting peaks in stress So, if you're getting peaks in stress So, if you're getting peaks in stress from time to time throughout your day or from time to time throughout your day or from time to time throughout your day or throughout your week, you are in a throughout your week, you are in a throughout your week, you are in a better position to combat infection. You better position to combat infection. You better position to combat infection. You are in a better position to heal your are in a better position to heal your are in a better position to heal your wounds, physical wounds. wounds, physical wounds. wounds, physical wounds. Many great things happen in the stress Many great things happen in the stress Many great things happen in the stress response. Now, of course, the stress response. Now, of course, the stress response. Now, of course, the stress response isn't always super intense. response isn't always super intense. response isn't always super intense. Sometimes it's milder. Sometimes it Sometimes it's milder. Sometimes it Sometimes it's milder. Sometimes it allows us to just focus on something cuz allows us to just focus on something cuz allows us to just focus on something cuz we have a deadline. That can feel we have a deadline. That can feel we have a deadline. That can feel stressful, but that's one of the reasons stressful, but that's one of the reasons stressful, but that's one of the reasons you procrastinators out there, people you procrastinators out there, people you procrastinators out there, people always ask me, "What can be done for always ask me, "What can be done for always ask me, "What can be done for procrastination?" What can be done for procrastination is What can be done for procrastination is What can be done for procrastination is you can understand what's happening, you can understand what's happening, you can understand what's happening, which is that you are self-imposing which is that you are self-imposing which is that you are self-imposing stress because stress acts like a drug. stress because stress acts like a drug. stress because stress acts like a drug. It is a powerful nootropic. I get asked It is a powerful nootropic. I get asked It is a powerful nootropic. I get asked about nootropics. The most powerful about nootropics. The most powerful about nootropics. The most powerful nootropic or smart drug is stress. It's nootropic or smart drug is stress. It's nootropic or smart drug is stress. It's the concern of failure. It's the desire the concern of failure. It's the desire the concern of failure. It's the desire to do well. It's the impending deadline. to do well. It's the impending deadline. to do well. It's the impending deadline. It's the oh my gosh, I have to do this It's the oh my gosh, I have to do this It's the oh my gosh, I have to do this thing now or I'm going to fail. That is thing now or I'm going to fail. That is thing now or I'm going to fail. That is the best nootropic you will ever find. the best nootropic you will ever find. the best nootropic you will ever find. That combined with a good night's sleep, That combined with a good night's sleep, That combined with a good night's sleep, which we'll talk about. But, we spent a which we'll talk about. But, we spent a which we'll talk about. But, we spent a whole month on sleep, so I don't want to whole month on sleep, so I don't want to whole month on sleep, so I don't want to backtrack too much. backtrack too much. backtrack too much. Okay? So, short-term stress, great. The Okay? So, short-term stress, great. The Okay? So, short-term stress, great. The key is to be able to turn the stress key is to be able to turn the stress key is to be able to turn the stress response off when you're done, when you response off when you're done, when you response off when you're done, when you don't want that. In fact, don't want that. In fact, don't want that. In fact, let's just really tamp down the let's just really tamp down the let's just really tamp down the relationship between the short-term or relationship between the short-term or relationship between the short-term or acute stress response and infection. acute stress response and infection. acute stress response and infection. Many of us are familiar with the Many of us are familiar with the Many of us are familiar with the experience of work, experience of work, experience of work, work or taking care of a loved one or work or taking care of a loved one or work or taking care of a loved one or stress, then we finally relax. Maybe we even go then we finally relax. Maybe we even go then we finally relax. Maybe we even go on vacation. Like, "Oh, now I'm finally on vacation. Like, "Oh, now I'm finally on vacation. Like, "Oh, now I'm finally going to get the break." And then we get going to get the break." And then we get going to get the break." And then we get sick. And that's because the adrenaline And that's because the adrenaline And that's because the adrenaline response crashed and your immune system response crashed and your immune system response crashed and your immune system crashed with it. crashed with it. crashed with it. So, please understand this. Now, many of So, please understand this. Now, many of So, please understand this. Now, many of you might say, "Well, how long? Is it 2 you might say, "Well, how long? Is it 2 you might say, "Well, how long? Is it 2 hours? Is it 3 hours?" A lot of you out hours? Is it 3 hours?" A lot of you out hours? Is it 3 hours?" A lot of you out there that really like specificity. It there that really like specificity. It there that really like specificity. It will vary for everybody. will vary for everybody. will vary for everybody. I would just kind of use a rule of I would just kind of use a rule of I would just kind of use a rule of thumb. When you are no longer able to thumb. When you are no longer able to thumb. When you are no longer able to achieve good sleep, what good sleep achieve good sleep, what good sleep achieve good sleep, what good sleep means to you, and please see the means to you, and please see the means to you, and please see the episodes on sleep if you want more about episodes on sleep if you want more about episodes on sleep if you want more about tools to sleep. When you are no longer tools to sleep. When you are no longer tools to sleep. When you are no longer able to achieve good sleep, you are now able to achieve good sleep, you are now able to achieve good sleep, you are now moving from acute stress to chronic moving from acute stress to chronic moving from acute stress to chronic stress. You need to be able to turn the stress. You need to be able to turn the stress. You need to be able to turn the stress response off. stress response off. stress response off. If I have one wish, well, I have many If I have one wish, well, I have many If I have one wish, well, I have many wishes for this lifetime, but if I have wishes for this lifetime, but if I have wishes for this lifetime, but if I have one wish today one wish today one wish today that I hope will permeate that I hope will permeate that I hope will permeate and spread out there is this idea that and spread out there is this idea that and spread out there is this idea that we need from a young age, but even as we need from a young age, but even as we need from a young age, but even as adults and forever, we need to learn how adults and forever, we need to learn how adults and forever, we need to learn how to turn off our stress response. to turn off our stress response. to turn off our stress response. Physiological sigh is one. Physiological sigh is one. Physiological sigh is one. If we're going to activate our stress If we're going to activate our stress If we're going to activate our stress response intentionally by ice baths, response intentionally by ice baths, response intentionally by ice baths, cold showers, cyclic hyperoxygenated cold showers, cyclic hyperoxygenated cold showers, cyclic hyperoxygenated breathing, aka Tummo breathing or Wim breathing, aka Tummo breathing or Wim breathing, aka Tummo breathing or Wim Hof breathing, Hof breathing, Hof breathing, we also need to learn how to press the we also need to learn how to press the we also need to learn how to press the brake, okay? So, let's think about the brake, okay? So, let's think about the brake, okay? So, let's think about the stress system. It knows how to activate stress system. It knows how to activate stress system. It knows how to activate itself. Now we're talking about a way of itself. Now we're talking about a way of itself. Now we're talking about a way of deliberately activating your stress deliberately activating your stress deliberately activating your stress system in order to combat infection. I do this in order to combat infection. I do this in order to combat infection. I do this from time to time. I might feel a tickle from time to time. I might feel a tickle from time to time. I might feel a tickle in my throat or like I'm getting kind of in my throat or like I'm getting kind of in my throat or like I'm getting kind of run down. run down. run down. I will do this kind of breathing. I do. I will do this kind of breathing. I do. I will do this kind of breathing. I do. I will take 25 or 30 breaths, exhale, I will take 25 or 30 breaths, exhale, I will take 25 or 30 breaths, exhale, hold my hold my breath. 25, 30 breaths hold my hold my breath. 25, 30 breaths hold my hold my breath. 25, 30 breaths again, exhale, hold my breath for about again, exhale, hold my breath for about again, exhale, hold my breath for about 15 seconds. 15 seconds. 15 seconds. 25, 30 breaths again, exhale, hold my 25, 30 breaths again, exhale, hold my 25, 30 breaths again, exhale, hold my breath for 25 or 30 seconds, then a big breath for 25 or 30 seconds, then a big breath for 25 or 30 seconds, then a big inhale, and I hold my breath until I inhale, and I hold my breath until I inhale, and I hold my breath until I feel the impulse to breathe. feel the impulse to breathe. feel the impulse to breathe. Again, I feel it's safe for me. I've run Again, I feel it's safe for me. I've run Again, I feel it's safe for me. I've run it by my doctor, so it's fine. I'm You it by my doctor, so it's fine. I'm You it by my doctor, so it's fine. I'm You should not do this unless it's right for should not do this unless it's right for should not do this unless it's right for you, but I do this. Some people like the you, but I do this. Some people like the you, but I do this. Some people like the ice bath. I rarely do the ice bath. Some ice bath. I rarely do the ice bath. Some ice bath. I rarely do the ice bath. Some people like cold showers. I like hot people like cold showers. I like hot people like cold showers. I like hot showers. So, I take hot showers, but I showers. So, I take hot showers, but I showers. So, I take hot showers, but I do this kind of breathing. Again, they do this kind of breathing. Again, they do this kind of breathing. Again, they are all having more or less the same are all having more or less the same are all having more or less the same effect of increasing adrenaline and which of increasing adrenaline and which of increasing adrenaline and which allows you to combat the allows you to combat the allows you to combat the infection because you're activating the infection because you're activating the infection because you're activating the immune response. Okay. immune response. Okay. immune response. Okay. So, now let's talk about medium-term So, now let's talk about medium-term So, now let's talk about medium-term stress. Medium-term stress is going to stress. Medium-term stress is going to stress. Medium-term stress is going to be stress that lasts anywhere from be stress that lasts anywhere from be stress that lasts anywhere from several days to several weeks. Okay? We several days to several weeks. Okay? We several days to several weeks. Okay? We might think of that as long-term stress. might think of that as long-term stress. might think of that as long-term stress. There are times in life when we are just There are times in life when we are just There are times in life when we are just dealing with a lot, okay? This dealing with a lot, okay? This dealing with a lot, okay? This particular quarter I happen to be particular quarter I happen to be particular quarter I happen to be directing a course, I'm doing the lab, directing a course, I'm doing the lab, directing a course, I'm doing the lab, I'm doing this. I enjoy all these things I'm doing this. I enjoy all these things I'm doing this. I enjoy all these things immensely, but I'm kind of near my immensely, but I'm kind of near my immensely, but I'm kind of near my threshold. I'm near the point where threshold. I'm near the point where threshold. I'm near the point where any additional thing, like I couldn't any additional thing, like I couldn't any additional thing, like I couldn't log on to a website the other day and I log on to a website the other day and I log on to a website the other day and I it felt like the most intense thing in it felt like the most intense thing in it felt like the most intense thing in the world at that moment and I kind of the world at that moment and I kind of the world at that moment and I kind of laughed at myself. Fortunately, I caught laughed at myself. Fortunately, I caught laughed at myself. Fortunately, I caught it, but that typically wouldn't be my it, but that typically wouldn't be my it, but that typically wouldn't be my response under conditions where I wasn't response under conditions where I wasn't response under conditions where I wasn't pushed to threshold. What is this pushed to threshold. What is this pushed to threshold. What is this medium-term stress? What is stress medium-term stress? What is stress medium-term stress? What is stress threshold? Well, threshold? Well, threshold? Well, stress threshold is actually our ability stress threshold is actually our ability stress threshold is actually our ability to cognitive ly regulate what's going on to cognitive ly regulate what's going on to cognitive ly regulate what's going on in our body. So, we've all heard so much in our body. So, we've all heard so much in our body. So, we've all heard so much about we need to unify our mind and about we need to unify our mind and about we need to unify our mind and body. We need to be at one with our mind body. We need to be at one with our mind body. We need to be at one with our mind and body or you know, and now I and body or you know, and now I and body or you know, and now I realize I'm kind of poking fun at some realize I'm kind of poking fun at some realize I'm kind of poking fun at some of the new age-y language, but the of the new age-y language, but the of the new age-y language, but the reason I poke fun is not because I don't reason I poke fun is not because I don't reason I poke fun is not because I don't think it has value, but it has no think it has value, but it has no think it has value, but it has no specificity. What does that mean? I specificity. What does that mean? I specificity. What does that mean? I mean, I think I'm always in the my body. mean, I think I'm always in the my body. mean, I think I'm always in the my body. I've never fortunately looked across the I've never fortunately looked across the I've never fortunately looked across the room and seen my arm over there or my room and seen my arm over there or my room and seen my arm over there or my leg over there. I'm connected to my leg over there. I'm connected to my leg over there. I'm connected to my body. There actually is a syndrome where body. There actually is a syndrome where body. There actually is a syndrome where people feel disconnected from their people feel disconnected from their people feel disconnected from their limbs. This is a real clinical limbs. This is a real clinical limbs. This is a real clinical condition. These people actually will condition. These people actually will condition. These people actually will seek out amputation. They will try and seek out amputation. They will try and seek out amputation. They will try and convince doctors to amputate certain convince doctors to amputate certain convince doctors to amputate certain portions of their body. It's a really portions of their body. It's a really portions of their body. It's a really terrible thing for people to have um terrible thing for people to have um terrible thing for people to have um and it relates to a and it relates to a and it relates to a change in central maps in the brain, change in central maps in the brain, change in central maps in the brain, believe it or not. Most of us want to believe it or not. Most of us want to believe it or not. Most of us want to keep our limbs keep our limbs keep our limbs um whichever ones we happen to have and um whichever ones we happen to have and um whichever ones we happen to have and most of us feel one in mind and body so most of us feel one in mind and body so most of us feel one in mind and body so much so that when stress hits, we feel much so that when stress hits, we feel much so that when stress hits, we feel it in our mind and body. A lot of stress it in our mind and body. A lot of stress it in our mind and body. A lot of stress inoculation, a lot of managing medium-term stress on a lot of managing medium-term stress on a lot of managing medium-term stress on the on the time scale of weeks or maybe the on the time scale of weeks or maybe the on the time scale of weeks or maybe even a couple months. So, we're not even a couple months. So, we're not even a couple months. So, we're not talking about years of stress. talking about years of stress. talking about years of stress. A lot of that has to do with raising our A lot of that has to do with raising our A lot of that has to do with raising our stress threshold. It's about capacity. stress threshold. It's about capacity. stress threshold. It's about capacity. And there are very simple tools, And there are very simple tools, And there are very simple tools, excellent tools that will allow us to excellent tools that will allow us to excellent tools that will allow us to modulate our modulate our modulate our capacity for stress. And they look a lot capacity for stress. And they look a lot capacity for stress. And they look a lot like the tools I just described. like the tools I just described. like the tools I just described. They involve placing oneself They involve placing oneself They involve placing oneself deliberately into a situation where our deliberately into a situation where our deliberately into a situation where our adrenaline is increased somewhat, not to adrenaline is increased somewhat, not to adrenaline is increased somewhat, not to the extreme, the extreme, the extreme, and then when we are feel flooded with and then when we are feel flooded with and then when we are feel flooded with adrenaline, and normally we would panic, it's about and normally we would panic, it's about and normally we would panic, it's about cognitively, mentally, emotionally cognitively, mentally, emotionally cognitively, mentally, emotionally calming ourselves and being comfortable calming ourselves and being comfortable calming ourselves and being comfortable with that response in our body. So, with that response in our body. So, with that response in our body. So, unlike trying to unify the mind and body unlike trying to unify the mind and body unlike trying to unify the mind and body and make it all calm or make it all and make it all calm or make it all and make it all calm or make it all alert, this is about dissociating mind alert, this is about dissociating mind alert, this is about dissociating mind and body in a healthy way. And what and body in a healthy way. And what and body in a healthy way. And what would this look like? Well, this is would this look like? Well, this is would this look like? Well, this is something I actually do as a practice something I actually do as a practice something I actually do as a practice because I mentioned before you can use I mentioned before you can use I mentioned before you can use physiological sighs. In real time, you physiological sighs. In real time, you physiological sighs. In real time, you can use can use can use the cyclic hyperoxygenation breathing to the cyclic hyperoxygenation breathing to the cyclic hyperoxygenation breathing to combat infection if you're feeling kind combat infection if you're feeling kind combat infection if you're feeling kind of run down. of run down. of run down. And there's also way in which you can use there's also way in which you can use there's also way in which you can use things like things like things like cold showers or if you exercise and you cold showers or if you exercise and you cold showers or if you exercise and you bring your heart rate up very high, you bring your heart rate up very high, you bring your heart rate up very high, you kind of go into that high intensity kind of go into that high intensity kind of go into that high intensity realm where your heart is beating a realm where your heart is beating a realm where your heart is beating a little bit harder than you're little bit harder than you're little bit harder than you're comfortable with. comfortable with. comfortable with. And that you're or you're just you feel And that you're or you're just you feel And that you're or you're just you feel uh some people think it's lactic acid. uh some people think it's lactic acid. uh some people think it's lactic acid. No one can agree on this whether what No one can agree on this whether what No one can agree on this whether what the burn is by whether it's lactic acid the burn is by whether it's lactic acid the burn is by whether it's lactic acid or it's built up of hydrogen or it's built up of hydrogen or it's built up of hydrogen or whatever. I don't want to get into that, whatever. I don't want to get into that, whatever. I don't want to get into that, but we're all familiar with the intense but we're all familiar with the intense but we're all familiar with the intense feeling of your muscles kind of feeling of your muscles kind of feeling of your muscles kind of burning because you're working burning because you're working burning because you're working very hard physically. very hard physically. very hard physically. The key in those moments is to learn to The key in those moments is to learn to The key in those moments is to learn to relax the mind while the body is very relax the mind while the body is very relax the mind while the body is very activated. And what that tends to do, activated. And what that tends to do, activated. And what that tends to do, there's a limited amount of research on there's a limited amount of research on there's a limited amount of research on this, but what that tends to do is it this, but what that tends to do is it this, but what that tends to do is it tends to create a situation where what tends to create a situation where what tends to create a situation where what once felt like a lot feels manageable. once felt like a lot feels manageable. once felt like a lot feels manageable. Okay, you've raised your stress Okay, you've raised your stress Okay, you've raised your stress threshold or your stress capacity. threshold or your stress capacity. threshold or your stress capacity. One way that you can do this, and this One way that you can do this, and this One way that you can do this, and this is kind of fun, if it's approved by your is kind of fun, if it's approved by your is kind of fun, if it's approved by your physician and you're able to do this, physician and you're able to do this, physician and you're able to do this, you can bring your heart rate up. You you can bring your heart rate up. You you can bring your heart rate up. You could do this through an ice bath if could do this through an ice bath if could do this through an ice bath if that's your thing or a cold shower or that's your thing or a cold shower or that's your thing or a cold shower or cyclic oxygenation breathing where you cyclic oxygenation breathing where you cyclic oxygenation breathing where you could sprint or you could go hard on the could sprint or you could go hard on the could sprint or you could go hard on the bike. Whatever it is that brings your heart Whatever it is that brings your heart Whatever it is that brings your heart rate up. rate up. rate up. And then what you want to do is you want And then what you want to do is you want And then what you want to do is you want to actually try and calm the mind while to actually try and calm the mind while to actually try and calm the mind while your body is in this heightened state of your body is in this heightened state of your body is in this heightened state of activation. And the best way that I'm aware to do And the best way that I'm aware to do And the best way that I'm aware to do that again goes back to physiology not that again goes back to physiology not that again goes back to physiology not psychology. When we are stressed, our pupils dilate. When we are stressed, our pupils dilate. When we are stressed, our pupils dilate. The effect of that pupil dilation is to The effect of that pupil dilation is to The effect of that pupil dilation is to create tunnel vision. It literally create tunnel vision. It literally create tunnel vision. It literally narrows our view of the visual world. We narrows our view of the visual world. We narrows our view of the visual world. We no longer see in panorama. no longer see in panorama. no longer see in panorama. And there's some other effects as well, And there's some other effects as well, And there's some other effects as well, but that's because the visual system but that's because the visual system but that's because the visual system through this cranial nerve system that I through this cranial nerve system that I through this cranial nerve system that I described before is tethered and is part described before is tethered and is part described before is tethered and is part of this autonomic nervous system. of this autonomic nervous system. of this autonomic nervous system. By deliberately dilating your gaze, By deliberately dilating your gaze, By deliberately dilating your gaze, meaning not moving your head and eyes meaning not moving your head and eyes meaning not moving your head and eyes around, but by deliberately going from around, but by deliberately going from around, but by deliberately going from tunnel vision tunnel vision tunnel vision to broader panoramic vision, literally to broader panoramic vision, literally to broader panoramic vision, literally seeing more of your environment all at seeing more of your environment all at seeing more of your environment all at once. You don't have to do what I'm once. You don't have to do what I'm once. You don't have to do what I'm doing which is not blinking. You're doing which is not blinking. You're doing which is not blinking. You're welcome to blink. welcome to blink. welcome to blink. But it means deliberately dilating your But it means deliberately dilating your But it means deliberately dilating your gaze so that you can see yourself in the gaze so that you can see yourself in the gaze so that you can see yourself in the environment you're in, environment you're in, environment you're in, it creates a calming effect on the mind it creates a calming effect on the mind it creates a calming effect on the mind because it releases a particular circuit because it releases a particular circuit because it releases a particular circuit in the brain stem that's associated with in the brain stem that's associated with in the brain stem that's associated with alertness, aka stress. alertness, aka stress. alertness, aka stress. Now, this is very powerful. If you're Now, this is very powerful. If you're Now, this is very powerful. If you're running for instance and you're at max running for instance and you're at max running for instance and you're at max capacity or close to it where you're capacity or close to it where you're capacity or close to it where you're kind of hitting like 80, 90% of maximum kind of hitting like 80, 90% of maximum kind of hitting like 80, 90% of maximum on the bike and you dilate your gaze, on the bike and you dilate your gaze, on the bike and you dilate your gaze, what you'll find is the mind can relax what you'll find is the mind can relax what you'll find is the mind can relax while the body is in full output. while the body is in full output. while the body is in full output. And this is relates to work that in And this is relates to work that in And this is relates to work that in various communities people are various communities people are various communities people are working with this in the sports working with this in the sports working with this in the sports community, military communities, etc. community, military communities, etc. community, military communities, etc. But it's a form not really of stress But it's a form not really of stress But it's a form not really of stress inoculation. It's more about raising inoculation. It's more about raising inoculation. It's more about raising stress threshold so that the body is stress threshold so that the body is stress threshold so that the body is going to continue to be in a high going to continue to be in a high going to continue to be in a high alertness, high reactivity mode, alertness, high reactivity mode, alertness, high reactivity mode, high output, but the mind is calm. And high output, but the mind is calm. And high output, but the mind is calm. And so this isn't about unifying mind and so this isn't about unifying mind and so this isn't about unifying mind and body. This is actually about using body body. This is actually about using body body. This is actually about using body to bring up your level of activation to bring up your level of activation to bring up your level of activation then dissociating, not the then dissociating, not the then dissociating, not the clinical dissociation kind of disorders, clinical dissociation kind of disorders, clinical dissociation kind of disorders, but dissociating the mental or emotional but dissociating the mental or emotional but dissociating the mental or emotional response from what's going on in your response from what's going on in your response from what's going on in your body and over time, so if you do this, body and over time, so if you do this, body and over time, so if you do this, you know, a couple times, you don't have you know, a couple times, you don't have you know, a couple times, you don't have to do this every workout, but if you do to do this every workout, but if you do to do this every workout, but if you do this every maybe once a week or so, you this every maybe once a week or so, you this every maybe once a week or so, you start being comfortable at these higher start being comfortable at these higher start being comfortable at these higher activation states. What once felt activation states. What once felt activation states. What once felt overwhelming and like a lot of work now overwhelming and like a lot of work now overwhelming and like a lot of work now is manageable. It feels tolerable. So, manageable. It feels tolerable. So, manageable. It feels tolerable. So, that's for navigating medium-term that's for navigating medium-term that's for navigating medium-term stress. Now, there are other tools as stress. Now, there are other tools as stress. Now, there are other tools as well, but we don't want to go over 90 well, but we don't want to go over 90 well, but we don't want to go over 90 minutes cuz 90 minutes is one ultradian minutes cuz 90 minutes is one ultradian minutes cuz 90 minutes is one ultradian cycle. I always try and keep these cycle. I always try and keep these cycle. I always try and keep these podcasts to one ultradian cycle in case podcasts to one ultradian cycle in case podcasts to one ultradian cycle in case you haven't noticed, so you can derive you haven't noticed, so you can derive you haven't noticed, so you can derive maximum benefit from them maximum benefit from them maximum benefit from them based on ultradian cycle principles of based on ultradian cycle principles of based on ultradian cycle principles of learning. So, I don't want to go into every little So, I don't want to go into every little So, I don't want to go into every little bit of this and I want to make sure we bit of this and I want to make sure we bit of this and I want to make sure we get to emotions, but I want to emphasize get to emotions, but I want to emphasize get to emotions, but I want to emphasize that these medium-term stressors that these medium-term stressors that these medium-term stressors of it's been a hard month or hard week of it's been a hard month or hard week of it's been a hard month or hard week or it's or it's or it's uh semesters on the quarter system, so uh semesters on the quarter system, so uh semesters on the quarter system, so 10 weeks or semester, 10 weeks or semester, 10 weeks or semester, that is becomes more manageable when we that is becomes more manageable when we that is becomes more manageable when we train ourselves to train ourselves to train ourselves to be calm of mind when our body is be calm of mind when our body is be calm of mind when our body is activated. And if you haven't noticed, most of the if you haven't noticed, most of the if you haven't noticed, most of the tools I'm describing today are nothing tools I'm describing today are nothing tools I'm describing today are nothing like the sort of, okay, sit and do like the sort of, okay, sit and do like the sort of, okay, sit and do meditation. I'm not I'm actively meditation. I'm not I'm actively meditation. I'm not I'm actively avoiding saying the words NSDR, avoiding saying the words NSDR, avoiding saying the words NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. I talked a lot non-sleep deep rest. I talked a lot non-sleep deep rest. I talked a lot about those tools during the months on about those tools during the months on about those tools during the months on sleep and neuroplasticity and of course sleep and neuroplasticity and of course sleep and neuroplasticity and of course they're wonderful for replenishing your they're wonderful for replenishing your they're wonderful for replenishing your ability to lean into effort, to learn, ability to lean into effort, to learn, ability to lean into effort, to learn, to focus. Please do try and check out to focus. Please do try and check out to focus. Please do try and check out NSDR protocols, see if they're right for NSDR protocols, see if they're right for NSDR protocols, see if they're right for you. The margins for safety I think are you. The margins for safety I think are you. The margins for safety I think are enormous. You're basically just enormous. You're basically just enormous. You're basically just listening to a script. We have links to listening to a script. We have links to listening to a script. We have links to them in previous captions. I've talked them in previous captions. I've talked them in previous captions. I've talked on them on various podcasts before. We on them on various podcasts before. We on them on various podcasts before. We can provide them again, but today I'm can provide them again, but today I'm can provide them again, but today I'm really talking about tools so that you really talking about tools so that you really talking about tools so that you can learn to dance with stress can learn to dance with stress can learn to dance with stress to in the short term reduce that stress in the short term reduce that stress in the short term reduce that stress response a little bit if you feel it's response a little bit if you feel it's response a little bit if you feel it's too uncomfortable. In the medium term to too uncomfortable. In the medium term to too uncomfortable. In the medium term to be comfortable at these heightened be comfortable at these heightened be comfortable at these heightened levels of activation because life is levels of activation because life is levels of activation because life is going to continue to come at you and we going to continue to come at you and we going to continue to come at you and we can't pick the stressors, but we need to can't pick the stressors, but we need to can't pick the stressors, but we need to be able to function at a higher capacity be able to function at a higher capacity be able to function at a higher capacity often. And then there's long-term stress. Now, And then there's long-term stress. Now, And then there's long-term stress. Now, long-term stress is bad. You do not want long-term stress is bad. You do not want long-term stress is bad. You do not want adrenaline up in your system for a very adrenaline up in your system for a very adrenaline up in your system for a very long time. In fact, you ideally you long time. In fact, you ideally you long time. In fact, you ideally you would have your stress go up various would have your stress go up various would have your stress go up various times throughout the day, but it would times throughout the day, but it would times throughout the day, but it would never stay elevated and it would never stay elevated and it would never stay elevated and it would never prevent you from getting a good night's prevent you from getting a good night's prevent you from getting a good night's sleep. Now, that isn't realistic, okay? sleep. Now, that isn't realistic, okay? sleep. Now, that isn't realistic, okay? I would say I would say I would say for me for me for me three, four nights out of the month, no three, four nights out of the month, no three, four nights out of the month, no matter what I do, I take on too much or matter what I do, I take on too much or matter what I do, I take on too much or something happens and life is life and I something happens and life is life and I something happens and life is life and I don't get the best night's sleep that I don't get the best night's sleep that I don't get the best night's sleep that I would like to get. would like to get. would like to get. For many of you, it's For many of you, it's For many of you, it's 30 nights per month. For some of you, 30 nights per month. For some of you, 30 nights per month. For some of you, it's zero nights per month and it's zero nights per month and it's zero nights per month and congratulations to you zero nights per congratulations to you zero nights per congratulations to you zero nights per month people. If you are managing your month people. If you are managing your month people. If you are managing your sleep really well every night, that is sleep really well every night, that is sleep really well every night, that is fantastic. You really want to be able to fall You really want to be able to fall You really want to be able to fall asleep at night, stay asleep for most asleep at night, stay asleep for most asleep at night, stay asleep for most night and if you get up, go back to night and if you get up, go back to night and if you get up, go back to sleep for as long as you need to in sleep for as long as you need to in sleep for as long as you need to in order to feel rested. That's what I order to feel rested. That's what I order to feel rested. That's what I define as a healthy relationship to define as a healthy relationship to define as a healthy relationship to sleep. Check out the episodes on sleep if you Check out the episodes on sleep if you Check out the episodes on sleep if you want tools to be able to accomplish want tools to be able to accomplish want tools to be able to accomplish that. We can all accomplish that. It can that. We can all accomplish that. It can that. We can all accomplish that. It can be done and there are tools to do it. be done and there are tools to do it. be done and there are tools to do it. Zero cost tools. Zero cost tools. Zero cost tools. Okay, so let's talk about long-term Okay, so let's talk about long-term Okay, so let's talk about long-term stress. Earlier I talked about how breathing Earlier I talked about how breathing Earlier I talked about how breathing can modulate heart rate can modulate heart rate can modulate heart rate through this loop that includes the through this loop that includes the through this loop that includes the brain and the parasympathetic nervous brain and the parasympathetic nervous brain and the parasympathetic nervous system. I don't think I mentioned this and I don't think I mentioned this and I don't think I mentioned this and I want to make sure that I mention that want to make sure that I mention that want to make sure that I mention that breathing controlling heart rate through breathing controlling heart rate through breathing controlling heart rate through the sympathetic and parasympathetic the sympathetic and parasympathetic the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system is the basis of what's nervous system is the basis of what's nervous system is the basis of what's called HRV, heart rate variability. called HRV, heart rate variability. called HRV, heart rate variability. And we know that heart rate variability And we know that heart rate variability And we know that heart rate variability is good. You don't want your heart rate is good. You don't want your heart rate is good. You don't want your heart rate chronically elevated or chronically low. chronically elevated or chronically low. chronically elevated or chronically low. A lot of people think, oh, I want a A lot of people think, oh, I want a A lot of people think, oh, I want a really nice low heart rate. And indeed, really nice low heart rate. And indeed, really nice low heart rate. And indeed, if you're in shape, the stroke volume of if you're in shape, the stroke volume of if you're in shape, the stroke volume of your heart will be greater and you can your heart will be greater and you can your heart will be greater and you can have a nice, you know, slow heart rate. have a nice, you know, slow heart rate. have a nice, you know, slow heart rate. Um you know, years ago when I was Um you know, years ago when I was Um you know, years ago when I was running regularly, uh you know, I think running regularly, uh you know, I think running regularly, uh you know, I think my heart rate was down at like 50 or 60 my heart rate was down at like 50 or 60 my heart rate was down at like 50 or 60 or something like that. That's or something like that. That's or something like that. That's great, but and now it's higher than that great, but and now it's higher than that great, but and now it's higher than that because I'm running a little bit less, because I'm running a little bit less, because I'm running a little bit less, but everyone needs to determine what's right everyone needs to determine what's right everyone needs to determine what's right for them, but you don't really want your for them, but you don't really want your for them, but you don't really want your heart rate to be chronically low or heart rate to be chronically low or heart rate to be chronically low or chronically high. Both are bad. We know chronically high. Both are bad. We know chronically high. Both are bad. We know that chronic stress, elevated stress, that chronic stress, elevated stress, that chronic stress, elevated stress, and especially in the so-called type A and especially in the so-called type A and especially in the so-called type A personalities, creates heart disease, leading killer of creates heart disease, leading killer of creates heart disease, leading killer of for in most every country, but in for in most every country, but in for in most every country, but in particular in the US. particular in the US. particular in the US. Because of the way that adrenaline Because of the way that adrenaline Because of the way that adrenaline impacts those blood vessels of impacts those blood vessels of impacts those blood vessels of constricting and um some and dilating constricting and um some and dilating constricting and um some and dilating others, it's just that kind of others, it's just that kind of others, it's just that kind of hypertension, chronic hypertension, is hypertension, chronic hypertension, is hypertension, chronic hypertension, is just bad. And so chronic stress truly is just bad. And so chronic stress truly is just bad. And so chronic stress truly is bad. I want to really make that clear bad. I want to really make that clear bad. I want to really make that clear because I emphasized a lot of what because I emphasized a lot of what because I emphasized a lot of what some of the positive effects of stress, some of the positive effects of stress, some of the positive effects of stress, but you want to be able to tamp down but you want to be able to tamp down but you want to be able to tamp down your stress in real time. You also want your stress in real time. You also want your stress in real time. You also want to be able to modulate your stress and to be able to modulate your stress and to be able to modulate your stress and your emotional relationship to your emotional relationship to your emotional relationship to stress in the body in the medium term, stress in the body in the medium term, stress in the body in the medium term, but by no means do you want to be but by no means do you want to be but by no means do you want to be stressed out all the time chronically stressed out all the time chronically stressed out all the time chronically for months and months and months and for months and months and months and for months and months and months and years on end. years on end. years on end. The best tools, the best mechanisms that The best tools, the best mechanisms that The best tools, the best mechanisms that we know to modulate long-term stress, we know to modulate long-term stress, we know to modulate long-term stress, might surprise you a little bit. might surprise you a little bit. might surprise you a little bit. First of all, First of all, First of all, they're going to be the things that they're going to be the things that they're going to be the things that don't surprise you, which is everyone don't surprise you, which is everyone don't surprise you, which is everyone knows getting regular exercise, getting knows getting regular exercise, getting knows getting regular exercise, getting good sleep, good sleep, good sleep, um using real-time tools to try and tamp um using real-time tools to try and tamp um using real-time tools to try and tamp down the stress response, etc. That's down the stress response, etc. That's down the stress response, etc. That's all going to be really useful. all going to be really useful. all going to be really useful. The data really points to the fact that The data really points to the fact that The data really points to the fact that social connection and certain types of social connection and certain types of social connection and certain types of social connection in particular are what social connection in particular are what social connection in particular are what are going to mitigate or reduce are going to mitigate or reduce are going to mitigate or reduce long-term stress. And this is a long-term stress. And this is a long-term stress. And this is a particularly important issue nowadays particularly important issue nowadays particularly important issue nowadays where we have all these proxies or where we have all these proxies or where we have all these proxies or surrogates for social connection. You surrogates for social connection. You surrogates for social connection. You know, we're online and texting with know, we're online and texting with know, we're online and texting with people a lot, so we can feel connected. people a lot, so we can feel connected. people a lot, so we can feel connected. You know, people are like the plane's You know, people are like the plane's You know, people are like the plane's about to take off and everyone's texting about to take off and everyone's texting about to take off and everyone's texting with each other, you know, they're with each other, you know, they're with each other, you know, they're whether or not they have fear of flying whether or not they have fear of flying whether or not they have fear of flying or not. They're like, "Okay, you know, or not. They're like, "Okay, you know, or not. They're like, "Okay, you know, see you, love you, hate you." Whatever see you, love you, hate you." Whatever see you, love you, hate you." Whatever it is that they're trying to communicate it is that they're trying to communicate it is that they're trying to communicate to people. to people. to people. Then, you know, plane lands, everyone's Then, you know, plane lands, everyone's Then, you know, plane lands, everyone's phones out, see you, love you, hate you. phones out, see you, love you, hate you. phones out, see you, love you, hate you. Let's hope it's fewer hate yous. But, Let's hope it's fewer hate yous. But, Let's hope it's fewer hate yous. But, everyone has this kind of need to stay everyone has this kind of need to stay everyone has this kind of need to stay connected to one another. Humans are connected to one another. Humans are connected to one another. Humans are incredibly social creatures. Now, there incredibly social creatures. Now, there incredibly social creatures. Now, there is a way to look at this whole business is a way to look at this whole business is a way to look at this whole business of social connection, not from just the of social connection, not from just the of social connection, not from just the kind of wishy-washy new-agey kind of wishy-washy new-agey kind of wishy-washy new-agey perspective. And I want to point out perspective. And I want to point out perspective. And I want to point out that sometimes I'll say wishy-washy that sometimes I'll say wishy-washy that sometimes I'll say wishy-washy new-agey. I have nothing against that. new-agey. I have nothing against that. new-agey. I have nothing against that. Uh I just uh my goal here is always to Uh I just uh my goal here is always to Uh I just uh my goal here is always to put uh scientific data and some uh put uh scientific data and some uh put uh scientific data and some uh neurochemistry on things, so that for neurochemistry on things, so that for neurochemistry on things, so that for those of you that are into wishy-washy those of you that are into wishy-washy those of you that are into wishy-washy new-agey stuff, you also can arm new-agey stuff, you also can arm new-agey stuff, you also can arm yourself with some arguments for those yourself with some arguments for those yourself with some arguments for those of you uh of you uh of you uh the members of your family and your and the members of your family and your and the members of your family and your and your life that maybe aren't um so tuned your life that maybe aren't um so tuned your life that maybe aren't um so tuned into the typical language around those into the typical language around those into the typical language around those practices. Like, "Oh, connection is practices. Like, "Oh, connection is practices. Like, "Oh, connection is really key. We all get oxytocin." really key. We all get oxytocin." really key. We all get oxytocin." Actually, did you know that connection Actually, did you know that connection Actually, did you know that connection between individuals rarely causes the between individuals rarely causes the between individuals rarely causes the release of oxytocin? Oxytocin is release of oxytocin? Oxytocin is release of oxytocin? Oxytocin is released in very particular released in very particular released in very particular circumstances, like circumstances, like circumstances, like post-orgasm, baby and mother milk let down. It's baby and mother milk let down. It's baby and mother milk let down. It's associated with kind of really intense associated with kind of really intense associated with kind of really intense kinds of pair bonding things of mother kinds of pair bonding things of mother kinds of pair bonding things of mother and child. Also, father and child, but and child. Also, father and child, but and child. Also, father and child, but especially mother and child because it's especially mother and child because it's especially mother and child because it's relationship to the lactation system. Um relationship to the lactation system. Um relationship to the lactation system. Um couples post-sex. Um these kinds of couples post-sex. Um these kinds of couples post-sex. Um these kinds of things that were reflect deep kind of things that were reflect deep kind of things that were reflect deep kind of layers of our biology. And oxytocin is layers of our biology. And oxytocin is layers of our biology. And oxytocin is not just released when we, you know, not just released when we, you know, not just released when we, you know, walk in and you know, pat the dog on the walk in and you know, pat the dog on the walk in and you know, pat the dog on the head or we see somebody and we give them head or we see somebody and we give them head or we see somebody and we give them a hug and hey, great to see you, you a hug and hey, great to see you, you a hug and hey, great to see you, you know, fist bump. Uh that's not a know, fist bump. Uh that's not a know, fist bump. Uh that's not a situation for oxytocin. situation for oxytocin. situation for oxytocin. The way to think about social connection The way to think about social connection The way to think about social connection and how it can mitigate and how it can mitigate and how it can mitigate some of the long-term effects of stress some of the long-term effects of stress some of the long-term effects of stress is really through the systems of is really through the systems of is really through the systems of neuromodulation like serotonin neuromodulation like serotonin neuromodulation like serotonin and through in through in through in blocking certain things that are really blocking certain things that are really blocking certain things that are really bad for us when we feel socially bad for us when we feel socially bad for us when we feel socially isolated, things like tachykinins. So, isolated, things like tachykinins. So, isolated, things like tachykinins. So, let me explain what these are. Serotonin let me explain what these are. Serotonin let me explain what these are. Serotonin again is a neuromodulator. again is a neuromodulator. again is a neuromodulator. Neuromodulators are a little bit like Neuromodulators are a little bit like Neuromodulators are a little bit like playlists in the brain. They tend to playlists in the brain. They tend to playlists in the brain. They tend to amplify or bias the likelihood that amplify or bias the likelihood that amplify or bias the likelihood that certain brain circuits and body circuits certain brain circuits and body circuits certain brain circuits and body circuits are going to be activated and that are going to be activated and that are going to be activated and that others will not. Serotonin generally, others will not. Serotonin generally, others will not. Serotonin generally, and I'm I realize I'm speaking very and I'm I realize I'm speaking very and I'm I realize I'm speaking very generally here, but it generally gives generally here, but it generally gives generally here, but it generally gives us feelings of well-being. At very high us feelings of well-being. At very high us feelings of well-being. At very high levels it makes us feel blissed levels it makes us feel blissed levels it makes us feel blissed and it tends to make us feel like we and it tends to make us feel like we and it tends to make us feel like we have enough in our immediate have enough in our immediate have enough in our immediate environment. This is why some of the environment. This is why some of the environment. This is why some of the side effects of antidepressants that side effects of antidepressants that side effects of antidepressants that elevate serotonin and actually can help elevate serotonin and actually can help elevate serotonin and actually can help a lot of people with depressive symptoms a lot of people with depressive symptoms a lot of people with depressive symptoms but the side effects associated with drugs the side effects associated with drugs the side effects associated with drugs that increase serotonin tend to be that increase serotonin tend to be that increase serotonin tend to be reduced affect. They tend to kind of reduced affect. They tend to kind of reduced affect. They tend to kind of blunt affect or make people feel blunt affect or make people feel blunt affect or make people feel um like their libido is lower. Desire um like their libido is lower. Desire um like their libido is lower. Desire goes down because the body has so much goes down because the body has so much goes down because the body has so much serotonin and the brain has so much serotonin and the brain has so much serotonin and the brain has so much serotonin that one feels like they have serotonin that one feels like they have serotonin that one feels like they have enough. But serotonin But serotonin But serotonin pharmacology aside or taking, you know, pharmacology aside or taking, you know, pharmacology aside or taking, you know, antidepressants aside antidepressants aside antidepressants aside a topic for another time a topic for another time a topic for another time serotonin tends to make us feel good. serotonin tends to make us feel good. serotonin tends to make us feel good. When we see somebody that we recognize When we see somebody that we recognize When we see somebody that we recognize and trust, serotonin is released in the and trust, serotonin is released in the and trust, serotonin is released in the brain. And that has certain positive effects on And that has certain positive effects on And that has certain positive effects on the immune system and on other systems the immune system and on other systems the immune system and on other systems of neural repair and synapses and of neural repair and synapses and of neural repair and synapses and things that really reinforce connections things that really reinforce connections things that really reinforce connections in the brain and prevent that long-term in the brain and prevent that long-term in the brain and prevent that long-term withering of connections. So, serotonin withering of connections. So, serotonin withering of connections. So, serotonin is tied to social connection. Now, is tied to social connection. Now, is tied to social connection. Now, social connection can take many forms. social connection can take many forms. social connection can take many forms. As many of you know, I am very attached As many of you know, I am very attached As many of you know, I am very attached to my dog. I hope he's attached to me. to my dog. I hope he's attached to me. to my dog. I hope he's attached to me. He's asleep most of the time, so I don't He's asleep most of the time, so I don't He's asleep most of the time, so I don't know and even if he was awake, I don't know and even if he was awake, I don't know and even if he was awake, I don't really know what I would ask him, but he really know what I would ask him, but he really know what I would ask him, but he seems more or less to be attached to me seems more or less to be attached to me seems more or less to be attached to me as well. as well. as well. And there's And there's And there's no scientific evidence that it has to be no scientific evidence that it has to be no scientific evidence that it has to be human attachment. I do have human attachment. I do have human attachment. I do have attachments to humans as well. But you attachments to humans as well. But you attachments to humans as well. But you can have attachments to other people. can have attachments to other people. can have attachments to other people. Some of those can be romantic Some of those can be romantic Some of those can be romantic attachments. Those could be familial attachments. Those could be familial attachments. Those could be familial attachments that are non-romantic, attachments that are non-romantic, attachments that are non-romantic, friendship, pets, friendship, pets, friendship, pets, even attachments to things that just even attachments to things that just even attachments to things that just delight us. One of the things that delight us. One of the things that delight us. One of the things that really can mitigate against the really can mitigate against the really can mitigate against the long-term negative effects of chronic long-term negative effects of chronic long-term negative effects of chronic long-term stress isn't just having fun. long-term stress isn't just having fun. long-term stress isn't just having fun. We hear all this stuff. You need to play We hear all this stuff. You need to play We hear all this stuff. You need to play and have fun. That can be a little bit and have fun. That can be a little bit and have fun. That can be a little bit of a tough concept, especially for the of a tough concept, especially for the of a tough concept, especially for the hard-driving people or people that are hard-driving people or people that are hard-driving people or people that are stressed. But having a sense of delight, stressed. But having a sense of delight, stressed. But having a sense of delight, a sense of really enjoying something a sense of really enjoying something a sense of really enjoying something that you see and engage in, witness, or that you see and engage in, witness, or that you see and engage in, witness, or participate in, that is associated with participate in, that is associated with participate in, that is associated with the serotonin system. And certainly play the serotonin system. And certainly play the serotonin system. And certainly play is one of those things, social is one of those things, social is one of those things, social connection of various forms. Those are connection of various forms. Those are connection of various forms. Those are things to invest in. Some people might things to invest in. Some people might things to invest in. Some people might say, "Well, say, "Well, say, "Well, you know, nobody wants to be my friend you know, nobody wants to be my friend you know, nobody wants to be my friend or nobody wants to engage socially or nobody wants to engage socially or nobody wants to engage socially anymore." I'll be the first to admit, social I'll be the first to admit, social I'll be the first to admit, social connection and friendship and connection and friendship and connection and friendship and relationships of all kinds to animals or relationships of all kinds to animals or relationships of all kinds to animals or humans or inanimate objects takes work. humans or inanimate objects takes work. humans or inanimate objects takes work. It takes investment. It takes time in It takes investment. It takes time in It takes investment. It takes time in not needing everything to be exactly the not needing everything to be exactly the not needing everything to be exactly the way you want it to be. I have a friend way you want it to be. I have a friend way you want it to be. I have a friend who struggles with this and often times who struggles with this and often times who struggles with this and often times the conversations the conversations the conversations just circle back to the fact that when just circle back to the fact that when just circle back to the fact that when you want social connection, you often you want social connection, you often you want social connection, you often have to be more flexible. You have to have to be more flexible. You have to have to be more flexible. You have to eat on other people's schedules. eat on other people's schedules. eat on other people's schedules. Sometimes you have to eat things you Sometimes you have to eat things you Sometimes you have to eat things you don't necessarily want to eat the most don't necessarily want to eat the most don't necessarily want to eat the most in that moment or stay up a little later in that moment or stay up a little later in that moment or stay up a little later or wake up a little earlier. Social or wake up a little earlier. Social or wake up a little earlier. Social connection is something that we work connection is something that we work connection is something that we work for, but it is incredibly powerful. I for, but it is incredibly powerful. I for, but it is incredibly powerful. I want to of course tip my want to of course tip my want to of course tip my hat to um not it's only appropriate to hat to um not it's only appropriate to hat to um not it's only appropriate to call him the great Robert Sapolsky, my call him the great Robert Sapolsky, my call him the great Robert Sapolsky, my colleague who I'm fortunate uh my colleague who I'm fortunate uh my colleague who I'm fortunate uh not to know at Stanford, of course has not to know at Stanford, of course has not to know at Stanford, of course has talked about this quite a lot. So I talked about this quite a lot. So I talked about this quite a lot. So I want to acknowledge uh Robert's want to acknowledge uh Robert's want to acknowledge uh Robert's incredible work and discussions around incredible work and discussions around incredible work and discussions around this. You can look up those materials this. You can look up those materials this. You can look up those materials online and his wonderful books. online and his wonderful books. online and his wonderful books. But primates, and we are primates, we're But primates, and we are primates, we're But primates, and we are primates, we're uh we're social species. And as Robert uh we're social species. And as Robert uh we're social species. And as Robert has said many times before, never before has said many times before, never before has said many times before, never before in any primate history, but in particular any primate history, but in particular any primate history, but in particular in human history, have we interacted in human history, have we interacted in human history, have we interacted with so many strangers at a distance with so many strangers at a distance with so many strangers at a distance when we are not really connected to when we are not really connected to when we are not really connected to them. So, finding just a few people, them. So, finding just a few people, them. So, finding just a few people, even one, or an animal, or something even one, or an animal, or something even one, or an animal, or something that you delight in, that you delight in, that you delight in, believe it or not, has very positive believe it or not, has very positive believe it or not, has very positive effects on mitigating this long-term effects on mitigating this long-term effects on mitigating this long-term stress, on improving various aspects of stress, on improving various aspects of stress, on improving various aspects of our life as it relates to stress and our life as it relates to stress and our life as it relates to stress and emotionality. So, that's the social connection part. So, that's the social connection part. So, that's the social connection part. The other thing is that social isolation The other thing is that social isolation The other thing is that social isolation that goes too long is associated in that goes too long is associated in that goes too long is associated in everything from flies, believe it or everything from flies, believe it or everything from flies, believe it or not, to mice and humans with this not, to mice and humans with this not, to mice and humans with this molecule tachykinin. Tachykinin molecule tachykinin. Tachykinin molecule tachykinin. Tachykinin is a molecule that makes us more feel is a molecule that makes us more feel is a molecule that makes us more feel fearful, paranoid, and fearful, paranoid, and fearful, paranoid, and impairs our immune system. And so, impairs our immune system. And so, impairs our immune system. And so, tachykinin is like this punish internal tachykinin is like this punish internal tachykinin is like this punish internal punishment signal. It's like our body punishment signal. It's like our body punishment signal. It's like our body and our brain telling us, "You're not and our brain telling us, "You're not and our brain telling us, "You're not spending enough time with people that spending enough time with people that spending enough time with people that you really trust. You're not spending you really trust. You're not spending you really trust. You're not spending time doing things that you really time doing things that you really time doing things that you really enjoy." And I often think about enjoy." And I often think about enjoy." And I often think about tachykinin for myself, because I'm tachykinin for myself, because I'm tachykinin for myself, because I'm pretty hard driving, I have a lot of pretty hard driving, I have a lot of pretty hard driving, I have a lot of pursuits. I also have a lot of wonderful pursuits. I also have a lot of wonderful pursuits. I also have a lot of wonderful people and an incredibly wonderful people and an incredibly wonderful people and an incredibly wonderful bulldog in my life. But, there are times bulldog in my life. But, there are times bulldog in my life. But, there are times when I can be so goal-directed and so in when I can be so goal-directed and so in when I can be so goal-directed and so in motion and trying to accomplish motion and trying to accomplish motion and trying to accomplish everything that I sometimes forget that everything that I sometimes forget that everything that I sometimes forget that about tachykinin. And I like to remind about tachykinin. And I like to remind about tachykinin. And I like to remind myself, so much so that I actually have myself, so much so that I actually have myself, so much so that I actually have a little post-it above my desk that a little post-it above my desk that a little post-it above my desk that says, "Tachykinin" to remind me that says, "Tachykinin" to remind me that says, "Tachykinin" to remind me that tachykinin is this very sinister tachykinin is this very sinister tachykinin is this very sinister molecule that starts being secreted when molecule that starts being secreted when molecule that starts being secreted when we are not socially connected enough. we are not socially connected enough. we are not socially connected enough. And this is why long meals with friends And this is why long meals with friends And this is why long meals with friends or family, where there We'll talk about or family, where there We'll talk about or family, where there We'll talk about phones in a moment, but where there's no phones in a moment, but where there's no phones in a moment, but where there's no intrusions, or even if there are, just intrusions, or even if there are, just intrusions, or even if there are, just feeling like we are connected suppresses feeling like we are connected suppresses feeling like we are connected suppresses tachykinin. And tachykinin is something you really And tachykinin is something you really And tachykinin is something you really want to avoid, because chronic isolation want to avoid, because chronic isolation want to avoid, because chronic isolation chronically high tachykinin chronically high tachykinin chronically high tachykinin that's associated with long-term stress that's associated with long-term stress that's associated with long-term stress really depletes so many good functions really depletes so many good functions really depletes so many good functions of our brain and body and promote so of our brain and body and promote so of our brain and body and promote so many bad ones including irritability, many bad ones including irritability, many bad ones including irritability, paranoia, fear, etc. That is really paranoia, fear, etc. That is really paranoia, fear, etc. That is really something to avoid. And so I want to something to avoid. And so I want to something to avoid. And so I want to highlight tachykinin as something to highlight tachykinin as something to highlight tachykinin as something to avoid. I don't want to completely avoid. I don't want to completely avoid. I don't want to completely disregard oxytocin. It's just that disregard oxytocin. It's just that disregard oxytocin. It's just that oxytocin has been built up a lot in the oxytocin has been built up a lot in the oxytocin has been built up a lot in the media and really serotonin works on much media and really serotonin works on much media and really serotonin works on much faster time scales. Now how do you know faster time scales. Now how do you know faster time scales. Now how do you know if you're making serotonin? You don't if you're making serotonin? You don't if you're making serotonin? You don't know in the moment but you can learn if know in the moment but you can learn if know in the moment but you can learn if you pay attention to kind of recognize you pay attention to kind of recognize you pay attention to kind of recognize these feelings of comfort, trust, bliss, these feelings of comfort, trust, bliss, these feelings of comfort, trust, bliss, delight. And those are not weak terms. delight. And those are not weak terms. delight. And those are not weak terms. Those are not associated just with uh Those are not associated just with uh Those are not associated just with uh psychological terms. They are psychological terms. They are psychological terms. They are they are every bit as physiological as they are every bit as physiological as they are every bit as physiological as the movement of your muscles or the movement of your muscles or the movement of your muscles or the secretion of adrenaline that and many secretion of adrenaline that and many secretion of adrenaline that and many people focus now on gratitude. You know, people focus now on gratitude. You know, people focus now on gratitude. You know, gratitude is a little bit subjective and gratitude is a little bit subjective and gratitude is a little bit subjective and here we're moving from um some objective here we're moving from um some objective here we're moving from um some objective to kind of subjective things objective to kind of subjective things objective to kind of subjective things but recognizing and in particular but recognizing and in particular but recognizing and in particular writing down things that you're thankful writing down things that you're thankful writing down things that you're thankful for however small they may seem for however small they may seem for however small they may seem does seem to have a positive effect on does seem to have a positive effect on does seem to have a positive effect on the on the serotonin system. Now there the on the serotonin system. Now there the on the serotonin system. Now there are a plethora of things that will also are a plethora of things that will also are a plethora of things that will also impact well-being and allow you to impact well-being and allow you to impact well-being and allow you to modulate your long-term stress reduce modulate your long-term stress reduce modulate your long-term stress reduce the likelihood that you'll engage in the likelihood that you'll engage in the likelihood that you'll engage in long-term stress. And we don't have time long-term stress. And we don't have time long-term stress. And we don't have time to go into all these but of course to go into all these but of course to go into all these but of course finding the diet and nutrition that's finding the diet and nutrition that's finding the diet and nutrition that's right for you, the exercise schedule right for you, the exercise schedule right for you, the exercise schedule that was right for you, the sleep that was right for you, the sleep that was right for you, the sleep schedule, all that. schedule, all that. schedule, all that. But do not underemphasize the social But do not underemphasize the social But do not underemphasize the social connection part. Please. As well there connection part. Please. As well there connection part. Please. As well there are some compounds that are not are some compounds that are not are some compounds that are not antidepressants although if you need antidepressants and although if you need antidepressants and although if you need antidepressants and a clinician prescribes them to you, a clinician prescribes them to you, a clinician prescribes them to you, please follow their advice if that's please follow their advice if that's please follow their advice if that's what's right for you. what's right for you. what's right for you. There are compounds that are not There are compounds that are not There are compounds that are not prescription compounds that can modulate prescription compounds that can modulate prescription compounds that can modulate the stress system and sometimes because the stress system and sometimes because the stress system and sometimes because of the way that life is we just don't of the way that life is we just don't of the way that life is we just don't have the opportunity to control life and have the opportunity to control life and have the opportunity to control life and to control our response to stress. And to control our response to stress. And to control our response to stress. And at least for myself, I can only talk at least for myself, I can only talk at least for myself, I can only talk about my own experience, I found it about my own experience, I found it about my own experience, I found it useful in times of chronic stress to useful in times of chronic stress to useful in times of chronic stress to start modulating some of the start modulating some of the start modulating some of the neurochemistry related to the stress neurochemistry related to the stress neurochemistry related to the stress response in order response in order response in order to help. Now, if a doctor prescribes you to help. Now, if a doctor prescribes you to help. Now, if a doctor prescribes you prednisone or prescribes you some other prednisone or prescribes you some other prednisone or prescribes you some other hormone or something, that's important. hormone or something, that's important. hormone or something, that's important. But what I'm talking about now are But what I'm talking about now are But what I'm talking about now are non-prescription things. You should non-prescription things. You should non-prescription things. You should check out examine.com, this free check out examine.com, this free check out examine.com, this free website, which will allow you to put in website, which will allow you to put in website, which will allow you to put in any supplement and evaluate that any supplement and evaluate that any supplement and evaluate that supplement with They provide links in supplement with They provide links in supplement with They provide links in the so-called human effect matrix to the so-called human effect matrix to the so-called human effect matrix to PubMed. It tells you the exact subjects PubMed. It tells you the exact subjects PubMed. It tells you the exact subjects they were done in. It was a they were done in. It was a they were done in. It was a postmenopausal women? Was it kids? Was postmenopausal women? Was it kids? Was postmenopausal women? Was it kids? Was it normal adults? Was it people with it normal adults? Was it people with it normal adults? Was it people with autism? etc. Check out that site for any and all etc. Check out that site for any and all etc. Check out that site for any and all supplements you're considering or supplements you're considering or supplements you're considering or taking. I highly recommend it. I've no taking. I highly recommend it. I've no taking. I highly recommend it. I've no relationship to them. I just think it's relationship to them. I just think it's relationship to them. I just think it's a wonderful site that's curated all this a wonderful site that's curated all this a wonderful site that's curated all this important information. important information. important information. But the some of these compounds are But the some of these compounds are But the some of these compounds are effective enough they can kind of take effective enough they can kind of take effective enough they can kind of take the edge off and I'll use them the edge off and I'll use them the edge off and I'll use them periodically myself. And so I just periodically myself. And so I just periodically myself. And so I just thought I'd mention them since there a thought I'd mention them since there a thought I'd mention them since there a number of you that are interested in number of you that are interested in number of you that are interested in them. The three I want to focus on and them. The three I want to focus on and them. The three I want to focus on and one that I think you need to be cautious one that I think you need to be cautious one that I think you need to be cautious about that I've mentioned before about that I've mentioned before about that I've mentioned before include ashwagandha. Funny name, but that's what it's called. Funny name, but that's what it's called. Funny name, but that's what it's called. L-theanine or theanine it's often called L-theanine or theanine it's often called L-theanine or theanine it's often called and melatonin. Let's talk about and melatonin. Let's talk about and melatonin. Let's talk about melatonin first. Melatonin I talked melatonin first. Melatonin I talked melatonin first. Melatonin I talked about during the month on sleep. about during the month on sleep. about during the month on sleep. Melatonin is a hormone secreted from the Melatonin is a hormone secreted from the Melatonin is a hormone secreted from the pineal in direct relationship to how pineal in direct relationship to how pineal in direct relationship to how much darkness you are in, not emotional much darkness you are in, not emotional much darkness you are in, not emotional darkness, but light suppresses darkness, but light suppresses darkness, but light suppresses melatonin. Melatonin helps you fall melatonin. Melatonin helps you fall melatonin. Melatonin helps you fall asleep, it doesn't help you stay asleep. asleep, it doesn't help you stay asleep. asleep, it doesn't help you stay asleep. I personally do not recommend personally do not recommend personally do not recommend supplementing melatonin supplementing melatonin supplementing melatonin because it's supplemented typically at very high it's supplemented typically at very high it's supplemented typically at very high levels. You know, 1 to 3 mg or even more. That You know, 1 to 3 mg or even more. That You know, 1 to 3 mg or even more. That is an outrageously high dose. It's super is an outrageously high dose. It's super is an outrageously high dose. It's super physiological compared to what you super physiological compared to what you super physiological compared to what you normally would make. It also has a normally would make. It also has a normally would make. It also has a number of potentially negative effects number of potentially negative effects number of potentially negative effects on the reproductive access and on the reproductive access and on the reproductive access and hormones there. Some people can take it hormones there. Some people can take it hormones there. Some people can take it without problems. If you like it and without problems. If you like it and without problems. If you like it and that's your thing, fine. I just want to that's your thing, fine. I just want to that's your thing, fine. I just want to cue to the fact that there can be cue to the fact that there can be cue to the fact that there can be issues. You should check on examine.com, issues. You should check on examine.com, issues. You should check on examine.com, talk to your doctor, especially in kids talk to your doctor, especially in kids talk to your doctor, especially in kids because melatonin suppresses the puberty because melatonin suppresses the puberty because melatonin suppresses the puberty response in a number of species. response in a number of species. response in a number of species. Enough about the negative things of Enough about the negative things of Enough about the negative things of melatonin except that people who take melatonin except that people who take melatonin except that people who take too much melatonin chronically too much melatonin chronically too much melatonin chronically often time when they're taking it to often time when they're taking it to often time when they're taking it to sleep or for whatever reason, yes, it sleep or for whatever reason, yes, it sleep or for whatever reason, yes, it can reduce anxiety and stress, but it can reduce anxiety and stress, but it can reduce anxiety and stress, but it also can reduce the output of the also can reduce the output of the also can reduce the output of the adrenals to the point where it can adrenals to the point where it can adrenals to the point where it can become problematic. Now, become problematic. Now, become problematic. Now, a note about adrenal burnout. There is a note about adrenal burnout. There is a note about adrenal burnout. There is actually no such thing as adrenal actually no such thing as adrenal actually no such thing as adrenal burnout under normal conditions. The burnout under normal conditions. The burnout under normal conditions. The adrenals have enough adrenaline to adrenals have enough adrenaline to adrenals have enough adrenaline to support 200 years of stress, for better support 200 years of stress, for better support 200 years of stress, for better or for worse. or for worse. or for worse. The concept of adrenal burnout The concept of adrenal burnout The concept of adrenal burnout has origins in the work of Nobel Prize has origins in the work of Nobel Prize has origins in the work of Nobel Prize winner Hans Selye, who actually winner Hans Selye, who actually winner Hans Selye, who actually discovered what he called the general discovered what he called the general discovered what he called the general adaptation syndrome. He discovered a lot adaptation syndrome. He discovered a lot adaptation syndrome. He discovered a lot of things about stress. He did some of things about stress. He did some of things about stress. He did some phenomenal work that turned out to be phenomenal work that turned out to be phenomenal work that turned out to be true. That we have stressors, there's That we have stressors, there's That we have stressors, there's something called distress. He talked something called distress. He talked something called distress. He talked about eustress, which is positive about eustress, which is positive about eustress, which is positive stress. Eustress has never really caught stress. Eustress has never really caught stress. Eustress has never really caught on in the in the kind of more general on in the in the kind of more general on in the in the kind of more general discussion. But he had this theory that discussion. But he had this theory that discussion. But he had this theory that if stress went on long enough that you if stress went on long enough that you if stress went on long enough that you would eventually reach a phase called would eventually reach a phase called would eventually reach a phase called exhaustion. And that turned out to be exhaustion. And that turned out to be exhaustion. And that turned out to be wrong. Although many of you may feel exhausted Although many of you may feel exhausted Although many of you may feel exhausted after chronic stress, there isn't really after chronic stress, there isn't really after chronic stress, there isn't really a physiological exhaustion that happens. a physiological exhaustion that happens. a physiological exhaustion that happens. And that eventually got picked up and And that eventually got picked up and And that eventually got picked up and ran with by the general public and they ran with by the general public and they ran with by the general public and they talk about adrenal burnout. Too much talk about adrenal burnout. Too much talk about adrenal burnout. Too much coffee, adrenal burnout. You hear all coffee, adrenal burnout. You hear all coffee, adrenal burnout. You hear all this stuff. There is no such thing as this stuff. There is no such thing as this stuff. There is no such thing as adrenal burnout. The adrenals don't burn adrenal burnout. The adrenals don't burn adrenal burnout. The adrenals don't burn out. There is something however called out. There is something however called out. There is something however called adrenal insufficiency syndrome, which is adrenal insufficiency syndrome, which is adrenal insufficiency syndrome, which is a real physiological problem where some a real physiological problem where some a real physiological problem where some people have very impaired adrenals and people have very impaired adrenals and people have very impaired adrenals and they can't produce adrenaline. And they can't produce adrenaline. And they can't produce adrenaline. And melatonin taken at very high levels for melatonin taken at very high levels for melatonin taken at very high levels for periods of time that are too long, can periods of time that are too long, can periods of time that are too long, can cause suppression of the cortisol and cause suppression of the cortisol and cause suppression of the cortisol and epinephrine release from the adrenals epinephrine release from the adrenals epinephrine release from the adrenals and can create a kind of pseudo and can create a kind of pseudo and can create a kind of pseudo adrenal insufficiency syndrome. adrenal insufficiency syndrome. adrenal insufficiency syndrome. So, beware melatonin for that reason. beware melatonin for that reason. beware melatonin for that reason. Please I'm trying I alone can't get rid of the I'm trying I alone can't get rid of the I'm trying I alone can't get rid of the phrase adrenal burnout. phrase adrenal burnout. phrase adrenal burnout. I'm not trying to um give a hard time to I'm not trying to um give a hard time to I'm not trying to um give a hard time to anyone who feels burnt out or exhausted, anyone who feels burnt out or exhausted, anyone who feels burnt out or exhausted, but it is for other reasons. It is not but it is for other reasons. It is not but it is for other reasons. It is not because of the adrenals are burnt out because of the adrenals are burnt out because of the adrenals are burnt out unless you happen to have adrenal unless you happen to have adrenal unless you happen to have adrenal insufficiency syndrome. So, I'm not a insufficiency syndrome. So, I'm not a insufficiency syndrome. So, I'm not a fan of melatonin for a lot of reasons. fan of melatonin for a lot of reasons. fan of melatonin for a lot of reasons. Now, I've mentioned several. The other Now, I've mentioned several. The other Now, I've mentioned several. The other is L-theanine. I've talked about is L-theanine. I've talked about is L-theanine. I've talked about L-theanine, which provided it's safe for L-theanine, which provided it's safe for L-theanine, which provided it's safe for you, can be taken 100 mg or 200 mg about you, can be taken 100 mg or 200 mg about you, can be taken 100 mg or 200 mg about a 30 minutes or 60 minutes before sleep. a 30 minutes or 60 minutes before sleep. a 30 minutes or 60 minutes before sleep. It can enhance the transition to sleep It can enhance the transition to sleep It can enhance the transition to sleep and depth of sleep for many people. and depth of sleep for many people. and depth of sleep for many people. It it increases GABA, this inhibitory It it increases GABA, this inhibitory It it increases GABA, this inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. It tends neurotransmitter in the brain. It tends neurotransmitter in the brain. It tends to turn off our forebrain a little bit to turn off our forebrain a little bit to turn off our forebrain a little bit or reduce the activity of our kind of or reduce the activity of our kind of or reduce the activity of our kind of thinking systems and ruminating systems thinking systems and ruminating systems thinking systems and ruminating systems help people fall asleep. help people fall asleep. help people fall asleep. That's for sleep, but theanine has also That's for sleep, but theanine has also That's for sleep, but theanine has also been shown for people that are been shown for people that are been shown for people that are chronically anxious or chronically anxious or chronically anxious or chronically stressed to if you look at the studies I stressed to if you look at the studies I stressed to if you look at the studies I have a large collection of studies in have a large collection of studies in have a large collection of studies in front of me right now. If you want to front of me right now. If you want to front of me right now. If you want to see those links, I know if you want see those links, I know if you want see those links, I know if you want those, go to examine.com, put in those, go to examine.com, put in those, go to examine.com, put in theanine. They linked for instance, it theanine. They linked for instance, it theanine. They linked for instance, it is known to significantly increase is known to significantly increase is known to significantly increase relaxation. There are four studies relaxation. There are four studies relaxation. There are four studies listed there with PubMed links. It is listed there with PubMed links. It is listed there with PubMed links. It is known to have a minor effect on anxiety, known to have a minor effect on anxiety, known to have a minor effect on anxiety, but eight studies have shown that. Um but eight studies have shown that. Um but eight studies have shown that. Um which I think is a fairly large set of which I think is a fairly large set of which I think is a fairly large set of studies. Some of them in great journals. studies. Some of them in great journals. studies. Some of them in great journals. Um it also can reduce task completion it also can reduce task completion it also can reduce task completion anxiety. So, anxiety related to task anxiety. So, anxiety related to task anxiety. So, anxiety related to task completion. Not good to the completion. Not good to the completion. Not good to the procrastinators perhaps, but for those procrastinators perhaps, but for those procrastinators perhaps, but for those of you that are chronically stressed, it of you that are chronically stressed, it of you that are chronically stressed, it can increase attention a little bit, can increase attention a little bit, can increase attention a little bit, can reduce blood pressure a little bit, reduce blood pressure a little bit, reduce blood pressure a little bit, improve sleep quality, improve sleep quality, improve sleep quality, etc. It definitely has a notable effect etc. It definitely has a notable effect etc. It definitely has a notable effect on stress. Two studies in particular um on stress. Two studies in particular um on stress. Two studies in particular um that it can notably reduce the effects that it can notably reduce the effects that it can notably reduce the effects of stress. So, of stress. So, of stress. So, there's a lot there. It also has effects there's a lot there. It also has effects there's a lot there. It also has effects on insomnia, on some blood lipid on insomnia, on some blood lipid on insomnia, on some blood lipid profiles. And so, go to examine.com and profiles. And so, go to examine.com and profiles. And so, go to examine.com and check it out. But, this is one reason check it out. But, this is one reason check it out. But, this is one reason why I supplement theanine for sleep. why I supplement theanine for sleep. why I supplement theanine for sleep. But, if I'm feeling like I've been under But, if I'm feeling like I've been under But, if I'm feeling like I've been under a lot of stress, and I'm not managing my a lot of stress, and I'm not managing my a lot of stress, and I'm not managing my stress very well with the short-term and stress very well with the short-term and stress very well with the short-term and medium-term tools that I talked about medium-term tools that I talked about medium-term tools that I talked about earlier, I might start taking a little earlier, I might start taking a little earlier, I might start taking a little bit of theanine, especially in the late bit of theanine, especially in the late bit of theanine, especially in the late afternoon, which is when I tend to start afternoon, which is when I tend to start afternoon, which is when I tend to start to feel like I haven't gotten enough to feel like I haven't gotten enough to feel like I haven't gotten enough done, and the day is kind of carrying done, and the day is kind of carrying done, and the day is kind of carrying on. And so, you can blunt the response on. And so, you can blunt the response on. And so, you can blunt the response to stress a little bit, which is why a to stress a little bit, which is why a to stress a little bit, which is why a lot of companies are now putting lot of companies are now putting lot of companies are now putting theanine into energy drinks. I am theanine into energy drinks. I am theanine into energy drinks. I am not a big fan of most energy drinks. not a big fan of most energy drinks. not a big fan of most energy drinks. Most of them have taurine, which I know Most of them have taurine, which I know Most of them have taurine, which I know some of you wrote to me and said, "Oh, some of you wrote to me and said, "Oh, some of you wrote to me and said, "Oh, taurine's great for all these reasons." taurine's great for all these reasons." taurine's great for all these reasons." Taurine also has effects on the Taurine also has effects on the Taurine also has effects on the microvasculature that, at least for me, microvasculature that, at least for me, microvasculature that, at least for me, were not good. It caused bursting of were not good. It caused bursting of were not good. It caused bursting of microvasculature in my sclera, in my microvasculature in my sclera, in my microvasculature in my sclera, in my eyes, which is why I'm not a fan of any eyes, which is why I'm not a fan of any eyes, which is why I'm not a fan of any energy drink that has taurine energy drink that has taurine energy drink that has taurine or taurine generally. But, that's just or taurine generally. But, that's just or taurine generally. But, that's just me. You have to decide for you. I'm sure me. You have to decide for you. I'm sure me. You have to decide for you. I'm sure the comment section there'll be a couple the comment section there'll be a couple the comment section there'll be a couple um taurinistas out there that will say, um taurinistas out there that will say, um taurinistas out there that will say, "But, I love taurine." Great. "But, I love taurine." Great. "But, I love taurine." Great. Keep the taurine companies in business, Keep the taurine companies in business, Keep the taurine companies in business, but it's not for me. And I'd like people but it's not for me. And I'd like people but it's not for me. And I'd like people to know that it may or may not be for to know that it may or may not be for to know that it may or may not be for them. The other supplement that can be very The other supplement that can be very The other supplement that can be very useful is ashwagandha. Ashwagandha is useful is ashwagandha. Ashwagandha is useful is ashwagandha. Ashwagandha is known to lower anxiety and cortisol. known to lower anxiety and cortisol. known to lower anxiety and cortisol. There is six There are, excuse me, six There is six There are, excuse me, six There is six There are, excuse me, six studies that collectively show studies that collectively show studies that collectively show reductions in cortisol, which is reductions in cortisol, which is reductions in cortisol, which is Cortisol is typically associated with Cortisol is typically associated with Cortisol is typically associated with waking up in the morning, which is good. waking up in the morning, which is good. waking up in the morning, which is good. That's a healthy, brief cortisol bump That's a healthy, brief cortisol bump That's a healthy, brief cortisol bump that goes away, provided you're getting that goes away, provided you're getting that goes away, provided you're getting your light at the right time of day, is your light at the right time of day, is your light at the right time of day, is at right correct times of day, like at right correct times of day, like at right correct times of day, like morning and evening. But, you don't morning and evening. But, you don't morning and evening. But, you don't want cortisol chronically elevated. want cortisol chronically elevated. want cortisol chronically elevated. That's associated with all the bad stuff That's associated with all the bad stuff That's associated with all the bad stuff about stress. about stress. about stress. There's a There's a There's a very strong effect of ashwagandha. You very strong effect of ashwagandha. You very strong effect of ashwagandha. You can find dosages at examine.com. can find dosages at examine.com. can find dosages at examine.com. They report in across six studies 14.5 They report in across six studies 14.5 They report in across six studies 14.5 to 27.9 reduction in cortisol in to 27.9 reduction in cortisol in to 27.9 reduction in cortisol in otherwise healthy, but stressed otherwise healthy, but stressed otherwise healthy, but stressed individuals. Now, I don't know about individuals. Now, I don't know about individuals. Now, I don't know about kids. You have to look at what the what kids. You have to look at what the what kids. You have to look at what the what the what it says on various supplements. the what it says on various supplements. the what it says on various supplements. Most things here are being done in Most things here are being done in Most things here are being done in adults, so please check carefully. But, adults, so please check carefully. But, adults, so please check carefully. But, this is great. I mean, the opportunity this is great. I mean, the opportunity this is great. I mean, the opportunity for me anyway to be able to take for me anyway to be able to take for me anyway to be able to take something that can help me reduce my something that can help me reduce my something that can help me reduce my cortisol so that I don't get some of the cortisol so that I don't get some of the cortisol so that I don't get some of the long-term effects of stress. And I'm not long-term effects of stress. And I'm not long-term effects of stress. And I'm not going to take ashwagandha year-round. I going to take ashwagandha year-round. I going to take ashwagandha year-round. I would only do this if I was feeling like would only do this if I was feeling like would only do this if I was feeling like I wasn't managing my short- and I wasn't managing my short- and I wasn't managing my short- and medium-term stress well. So, I don't medium-term stress well. So, I don't medium-term stress well. So, I don't take it on a regular basis. I do take it take it on a regular basis. I do take it take it on a regular basis. I do take it when I'm in these times when things are when I'm in these times when things are when I'm in these times when things are particularly stressful. particularly stressful. particularly stressful. It has There are five other studies that It has There are five other studies that It has There are five other studies that show reduced stress. So, that's not cortisol reduced stress. So, that's not cortisol reduced stress. So, that's not cortisol measurements, but things like fatigue, measurements, but things like fatigue, measurements, but things like fatigue, cognitive impairment, etc. cognitive impairment, etc. cognitive impairment, etc. Um it does lower total cholesterol, Um it does lower total cholesterol, Um it does lower total cholesterol, which may or may not be good or bad for which may or may not be good or bad for which may or may not be good or bad for you up to 10%. you up to 10%. you up to 10%. Um so, some people don't want their Um so, some people don't want their Um so, some people don't want their cholesterol lowered. Some people might. cholesterol lowered. Some people might. cholesterol lowered. Some people might. Um cholesterol we'll talk about this in Um cholesterol we'll talk about this in Um cholesterol we'll talk about this in a month on hormones, but cholesterol is a month on hormones, but cholesterol is a month on hormones, but cholesterol is the molecule from which testosterone and the molecule from which testosterone and the molecule from which testosterone and estrogen and cortisol, for that matter, estrogen and cortisol, for that matter, estrogen and cortisol, for that matter, are synthesized. So, you don't want to are synthesized. So, you don't want to are synthesized. So, you don't want to get your cholesterol so low then you get your cholesterol so low then you get your cholesterol so low then you There are all sorts of negative effects, There are all sorts of negative effects, There are all sorts of negative effects, but you don't want it too high either. but you don't want it too high either. but you don't want it too high either. Um mild effects in good clinical studies Um mild effects in good clinical studies Um mild effects in good clinical studies on reducing depression, probably on reducing depression, probably on reducing depression, probably associated with the effects on stress, associated with the effects on stress, associated with the effects on stress, and some other things as well. So, and some other things as well. So, and some other things as well. So, ashwagandha is something I use from time ashwagandha is something I use from time ashwagandha is something I use from time to time. It's kind of interesting. to time. It's kind of interesting. to time. It's kind of interesting. L-theanine I rarely will use those during the I rarely will use those during the I rarely will use those during the daytime except under conditions where daytime except under conditions where daytime except under conditions where I'm feeling chronically stressed. So, I'm feeling chronically stressed. So, I'm feeling chronically stressed. So, check out the Human Effect Matrix on check out the Human Effect Matrix on check out the Human Effect Matrix on examine.com. Again, a phenomenal examine.com. Again, a phenomenal examine.com. Again, a phenomenal website. I think I've sent them a few website. I think I've sent them a few website. I think I've sent them a few emails before. Uh that's the only emails before. Uh that's the only emails before. Uh that's the only exchanges I've ever had with them, but I exchanges I've ever had with them, but I exchanges I've ever had with them, but I just think it's wonderful that they put just think it's wonderful that they put just think it's wonderful that they put together this resource. Otherwise, we'd together this resource. Otherwise, we'd together this resource. Otherwise, we'd be stuck mining PubMed. They've um be stuck mining PubMed. They've um be stuck mining PubMed. They've um collated the papers from PubMed with collated the papers from PubMed with collated the papers from PubMed with links to PubMed. So, terrific resource. links to PubMed. So, terrific resource. links to PubMed. So, terrific resource. So, social connection and some So, social connection and some So, social connection and some supplementation, of course, diet, supplementation, of course, diet, supplementation, of course, diet, exercise, sleep for long-term stress. exercise, sleep for long-term stress. exercise, sleep for long-term stress. And now, we are finally in a position to And now, we are finally in a position to And now, we are finally in a position to talk about what we have set out to do talk about what we have set out to do talk about what we have set out to do from the beginning, which is spend the from the beginning, which is spend the from the beginning, which is spend the month on emotions. month on emotions. month on emotions. It was very important that we discuss It was very important that we discuss It was very important that we discuss stress, and we discuss in the context of stress, and we discuss in the context of stress, and we discuss in the context of short, medium, and long-term stress. short, medium, and long-term stress. short, medium, and long-term stress. That we discuss tools for short-term, That we discuss tools for short-term, That we discuss tools for short-term, medium-term, and long-term control. I medium-term, and long-term control. I medium-term, and long-term control. I don't really want to say mitigation of don't really want to say mitigation of don't really want to say mitigation of stress. Stress is going to happen, but stress. Stress is going to happen, but stress. Stress is going to happen, but our ability to modulate and control our ability to modulate and control our ability to modulate and control stress in real-time, offline, using stress in real-time, offline, using stress in real-time, offline, using tools such as respiration, using tools such as such as respiration, using tools such as such as respiration, using tools such as dilation of gaze, using tools like dilation of gaze, using tools like dilation of gaze, using tools like social connection, maybe some social connection, maybe some social connection, maybe some supplements. Certainly, take care of supplements. Certainly, take care of supplements. Certainly, take care of your sleep and nutrition and exercise. your sleep and nutrition and exercise. your sleep and nutrition and exercise. Again, tons of resources and information Again, tons of resources and information Again, tons of resources and information in the sleep episodes, so you can look in the sleep episodes, so you can look in the sleep episodes, so you can look there. We will do a month on hormones, there. We will do a month on hormones, there. We will do a month on hormones, on exercise, etc. But let's talk about on exercise, etc. But let's talk about on exercise, etc. But let's talk about emotions because emotions because emotions because in subsequent episodes, we're going to in subsequent episodes, we're going to in subsequent episodes, we're going to talk about OCD. We're going to talk about OCD. We're going to talk about OCD. We're going to talk about depression. We're going to talk about depression. We're going to talk about depression. We're going to talk about mania. We're going to be talking about mania. We're going to be talking about mania. We're going to be talking about dopamine and all sorts of things, about dopamine and all sorts of things, about dopamine and all sorts of things, but at the core of emotions but at the core of emotions but at the core of emotions is this question, what is an emotion? is this question, what is an emotion? is this question, what is an emotion? Well, it's complex. There isn't a single Well, it's complex. There isn't a single Well, it's complex. There isn't a single brain area for any one of these things brain area for any one of these things brain area for any one of these things that we call emotions. that we call emotions. that we call emotions. My framework, and I think the modern My framework, and I think the modern My framework, and I think the modern science, both psychology and science, both psychology and science, both psychology and neuroscience is pretty well aligned with what is pretty well aligned with what is pretty well aligned with what Lisa Feldman Barrett has talked about. Lisa Feldman Barrett has talked about. Lisa Feldman Barrett has talked about. Now, Lisa's at Northeastern University. Now, Lisa's at Northeastern University. Now, Lisa's at Northeastern University. She runs a big lab there. She's a world She runs a big lab there. She's a world She runs a big lab there. She's a world expert in emotions. She's written two expert in emotions. She's written two expert in emotions. She's written two books that are really wonderful. One is books that are really wonderful. One is books that are really wonderful. One is how emotions are made, which was her how emotions are made, which was her how emotions are made, which was her first book. The second one is seven and first book. The second one is seven and first book. The second one is seven and a half facts about the brain. a half facts about the brain. a half facts about the brain. That's a wonderful book as well. It came That's a wonderful book as well. It came That's a wonderful book as well. It came out more recently. I hosted Lisa on an out more recently. I hosted Lisa on an out more recently. I hosted Lisa on an Instagram live once. Maybe we'll get her Instagram live once. Maybe we'll get her Instagram live once. Maybe we'll get her here on the podcast if we're lucky. her here on the podcast if we're lucky. her here on the podcast if we're lucky. We don't agree on everything about the We don't agree on everything about the We don't agree on everything about the neuroscience of emotions, but I neuroscience of emotions, but I neuroscience of emotions, but I subscribe to most everything that I've subscribe to most everything that I've subscribe to most everything that I've heard Lisa say. heard Lisa say. heard Lisa say. In particular, the fact that emotions In particular, the fact that emotions In particular, the fact that emotions are context-dependent, there's a are context-dependent, there's a are context-dependent, there's a cultural dependence, etc. cultural dependence, etc. cultural dependence, etc. I look at things mainly through the lens I look at things mainly through the lens I look at things mainly through the lens of physiology and neuroscience at kind of physiology and neuroscience at kind of physiology and neuroscience at kind of low-level circuitry. of low-level circuitry. of low-level circuitry. And one way to think about emotions that I one way to think about emotions that I one way to think about emotions that I think is consistent, and I think Lisa think is consistent, and I think Lisa think is consistent, and I think Lisa would generally approve, I can't speak would generally approve, I can't speak would generally approve, I can't speak for her, but I would hope she would for her, but I would hope she would for her, but I would hope she would generally approve of this description, generally approve of this description, generally approve of this description, is that when our internal state of is that when our internal state of is that when our internal state of stress or calm matches the demands on us stress or calm matches the demands on us stress or calm matches the demands on us or is mismatched from the demands on us, or is mismatched from the demands on us, or is mismatched from the demands on us, we tend to interpret those as good or we tend to interpret those as good or we tend to interpret those as good or bad. Let me give you an example. bad. Let me give you an example. bad. Let me give you an example. If I am feeling If I am feeling If I am feeling very anxious, very stressed inside very anxious, very stressed inside very anxious, very stressed inside and I have a lot to do, that doesn't and I have a lot to do, that doesn't and I have a lot to do, that doesn't feel good feel good feel good but it's really no different than if I'm but it's really no different than if I'm but it's really no different than if I'm very tired and I have a lot to do very tired and I have a lot to do very tired and I have a lot to do because there's this mismatch. I'm not because there's this mismatch. I'm not because there's this mismatch. I'm not in the right internal state, my internal in the right internal state, my internal in the right internal state, my internal state isn't correct, rather, to meet the state isn't correct, rather, to meet the state isn't correct, rather, to meet the demands that are being placed upon me. demands that are being placed upon me. demands that are being placed upon me. So, in both cases, whether I'm too tired So, in both cases, whether I'm too tired So, in both cases, whether I'm too tired or I'm too stressed to do what I need to or I'm too stressed to do what I need to or I'm too stressed to do what I need to do the valence, meaning the value that I the valence, meaning the value that I the valence, meaning the value that I assign to that is I don't feel good. assign to that is I don't feel good. assign to that is I don't feel good. It's not a good situation and I don't It's not a good situation and I don't It's not a good situation and I don't feel good. Now, I might call it feel good. Now, I might call it feel good. Now, I might call it stressed, I might call it anxious, I stressed, I might call it anxious, I stressed, I might call it anxious, I might call it worried, might call it a might call it worried, might call it a might call it worried, might call it a number of things, but it's not good. number of things, but it's not good. number of things, but it's not good. However, when I'm However, when I'm However, when I'm tired and I want to fall asleep tired and I want to fall asleep tired and I want to fall asleep well, then I feel good because that's well, then I feel good because that's well, then I feel good because that's what the demand is. I need to go to what the demand is. I need to go to what the demand is. I need to go to sleep and I'm tired. If I'm wide awake sleep and I'm tired. If I'm wide awake sleep and I'm tired. If I'm wide awake and I need to fall asleep then that's and I need to fall asleep then that's and I need to fall asleep then that's not good and I tend then the brain tends not good and I tend then the brain tends not good and I tend then the brain tends to go down the direction of interpreting to go down the direction of interpreting to go down the direction of interpreting the situation as a bad one. So, while the situation as a bad one. So, while the situation as a bad one. So, while the discussion around emotions is far the discussion around emotions is far the discussion around emotions is far more nuanced and more elaborate than more nuanced and more elaborate than more nuanced and more elaborate than this one way to think about your relationship one way to think about your relationship one way to think about your relationship to emotions is whether or not your to emotions is whether or not your to emotions is whether or not your internal state is matching the demands internal state is matching the demands internal state is matching the demands that are upon you. that are upon you. that are upon you. So, in that way, we don't really So, in that way, we don't really So, in that way, we don't really place so much value on whether or not place so much value on whether or not place so much value on whether or not we're feeling alert or sleepy. We only we're feeling alert or sleepy. We only we're feeling alert or sleepy. We only place value on whether or not that place value on whether or not that place value on whether or not that alertness, whether or not it's alertness, whether or not it's alertness, whether or not it's full-blown stress or not, or our full-blown stress or not, or our full-blown stress or not, or our sleepiness, whether or not we're falling sleepiness, whether or not we're falling sleepiness, whether or not we're falling asleep or just a little bit drowsy, asleep or just a little bit drowsy, asleep or just a little bit drowsy, whether or not that matches the whether or not that matches the whether or not that matches the conditions that we face. conditions that we face. conditions that we face. And it's a useful framework to have, and And it's a useful framework to have, and And it's a useful framework to have, and it's the reason in part why I spent this it's the reason in part why I spent this it's the reason in part why I spent this last hour and a half or so last hour and a half or so last hour and a half or so talking about stress and how to control talking about stress and how to control talking about stress and how to control stress. One reason we did that is because I One reason we did that is because I One reason we did that is because I think it's a valuable opportunity to think it's a valuable opportunity to think it's a valuable opportunity to learn some tools and understand stress learn some tools and understand stress learn some tools and understand stress and really learn how to take control of and really learn how to take control of and really learn how to take control of stress, which I think we could all stress, which I think we could all stress, which I think we could all benefit from doing regardless of age. benefit from doing regardless of age. benefit from doing regardless of age. The other reason is that when you start The other reason is that when you start The other reason is that when you start to understand that you have this kind of to understand that you have this kind of to understand that you have this kind of seesaw system in your body, this seesaw system in your body, this seesaw system in your body, this autonomic nervous system, that takes you autonomic nervous system, that takes you autonomic nervous system, that takes you from alert and calm to stressed to full-blown alert and calm to stressed to full-blown alert and calm to stressed to full-blown panic, it has that capacity, or from panic, it has that capacity, or from panic, it has that capacity, or from sleepy and drowsy to sleepy and drowsy to sleepy and drowsy to passing out tired to, you know, God passing out tired to, you know, God passing out tired to, you know, God forbid, let's hope never, but a coma, forbid, let's hope never, but a coma, forbid, let's hope never, but a coma, right? That you're basically on this right? That you're basically on this right? That you're basically on this seesaw all the time, and where you are seesaw all the time, and where you are seesaw all the time, and where you are on that seesaw of alertness or calmness on that seesaw of alertness or calmness on that seesaw of alertness or calmness positions you to be in better positions you to be in better positions you to be in better reaction to the demands that you face, whether or to the demands that you face, whether or to the demands that you face, whether or not the thing that you face is a need to not the thing that you face is a need to not the thing that you face is a need to fall asleep or to listen quietly and not fall asleep or to listen quietly and not fall asleep or to listen quietly and not react. You now know, for instance, that react. You now know, for instance, that react. You now know, for instance, that if your job is to take feedback, or if your job is to take feedback, or if your job is to take feedback, or maybe you're going in for a job maybe you're going in for a job maybe you're going in for a job evaluation, or evaluation, or evaluation, or you're in a relationship where you're in a relationship where you're in a relationship where you're there was a call for a discussion, and there was a call for a discussion, and there was a call for a discussion, and somebody needs to talk to you about somebody needs to talk to you about somebody needs to talk to you about something, and we need to talk about something, and we need to talk about something, and we need to talk about something. You're going to there like, something. You're going to there like, something. You're going to there like, "Oh goodness, this is going to be "Oh goodness, this is going to be "Oh goodness, this is going to be rough." Learning to reduce that stress response Learning to reduce that stress response Learning to reduce that stress response a little bit so that you are in a little bit so that you are in a little bit so that you are in a position to hear position to hear position to hear the information better. the information better. the information better. And remember from a previous episode, if And remember from a previous episode, if And remember from a previous episode, if you close your eyes, you'll be able to you close your eyes, you'll be able to you close your eyes, you'll be able to actually focus on the information actually focus on the information actually focus on the information better. There's your permission to not better. There's your permission to not better. There's your permission to not look someone directly in the eye while look someone directly in the eye while look someone directly in the eye while they talk to you if you really want to they talk to you if you really want to they talk to you if you really want to hear what they have to say. hear what they have to say. hear what they have to say. You will be able to modulate that stress You will be able to modulate that stress You will be able to modulate that stress response and lean into life better. You response and lean into life better. You response and lean into life better. You will be able to will be able to will be able to react to things in a more effective way react to things in a more effective way react to things in a more effective way and to not be and to not be and to not be And this is really one of the important And this is really one of the important And this is really one of the important things to me anyway is that so much of things to me anyway is that so much of things to me anyway is that so much of the language around psychology, which I the language around psychology, which I the language around psychology, which I think is a wonderful field, but pop I think is a wonderful field, but pop I think is a wonderful field, but pop psychology in particular is be psychology in particular is be psychology in particular is be responsive, not reactive. Well, great. responsive, not reactive. Well, great. responsive, not reactive. Well, great. But then how does one do that? Well, one But then how does one do that? Well, one But then how does one do that? Well, one does that by modulating their short-term does that by modulating their short-term does that by modulating their short-term stress response in real time. Not by stress response in real time. Not by stress response in real time. Not by saying, "Hold on, I need to meditate. saying, "Hold on, I need to meditate. saying, "Hold on, I need to meditate. Hold on, I need a massage, and then I Hold on, I need a massage, and then I Hold on, I need a massage, and then I can have this conversation." By can have this conversation." By can have this conversation." By modulating the reactivity in real time. modulating the reactivity in real time. modulating the reactivity in real time. How does one, for instance, be mindful? How does one, for instance, be mindful? How does one, for instance, be mindful? Which is a beautiful concept, but how Which is a beautiful concept, but how Which is a beautiful concept, but how are you mindful? Well, I don't know. are you mindful? Well, I don't know. are you mindful? Well, I don't know. When I'm moving through my day, a lot of When I'm moving through my day, a lot of When I'm moving through my day, a lot of times I'm just trying to get things times I'm just trying to get things times I'm just trying to get things done. And as soon as I start monitoring done. And as soon as I start monitoring done. And as soon as I start monitoring and seeing what I'm doing and it kind of and seeing what I'm doing and it kind of and seeing what I'm doing and it kind of third-personing what I'm doing, it third-personing what I'm doing, it third-personing what I'm doing, it actually takes me out of the actually takes me out of the actually takes me out of the effectiveness and experience of what I'm effectiveness and experience of what I'm effectiveness and experience of what I'm doing. So, for me, sometimes that doing. So, for me, sometimes that doing. So, for me, sometimes that mindfulness, that observer as they call mindfulness, that observer as they call mindfulness, that observer as they call it, is a is something that doesn't help it, is a is something that doesn't help it, is a is something that doesn't help me. It actually hinders me. What's me. It actually hinders me. What's me. It actually hinders me. What's important to me is to be able to work important to me is to be able to work important to me is to be able to work and focus and then to be able to and focus and then to be able to and focus and then to be able to disengage. To be able to do a non-sleep disengage. To be able to do a non-sleep disengage. To be able to do a non-sleep depressed or to be able to still fall depressed or to be able to still fall depressed or to be able to still fall asleep even though I've been working asleep even though I've been working asleep even though I've been working hard until 9:30 to put my head down at hard until 9:30 to put my head down at hard until 9:30 to put my head down at 10:00 and be out cold sleeping 10:00 and be out cold sleeping 10:00 and be out cold sleeping by 10:02. That's possible if you can by 10:02. That's possible if you can by 10:02. That's possible if you can learn to control this stress learn to control this stress learn to control this stress response. And to do that, we can't use response. And to do that, we can't use response. And to do that, we can't use the mind to control the mind. We need the mind to control the mind. We need the mind to control the mind. We need tools. And so a lot of the tools. And so a lot of the tools. And so a lot of the um people being grumpy or anxious or um people being grumpy or anxious or um people being grumpy or anxious or depressed, a lot of that, provided it's depressed, a lot of that, provided it's depressed, a lot of that, provided it's not for some underlying neurochemical not for some underlying neurochemical not for some underlying neurochemical reason that's chronic, a lot of that reason that's chronic, a lot of that reason that's chronic, a lot of that comes from being comes from being comes from being poorly rested, from overworked, from poorly rested, from overworked, from poorly rested, from overworked, from feeling like the world is bearing down feeling like the world is bearing down feeling like the world is bearing down on us. And so rather than take a on us. And so rather than take a on us. And so rather than take a subjective view of this, I take the view subjective view of this, I take the view subjective view of this, I take the view of objective physiology. What can we do of objective physiology. What can we do of objective physiology. What can we do that's anchored to these neuronal that's anchored to these neuronal that's anchored to these neuronal systems in our body, in our brain, in systems in our body, in our brain, in systems in our body, in our brain, in our eyes, in our diaphragm, etc., and our eyes, in our diaphragm, etc., and our eyes, in our diaphragm, etc., and look to those as tools, levers that we look to those as tools, levers that we look to those as tools, levers that we can pull on and push, and maneuver can pull on and push, and maneuver can pull on and push, and maneuver through life in a way where we start to through life in a way where we start to through life in a way where we start to feel like we have some agency, we feel like we have some agency, we feel like we have some agency, we actually have some real control because actually have some real control because actually have some real control because we're controlling the internal we're controlling the internal we're controlling the internal landscape. So, I think So, I think So, I think that ought to set the stage for where that ought to set the stage for where that ought to set the stage for where we're headed next, which is to talk we're headed next, which is to talk we're headed next, which is to talk about all the things that you normally about all the things that you normally about all the things that you normally think of when you think of emotions, think of when you think of emotions, think of when you think of emotions, like happiness, like awe, like joy, and like happiness, like awe, like joy, and like happiness, like awe, like joy, and we will get into some of that, but all we will get into some of that, but all we will get into some of that, but all of that rests firmly on the foundation of that rests firmly on the foundation of that rests firmly on the foundation of this thing we call the autonomic of this thing we call the autonomic of this thing we call the autonomic nervous system, this stress modulation, nervous system, this stress modulation, nervous system, this stress modulation, this calming modulation system. this calming modulation system. this calming modulation system. And again, whether or not you're And again, whether or not you're And again, whether or not you're activated or you're calm is not good or activated or you're calm is not good or activated or you're calm is not good or bad, it depends on the situation. bad, it depends on the situation. bad, it depends on the situation. Certainly when you want to fall asleep, Certainly when you want to fall asleep, Certainly when you want to fall asleep, being activated isn't good. When you being activated isn't good. When you being activated isn't good. When you have work to do, being activated is have work to do, being activated is have work to do, being activated is great. So, I hope today great. So, I hope today great. So, I hope today you were able to take a slightly you were able to take a slightly you were able to take a slightly different view of this thing that we different view of this thing that we different view of this thing that we call stress, not just see it as evil, call stress, not just see it as evil, call stress, not just see it as evil, but see it as powerful and useful in but see it as powerful and useful in but see it as powerful and useful in certain contexts, and great for us in certain contexts, and great for us in certain contexts, and great for us in certain contexts, and problematic in certain contexts, and problematic in certain contexts, and problematic in other contexts, and as well to think other contexts, and as well to think other contexts, and as well to think about the various tools that I've about the various tools that I've about the various tools that I've presented that can allow you to adjust presented that can allow you to adjust presented that can allow you to adjust and modulate your internal levels of and modulate your internal levels of and modulate your internal levels of alertness or calmness so that you can alertness or calmness so that you can alertness or calmness so that you can lean more effectively into life, which lean more effectively into life, which lean more effectively into life, which includes sleep and social connection, includes sleep and social connection, includes sleep and social connection, and the work you have to do, and of and the work you have to do, and of and the work you have to do, and of course acknowledges that the events in course acknowledges that the events in course acknowledges that the events in the world are beyond our control. What's the world are beyond our control. What's the world are beyond our control. What's in our control is how we react to them, in our control is how we react to them, in our control is how we react to them, something that's commonly said in the something that's commonly said in the something that's commonly said in the wellness and self-help and psychology wellness and self-help and psychology wellness and self-help and psychology world, but for which there often aren't world, but for which there often aren't world, but for which there often aren't as many concrete tools that we can as many concrete tools that we can as many concrete tools that we can really look to and trust in real time. really look to and trust in real time. really look to and trust in real time. And of course, there are other tools out And of course, there are other tools out And of course, there are other tools out there, as always. I'll say it. I there, as always. I'll say it. I there, as always. I'll say it. I strive to be accurate, but I'll never be strive to be accurate, but I'll never be strive to be accurate, but I'll never be exhaustive. I might have exhausted you. exhaustive. I might have exhausted you. exhaustive. I might have exhausted you. I might have cured your insomnia with I might have cured your insomnia with I might have cured your insomnia with this uh discussion today, but in all this uh discussion today, but in all this uh discussion today, but in all seriousness, my goal is to bring you seriousness, my goal is to bring you seriousness, my goal is to bring you tools and information so that you can tools and information so that you can tools and information so that you can manage better through life. So, thanks manage better through life. So, thanks manage better through life. So, thanks so much. so much. so much. I very much want to thank all of you for I very much want to thank all of you for I very much want to thank all of you for your support for the podcast. It's your support for the podcast. It's your support for the podcast. It's really been wonderful. If you've really been wonderful. If you've really been wonderful. If you've subscribed to the podcast on YouTube, subscribed to the podcast on YouTube, subscribed to the podcast on YouTube, Apple, or Spotify, or maybe even all Apple, or Spotify, or maybe even all Apple, or Spotify, or maybe even all three, terrific. If you haven't, please three, terrific. If you haven't, please three, terrific. If you haven't, please do subscribe on YouTube, Apple, or do subscribe on YouTube, Apple, or do subscribe on YouTube, Apple, or Spotify, or maybe even all three, which Spotify, or maybe even all three, which Spotify, or maybe even all three, which would be wonderful. would be wonderful. would be wonderful. On Apple, you can leave a five-star On Apple, you can leave a five-star On Apple, you can leave a five-star review if you think we deserve that, as review if you think we deserve that, as review if you think we deserve that, as well as a comment well as a comment well as a comment reviewing us. reviewing us. reviewing us. If you have suggestions, if you have If you have suggestions, if you have If you have suggestions, if you have questions regarding the content of the questions regarding the content of the questions regarding the content of the podcast, or things that you'd like us to podcast, or things that you'd like us to podcast, or things that you'd like us to cover in the future, please put those in cover in the future, please put those in cover in the future, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. the comment section on YouTube. the comment section on YouTube. As well, if you could recommend the As well, if you could recommend the As well, if you could recommend the podcast to friends, family members, podcast to friends, family members, podcast to friends, family members, coworkers that you think would benefit coworkers that you think would benefit coworkers that you think would benefit from the information, maybe even send from the information, maybe even send from the information, maybe even send them the links if you like, that's them the links if you like, that's them the links if you like, that's tremendously helpful. tremendously helpful. tremendously helpful. Today, as in previous episodes, I've Today, as in previous episodes, I've Today, as in previous episodes, I've touched on some things as they relate to touched on some things as they relate to touched on some things as they relate to supplementation. As always, I always supplementation. As always, I always supplementation. As always, I always cover a lot of tools that are zero-cost cover a lot of tools that are zero-cost cover a lot of tools that are zero-cost tools that it don't involve ingesting tools that it don't involve ingesting tools that it don't involve ingesting anything at all, behavioral tools. anything at all, behavioral tools. anything at all, behavioral tools. But, I mentioned some supplements that I But, I mentioned some supplements that I But, I mentioned some supplements that I particularly find useful. particularly find useful. particularly find useful. With supplements, it's a complicated With supplements, it's a complicated With supplements, it's a complicated landscape, often because many supplement landscape, often because many supplement landscape, often because many supplement companies don't put in the bottle what companies don't put in the bottle what companies don't put in the bottle what they say is in the particular they say is in the particular they say is in the particular product. We've partnered with Thorne, t h o r n We've partnered with Thorne, t h o r n We've partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e, because Thorne is a supplement company because Thorne is a supplement company because Thorne is a supplement company that we know to have the highest levels that we know to have the highest levels that we know to have the highest levels of stringency. It's used by the Mayo of stringency. It's used by the Mayo of stringency. It's used by the Mayo Clinic, it's used by all the major Clinic, it's used by all the major Clinic, it's used by all the major sports organizations for that particular sports organizations for that particular sports organizations for that particular reason, and because their quality reason, and because their quality reason, and because their quality standards are exceptionally high. standards are exceptionally high. standards are exceptionally high. If you'd like to try any supplements, If you'd like to try any supplements, If you'd like to try any supplements, and see the ones that I take, you can go and see the ones that I take, you can go and see the ones that I take, you can go to Thorne, t h o r n e dot com slash the to Thorne, t h o r n e dot com slash the to Thorne, t h o r n e dot com slash the letter u slash huberman, and if you do letter u slash huberman, and if you do letter u slash huberman, and if you do that, you'll get 20% off anything that's that, you'll get 20% off anything that's that, you'll get 20% off anything that's listed there on my page, as well as any listed there on my page, as well as any listed there on my page, as well as any of the supplements that Thorne sells. of the supplements that Thorne sells. of the supplements that Thorne sells. So, that's Thorne, t h o r n e, So, that's Thorne, t h o r n e, So, that's Thorne, t h o r n e, dot com slash the letter u slash dot com slash the letter u slash dot com slash the letter u slash huberman to get 20% off anything that huberman to get 20% off anything that huberman to get 20% off anything that Thorne sells. In addition, if you want Thorne sells. In addition, if you want Thorne sells. In addition, if you want to follow us on Twitter, we're there at to follow us on Twitter, we're there at to follow us on Twitter, we're there at Huberman Lab, or on Instagram, Huberman Lab, or on Instagram, Huberman Lab, or on Instagram, Huberman Lab. I also do some content on Huberman Lab. I also do some content on Huberman Lab. I also do some content on Huberman Lab, uh little neuroscience posts. Some Lab, uh little neuroscience posts. Some Lab, uh little neuroscience posts. Some are repost of clips from the podcast, are repost of clips from the podcast, are repost of clips from the podcast, others are unique content that you won't others are unique content that you won't others are unique content that you won't find on the on the podcast. So, you can find on the on the podcast. So, you can find on the on the podcast. So, you can follow us at Huberman Lab. Also, if follow us at Huberman Lab. Also, if follow us at Huberman Lab. Also, if you like, check out our Patreon, you like, check out our Patreon, you like, check out our Patreon, patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And most of all, and as always, really And most of all, and as always, really And most of all, and as always, really appreciate your time and attention appreciate your time and attention appreciate your time and attention today. I hope you practice some of the today. I hope you practice some of the today. I hope you practice some of the tools if they're right for you. I hope tools if they're right for you. I hope tools if they're right for you. I hope you think hard about stress and how you think hard about stress and how you think hard about stress and how you can control your stress. And above all, can control your stress. And above all, can control your stress. And above all, as always, thank you for your interest as always, thank you for your interest as always, thank you for your interest in science.