Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Erich Jarvis. Dr. Jarvis is guest is Dr. Erich Jarvis. Dr. Jarvis is guest is Dr. Erich Jarvis. Dr. Jarvis is a professor at the Rockefeller a professor at the Rockefeller a professor at the Rockefeller University in New York City, University in New York City, University in New York City, and his laboratory studies the and his laboratory studies the and his laboratory studies the neurobiology of vocal learning, neurobiology of vocal learning, neurobiology of vocal learning, language, speech disorders, and language, speech disorders, and language, speech disorders, and remarkably the relationship between remarkably the relationship between remarkably the relationship between language, music, and movement, in language, music, and movement, in language, music, and movement, in particular dance. particular dance. particular dance. His work spans from genomics, so the His work spans from genomics, so the His work spans from genomics, so the very genes that make up our genome and very genes that make up our genome and very genes that make up our genome and the genomes of other species that speak the genomes of other species that speak the genomes of other species that speak and have language, such as songbirds and have language, such as songbirds and have language, such as songbirds and parrots, all the way up to neural circuits, that all the way up to neural circuits, that all the way up to neural circuits, that is, the connections in the brain and is, the connections in the brain and is, the connections in the brain and body that govern our ability to learn body that govern our ability to learn body that govern our ability to learn and generate specific sounds and generate specific sounds and generate specific sounds and movements coordinated with those sounds, movements coordinated with those sounds, movements coordinated with those sounds, including hand movements, including hand movements, including hand movements, and all the way up to cognition, that is, all the way up to cognition, that is, all the way up to cognition, that is, our ability to think in specific ways our ability to think in specific ways our ability to think in specific ways based on what we are saying and the way based on what we are saying and the way based on what we are saying and the way that we comprehend what other people are that we comprehend what other people are that we comprehend what other people are saying, singing, and doing. saying, singing, and doing. saying, singing, and doing. As you'll soon see, As you'll soon see, As you'll soon see, I was immediately transfixed and I was immediately transfixed and I was immediately transfixed and absolutely enchanted by Dr. Jarvis's absolutely enchanted by Dr. Jarvis's absolutely enchanted by Dr. Jarvis's description of his work and the ways description of his work and the ways description of his work and the ways that it impacts all the various aspects that it impacts all the various aspects that it impacts all the various aspects of our lives. For instance, I learned of our lives. For instance, I learned of our lives. For instance, I learned from Dr. Jarvis that as we read, we are from Dr. Jarvis that as we read, we are from Dr. Jarvis that as we read, we are generating very low levels of motor generating very low levels of motor generating very low levels of motor activity in our throat, that is, we are activity in our throat, that is, we are activity in our throat, that is, we are speaking the words that we are reading speaking the words that we are reading speaking the words that we are reading at a level below the perception of sound at a level below the perception of sound at a level below the perception of sound or our own perception of those words. or our own perception of those words. or our own perception of those words. But if one were to put an amplifier to But if one were to put an amplifier to But if one were to put an amplifier to measure the firing of those muscles in measure the firing of those muscles in measure the firing of those muscles in our vocal cords, we'd find that as we're our vocal cords, we'd find that as we're our vocal cords, we'd find that as we're reading information, we are actually reading information, we are actually reading information, we are actually speaking that information. speaking that information. speaking that information. And as I learned and you'll soon learn, And as I learned and you'll soon learn, And as I learned and you'll soon learn, there's a direct link between those there's a direct link between those there's a direct link between those species in the world that have song and species in the world that have song and species in the world that have song and movement, which many of us would movement, which many of us would movement, which many of us would associate with dance, and our ability to associate with dance, and our ability to associate with dance, and our ability to learn and generate complex language. learn and generate complex language. learn and generate complex language. So, for people with speech disorders So, for people with speech disorders So, for people with speech disorders like stutter, or for people who are like stutter, or for people who are like stutter, or for people who are interested in multiple language interested in multiple language interested in multiple language learning, bilingual, trilingual, et learning, bilingual, trilingual, et learning, bilingual, trilingual, et cetera, and frankly for anyone who is cetera, and frankly for anyone who is cetera, and frankly for anyone who is interested in how we communicate through interested in how we communicate through interested in how we communicate through words, written or spoken, words, written or spoken, words, written or spoken, I'm certain today's episode is going to I'm certain today's episode is going to I'm certain today's episode is going to be an especially interesting and be an especially interesting and be an especially interesting and important one for you. Dr. Jarvis' work important one for you. Dr. Jarvis' work important one for you. Dr. Jarvis' work is so pioneering that he has been is so pioneering that he has been is so pioneering that he has been awarded truly countless awards. I'm not awarded truly countless awards. I'm not awarded truly countless awards. I'm not going to take our time to list off all going to take our time to list off all going to take our time to list off all of the various important awards that of the various important awards that of the various important awards that he's received, but I should point out he's received, but I should point out he's received, but I should point out that in addition to being a decorated that in addition to being a decorated that in addition to being a decorated professor at the Rockefeller University, professor at the Rockefeller University, professor at the Rockefeller University, he is also an investigator with the he is also an investigator with the he is also an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the so-called HHMI. so-called HHMI. so-called HHMI. And for those of you that don't know, And for those of you that don't know, And for those of you that don't know, HHMI investigators are selected on an HHMI investigators are selected on an HHMI investigators are selected on an extremely competitive basis, extremely competitive basis, extremely competitive basis, that they have to re-up, that is they that they have to re-up, that is they that they have to re-up, that is they have to re-compete every five years. have to re-compete every five years. have to re-compete every five years. They actually receive a grade every five They actually receive a grade every five They actually receive a grade every five years that dictates whether or not they years that dictates whether or not they years that dictates whether or not they are no longer a Howard Hughes are no longer a Howard Hughes are no longer a Howard Hughes investigator, whether or not they can investigator, whether or not they can investigator, whether or not they can advance to another five years of funding advance to another five years of funding advance to another five years of funding for their important research, and indeed for their important research, and indeed for their important research, and indeed Howard Hughes investigators are selected Howard Hughes investigators are selected Howard Hughes investigators are selected not just for the rigor of their work, not just for the rigor of their work, not just for the rigor of their work, but for their pioneering spirit and but for their pioneering spirit and but for their pioneering spirit and their ability to take on high-risk, their ability to take on high-risk, their ability to take on high-risk, high-benefit work, which is exactly the high-benefit work, which is exactly the high-benefit work, which is exactly the kind of work that Dr. Jarvis has been kind of work that Dr. Jarvis has been kind of work that Dr. Jarvis has been providing for decades now. providing for decades now. providing for decades now. Again, I think today's episode is one of Again, I think today's episode is one of Again, I think today's episode is one of the more unique and special episodes the more unique and special episodes the more unique and special episodes that we've had on the Huberman Lab that we've had on the Huberman Lab that we've had on the Huberman Lab podcast. I single it out because it podcast. I single it out because it podcast. I single it out because it really spans from the basic to the really spans from the basic to the really spans from the basic to the applied, and Dr. Jarvis' story is an applied, and Dr. Jarvis' story is an applied, and Dr. Jarvis' story is an especially unique one in terms of how he especially unique one in terms of how he especially unique one in terms of how he arrived at becoming a neurobiologist. arrived at becoming a neurobiologist. arrived at becoming a neurobiologist. So, for those of you that are interested So, for those of you that are interested So, for those of you that are interested in personal journey and personal story, in personal journey and personal story, in personal journey and personal story, Dr. Jarvis' is truly a special and Dr. Jarvis' is truly a special and Dr. Jarvis' is truly a special and important one. I'm pleased to announce important one. I'm pleased to announce important one. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab podcast is now that the Huberman Lab podcast is now that the Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. We partnered with Momentous Supplements. We partnered with Momentous Supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several partnered with Momentous for several partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they important reasons. First of all, they important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know ship internationally, because we know ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of that many of you are located outside of that many of you are located outside of the United States. Second of all, and the United States. Second of all, and the United States. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of perhaps most important, the quality of perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, their supplements is second to none, their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of both in terms of purity and precision of both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. the amounts of the ingredients. the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized Third, we've really emphasized Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements that are single ingredient supplements that are single ingredient supplements and that are supplied in supplements and that are supplied in supplements and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a dosages that allow you to build a dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's supplementation protocol that's supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for optimized for cost, that's optimized for optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add effectiveness, and that you can add effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your things and remove things from your things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really protocol in a way that's really protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like systematic and scientific. If you'd like systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner to see the supplements that we partner to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to with Momentous on, you can go to with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There you'll see those supplements and There you'll see those supplements and There you'll see those supplements and just keep in mind that we are constantly just keep in mind that we are constantly just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements expanding the library of supplements expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular available through Momentous on a regular available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's basis. Again, that's basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is podcast. Our first sponsor is podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your immediate and help you better meet your immediate and help you better meet your immediate and long-term health goals. I've long been a long-term health goals. I've long been a long-term health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work believer in getting regular blood work believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of done for the simple reason that many of done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And analyzed from a quality blood test. And analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insight into, tests, you can also get insight into, tests, you can also get insight into, for example, what your biological age is for example, what your biological age is for example, what your biological age is and compare that to your chronological and compare that to your chronological and compare that to your chronological age. The problem with a lot of DNA tests age. The problem with a lot of DNA tests age. The problem with a lot of DNA tests and blood tests, however, is you get and blood tests, however, is you get and blood tests, however, is you get information back about metabolic information back about metabolic information back about metabolic factors, lipids, factors, lipids, factors, lipids, and hormones and so forth, but you don't and hormones and so forth, but you don't and hormones and so forth, but you don't know what to do with or about that know what to do with or about that know what to do with or about that information. InsideTracker solves that information. InsideTracker solves that information. InsideTracker solves that problem with a simple platform that problem with a simple platform that problem with a simple platform that allows you to click on any specific allows you to click on any specific allows you to click on any specific factor, learn more about it and what it factor, learn more about it and what it factor, learn more about it and what it does in your brain and body, and also does in your brain and body, and also does in your brain and body, and also the various nutritional, the various nutritional, the various nutritional, supplementation, and other types of supplementation, and other types of supplementation, and other types of interventions you can take to bring the interventions you can take to bring the interventions you can take to bring the levels of that factor into the ranges levels of that factor into the ranges levels of that factor into the ranges that are optimal for you and your that are optimal for you and your that are optimal for you and your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also to get 20% off. Today's episode is also to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. Roka makes brought to us by Roka. Roka makes brought to us by Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. They also the absolute highest quality. They also the absolute highest quality. They also have some really unique features that have some really unique features that have some really unique features that make them especially attractive from the make them especially attractive from the make them especially attractive from the standpoint of aesthetics and standpoint of aesthetics and standpoint of aesthetics and performance. The company was founded by two The company was founded by two The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and All-American swimmers from Stanford, and All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about their eyeglasses and everything about their eyeglasses and everything about their eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with sunglasses were designed with sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. Initially, the performance in mind. Initially, the performance in mind. Initially, the eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed for sport, that is for running and for sport, that is for running and for sport, that is for running and for cycling, etc. And indeed, still their cycling, etc. And indeed, still their cycling, etc. And indeed, still their eyeglasses and sunglasses are very eyeglasses and sunglasses are very eyeglasses and sunglasses are very lightweight, and they won't slip off lightweight, and they won't slip off lightweight, and they won't slip off your face if you get sweaty. But they your face if you get sweaty. But they your face if you get sweaty. But they also have a terrific aesthetic. You can also have a terrific aesthetic. You can also have a terrific aesthetic. You can wear them to work, you can wear them out wear them to work, you can wear them out wear them to work, you can wear them out to eat. I wear readers at night when I to eat. I wear readers at night when I to eat. I wear readers at night when I work or if I drive, and I wear work or if I drive, and I wear work or if I drive, and I wear sunglasses sometimes during the middle sunglasses sometimes during the middle sunglasses sometimes during the middle of the day if it's too bright and I need of the day if it's too bright and I need of the day if it's too bright and I need sunglasses in order to see. If you'd sunglasses in order to see. If you'd sunglasses in order to see. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses or like to try Roka eyeglasses or like to try Roka eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to roka, that's sunglasses, you can go to roka, that's sunglasses, you can go to roka, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, save 20% off your first order. Again, save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com, and enter the code that's roka.com, and enter the code that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element also brought to us by Element. Element also brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has is an electrolyte drink that has is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you everything you need and nothing you everything you need and nothing you don't, meaning no sugar but plenty of don't, meaning no sugar but plenty of don't, meaning no sugar but plenty of the correct ratios of sodium, magnesium, the correct ratios of sodium, magnesium, the correct ratios of sodium, magnesium, and potassium. And those three and potassium. And those three and potassium. And those three electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are critical for your neuron, potassium, are critical for your neuron, potassium, are critical for your neuron, your nerve cell function, and for the your nerve cell function, and for the your nerve cell function, and for the function of all the cells in your brain function of all the cells in your brain function of all the cells in your brain and body. and body. and body. I've mentioned this before on the I've mentioned this before on the I've mentioned this before on the podcast, but I'm a fan of salt. Not podcast, but I'm a fan of salt. Not podcast, but I'm a fan of salt. Not taking too much salt, but certainly not taking too much salt, but certainly not taking too much salt, but certainly not getting too little salt. Element has getting too little salt. Element has getting too little salt. Element has 1,000 mg, that is 1 g of salt, which 1,000 mg, that is 1 g of salt, which 1,000 mg, that is 1 g of salt, which might sound like a lot of salt, but for might sound like a lot of salt, but for might sound like a lot of salt, but for many people, especially people who are many people, especially people who are many people, especially people who are following low-carbohydrate diets following low-carbohydrate diets following low-carbohydrate diets or who are exercising or sweating a lot or who are exercising or sweating a lot or who are exercising or sweating a lot or both, or both, or both, that level of salt can actually help you that level of salt can actually help you that level of salt can actually help you in many circumstances. Getting the in many circumstances. Getting the in many circumstances. Getting the appropriate level of salt, and certainly appropriate level of salt, and certainly appropriate level of salt, and certainly the appropriate levels of electrolytes, the appropriate levels of electrolytes, the appropriate levels of electrolytes, will improve your cognitive function and will improve your cognitive function and will improve your cognitive function and will improve your physical performance. will improve your physical performance. will improve your physical performance. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement, that's to drinkelement, that's to drinkelement, that's element.com/huberman, and you'll get a free sample pack with and you'll get a free sample pack with and you'll get a free sample pack with your order. That's your order. That's your order. That's drinkelement.com/huberman. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Eric And now, for my discussion with Dr. Eric And now, for my discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. Eric, so great to have you here. Jarvis. Eric, so great to have you here. Jarvis. Eric, so great to have you here. Thank you. Yeah. Very interested in Thank you. Yeah. Very interested in Thank you. Yeah. Very interested in learning from you about speech and learning from you about speech and learning from you about speech and language. And even as I ask the language. And even as I ask the language. And even as I ask the question, I realize that a lot of question, I realize that a lot of question, I realize that a lot of people, including myself, probably don't people, including myself, probably don't people, including myself, probably don't fully appreciate the distinction between fully appreciate the distinction between fully appreciate the distinction between speech and language. speech and language. speech and language. Right? Speech, I think of as the motor Right? Speech, I think of as the motor Right? Speech, I think of as the motor patterns, the production of sound uh patterns, the production of sound uh patterns, the production of sound uh that has meaning, hopefully. And that has meaning, hopefully. And that has meaning, hopefully. And language, of course, comes in various language, of course, comes in various language, of course, comes in various languages and varieties of ways of languages and varieties of ways of languages and varieties of ways of communicating. But, in terms of the communicating. But, in terms of the communicating. But, in terms of the study of speech and language, and study of speech and language, and study of speech and language, and thinking about how the brain organizes thinking about how the brain organizes thinking about how the brain organizes speech and language, uh what are the speech and language, uh what are the speech and language, uh what are the similarities? What are the differences? similarities? What are the differences? similarities? What are the differences? How should we think about speech and How should we think about speech and How should we think about speech and language? Yeah. Um well, I'm glad you, language? Yeah. Um well, I'm glad you, language? Yeah. Um well, I'm glad you, you know, invited me here, and I'm also you know, invited me here, and I'm also you know, invited me here, and I'm also glad to get that first question, glad to get that first question, glad to get that first question, which I consider a provocative one. The which I consider a provocative one. The which I consider a provocative one. The reason why reason why reason why uh I've been struggling what is the uh I've been struggling what is the uh I've been struggling what is the difference between speech and language difference between speech and language difference between speech and language for many years, for many years, for many years, and realized why am I struggling? It's and realized why am I struggling? It's and realized why am I struggling? It's because they are behavioral terms, let's because they are behavioral terms, let's because they are behavioral terms, let's call them psychologically psychology call them psychologically psychology call them psychologically psychology developed kind of terms, developed kind of terms, developed kind of terms, um that don't actually align exactly um that don't actually align exactly um that don't actually align exactly with brain function. with brain function. with brain function. All right? And the question is there a All right? And the question is there a All right? And the question is there a distinction between speech and language? distinction between speech and language? distinction between speech and language? And when I look at the brain of work And when I look at the brain of work And when I look at the brain of work that other people have done, work we that other people have done, work we that other people have done, work we have done, also compared it with animal have done, also compared it with animal have done, also compared it with animal models, like those who can imitate models, like those who can imitate models, like those who can imitate sounds, like parrots and songbirds, sounds, like parrots and songbirds, sounds, like parrots and songbirds, I start to see there really isn't such a I start to see there really isn't such a I start to see there really isn't such a sharp distinction. So, so to get at what sharp distinction. So, so to get at what sharp distinction. So, so to get at what I think is going on, let me tell you how I think is going on, let me tell you how I think is going on, let me tell you how some people think of it now, that some people think of it now, that some people think of it now, that there's a separate language module in there's a separate language module in there's a separate language module in the brain the brain the brain uh that has all the algorithms and uh that has all the algorithms and uh that has all the algorithms and computations that influence the speech computations that influence the speech computations that influence the speech pathway on how to produce sound pathway on how to produce sound pathway on how to produce sound and the auditory pathway on how to and the auditory pathway on how to and the auditory pathway on how to perceive and interpret it uh for speech perceive and interpret it uh for speech perceive and interpret it uh for speech or for you know or for you know or for you know sound that we call speech. sound that we call speech. sound that we call speech. And um And um And um it turns out it turns out it turns out I don't think there is any good evidence I don't think there is any good evidence I don't think there is any good evidence for a separate language module. for a separate language module. for a separate language module. Instead there is a speech production pathway there is a speech production pathway there is a speech production pathway that's controlling our larynx, that's controlling our larynx, that's controlling our larynx, controlling our jaw muscles, that has controlling our jaw muscles, that has controlling our jaw muscles, that has built within it all the complex built within it all the complex built within it all the complex algorithms for spoken language. And algorithms for spoken language. And algorithms for spoken language. And there's the auditory pathway there's the auditory pathway there's the auditory pathway that has built within it all the complex that has built within it all the complex that has built within it all the complex algorithms for understanding speech, not algorithms for understanding speech, not algorithms for understanding speech, not separate from a language module. separate from a language module. separate from a language module. And this speech production pathway is And this speech production pathway is And this speech production pathway is specialized to humans specialized to humans specialized to humans and parrots and songbirds. Whereas this and parrots and songbirds. Whereas this and parrots and songbirds. Whereas this auditory perception pathway is more auditory perception pathway is more auditory perception pathway is more ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. And this is why dogs can understand sit. And this is why dogs can understand sit. And this is why dogs can understand sit. Sientate say, come here ball boy, get Sientate say, come here ball boy, get Sientate say, come here ball boy, get the ball and so forth. Dogs can the ball and so forth. Dogs can the ball and so forth. Dogs can understand several hundred human speech understand several hundred human speech understand several hundred human speech words. Great apes, you can teach them words. Great apes, you can teach them words. Great apes, you can teach them for several thousand, but they can't say for several thousand, but they can't say for several thousand, but they can't say a word. a word. a word. Fascinating. Because you've raised a number of animal Because you've raised a number of animal Because you've raised a number of animal species early on here and because I have species early on here and because I have species early on here and because I have a basically an obsession with animals a basically an obsession with animals a basically an obsession with animals since the time I was very small, I have since the time I was very small, I have since the time I was very small, I have to ask um which animals have language? to ask um which animals have language? to ask um which animals have language? Which animals have modes of Which animals have modes of Which animals have modes of communication that are sort of like communication that are sort of like communication that are sort of like language? Yeah. Um you know, I've heard language? Yeah. Um you know, I've heard language? Yeah. Um you know, I've heard whale songs. I don't know what they're whale songs. I don't know what they're whale songs. I don't know what they're saying. They sound very beautiful, but I saying. They sound very beautiful, but I saying. They sound very beautiful, but I they could be insulting each other for they could be insulting each other for they could be insulting each other for all I know. Yeah. Um and they very all I know. Yeah. Um and they very all I know. Yeah. Um and they very well may be. well may be. well may be. Dolphins, birds, I mean they Dolphins, birds, I mean they Dolphins, birds, I mean they what do we understand about modes of what do we understand about modes of what do we understand about modes of communication that are communication that are communication that are like language but might not be what like language but might not be what like language but might not be what would classically be called language. would classically be called language. would classically be called language. So modes of communication that people would modes of communication that people would modes of communication that people would define as language more very in a very define as language more very in a very define as language more very in a very narrow definition they would say narrow definition they would say narrow definition they would say production of sound so speech. production of sound so speech. production of sound so speech. Um but what about the hands? The Um but what about the hands? The Um but what about the hands? The gesturing with the hands? What about a gesturing with the hands? What about a gesturing with the hands? What about a bird who is doing aerial displays in the bird who is doing aerial displays in the bird who is doing aerial displays in the air communicating information through air communicating information through air communicating information through body language, right? body language, right? body language, right? Well, um I'm going to go back to the Well, um I'm going to go back to the Well, um I'm going to go back to the brain. So what I think is going on is for spoken what I think is going on is for spoken what I think is going on is for spoken language we're using the speech pathway language we're using the speech pathway language we're using the speech pathway and all the complex algorithms there. and all the complex algorithms there. and all the complex algorithms there. Next to the brain regions that are Next to the brain regions that are Next to the brain regions that are controlling spoken language are the controlling spoken language are the controlling spoken language are the brain regions for gesturing with the brain regions for gesturing with the brain regions for gesturing with the hands. And that hand parallel pathway has also And that hand parallel pathway has also And that hand parallel pathway has also complex algorithms that we can utilize. complex algorithms that we can utilize. complex algorithms that we can utilize. And some species are more advanced in And some species are more advanced in And some species are more advanced in these circuits whether it's sound or these circuits whether it's sound or these circuits whether it's sound or gesturing with hands and some are less gesturing with hands and some are less gesturing with hands and some are less advanced. Now we humans and a few others are the Now we humans and a few others are the Now we humans and a few others are the most advanced for the speech sounds or most advanced for the speech sounds or most advanced for the speech sounds or the or the spoken language but a the or the spoken language but a the or the spoken language but a non-human primate can produce gesturing non-human primate can produce gesturing non-human primate can produce gesturing in a more advanced form than they can in a more advanced form than they can in a more advanced form than they can produce sound. produce sound. produce sound. I'm not sure I got that across clearly I'm not sure I got that across clearly I'm not sure I got that across clearly just to say that just to say that just to say that humans are the most advanced at spoken humans are the most advanced at spoken humans are the most advanced at spoken language but not necessarily as big a difference but not necessarily as big a difference but not necessarily as big a difference at gestural language compared to some at gestural language compared to some at gestural language compared to some other species. other species. other species. Very clear and very interesting and Very clear and very interesting and Very clear and very interesting and immediately prompts the question have immediately prompts the question have immediately prompts the question have there been brain imaging or other sorts there been brain imaging or other sorts there been brain imaging or other sorts of studies evaluating neural activity in studies evaluating neural activity in studies evaluating neural activity in the context of the context of the context of you know, cultures and languages at you know, cultures and languages at you know, cultures and languages at least that I associate with a lot of least that I associate with a lot of least that I associate with a lot of hand movement like Italian versus hand movement like Italian versus hand movement like Italian versus I don't know maybe you could give us I don't know maybe you could give us I don't know maybe you could give us some examples of cultures where language some examples of cultures where language some examples of cultures where language is not associated with as much is not associated with as much is not associated with as much overt hand movement. overt hand movement. overt hand movement. Yes. So, as you and I are talking here Yes. So, as you and I are talking here Yes. So, as you and I are talking here today and people who are listening but today and people who are listening but today and people who are listening but can't see us, we're actually gesturing can't see us, we're actually gesturing can't see us, we're actually gesturing with our hands as we talk uh without with our hands as we talk uh without with our hands as we talk uh without knowing it or doing it unconsciously. knowing it or doing it unconsciously. knowing it or doing it unconsciously. And if we were talking on a telephone, I And if we were talking on a telephone, I And if we were talking on a telephone, I would have one hand here and I'd be would have one hand here and I'd be would have one hand here and I'd be gesturing with the other hand without gesturing with the other hand without gesturing with the other hand without even you seeing me, right? And so, why even you seeing me, right? And so, why even you seeing me, right? And so, why is that? Uh some have argued and I would is that? Uh some have argued and I would is that? Uh some have argued and I would agree with based upon what we've seen is agree with based upon what we've seen is agree with based upon what we've seen is that there's an evolutionary that there's an evolutionary that there's an evolutionary relationship between the brain pathways relationship between the brain pathways relationship between the brain pathways that control speech production and that control speech production and that control speech production and gesturing. Uh and the brain regions I mentioned Uh and the brain regions I mentioned Uh and the brain regions I mentioned are directly adjacent to each other. And are directly adjacent to each other. And are directly adjacent to each other. And why is that? I think that the brain why is that? I think that the brain why is that? I think that the brain pathways that control speech evolved out pathways that control speech evolved out pathways that control speech evolved out of the brain pathways that control body of the brain pathways that control body of the brain pathways that control body movement. All right? And um All right? And um All right? And um that's uh that's uh that's uh when you talk about Italian, French, when you talk about Italian, French, when you talk about Italian, French, English, and so forth, English, and so forth, English, and so forth, um each one of those languages come with um each one of those languages come with um each one of those languages come with a learned set of gestures a learned set of gestures a learned set of gestures that uh you can communicate with. Now, that uh you can communicate with. Now, that uh you can communicate with. Now, how is that related to other animals? how is that related to other animals? how is that related to other animals? Well, Koko, a gorilla who was raised Well, Koko, a gorilla who was raised Well, Koko, a gorilla who was raised with humans for 39 years or more, uh with humans for 39 years or more, uh with humans for 39 years or more, uh learned how to do gesture learned how to do gesture learned how to do gesture communication, learned how to sign communication, learned how to sign communication, learned how to sign language, so to speak, right? But Koko language, so to speak, right? But Koko language, so to speak, right? But Koko couldn't produce those sounds. Koko couldn't produce those sounds. Koko couldn't produce those sounds. Koko could understand them as well could understand them as well could understand them as well by sign by seeing somebody sign or by sign by seeing somebody sign or by sign by seeing somebody sign or hearing somebody produce speech, but hearing somebody produce speech, but hearing somebody produce speech, but Koko couldn't produce it with her voice. Koko couldn't produce it with her voice. Koko couldn't produce it with her voice. And so, what's going on there is that And so, what's going on there is that And so, what's going on there is that a number of species, not all of them, a number of species, not all of them, a number of species, not all of them, a number of species have motor pathways in number of species have motor pathways in number of species have motor pathways in the brain where you can do learned the brain where you can do learned the brain where you can do learned gesturing, rudimentary language if you gesturing, rudimentary language if you gesturing, rudimentary language if you want to say with your limbs, even if want to say with your limbs, even if want to say with your limbs, even if it's not as advanced as humans, but they it's not as advanced as humans, but they it's not as advanced as humans, but they don't have this extra brain pathway for don't have this extra brain pathway for don't have this extra brain pathway for the sound. the sound. the sound. So, they can't gesture with their voice So, they can't gesture with their voice So, they can't gesture with their voice in the way that they gesture with their in the way that they gesture with their in the way that they gesture with their hands. I see. hands. I see. hands. I see. One thing that I've wondered about for a One thing that I've wondered about for a One thing that I've wondered about for a very long time is whether or not um very long time is whether or not um very long time is whether or not um primitive emotions primitive emotions primitive emotions and primitive sounds are the early and primitive sounds are the early and primitive sounds are the early substrate of language. And whether or substrate of language. And whether or substrate of language. And whether or not there's a bridge that we can draw not there's a bridge that we can draw not there's a bridge that we can draw between those in terms of just between those in terms of just between those in terms of just the basic respiration systems associated the basic respiration systems associated the basic respiration systems associated with different extreme feelings. Here with different extreme feelings. Here with different extreme feelings. Here Here's the way I'm imagining this might Here's the way I'm imagining this might Here's the way I'm imagining this might work. When I smell something delicious, When I smell something delicious, When I smell something delicious, I typically inhale more, I typically inhale more, I typically inhale more, Mhm. and I might say, "Mhm." or Mhm. and I might say, "Mhm." or Mhm. and I might say, "Mhm." or something like that. Whereas if I smell something like that. Whereas if I smell something like that. Whereas if I smell something putrid, I typically turn away, something putrid, I typically turn away, something putrid, I typically turn away, I wince, and I will exhale, you know, I wince, and I will exhale, you know, I wince, and I will exhale, you know, I sort of kind of like turn away, trying sort of kind of like turn away, trying sort of kind of like turn away, trying to not ingest those molecules or inhale to not ingest those molecules or inhale to not ingest those molecules or inhale those molecules. I could imagine that those molecules. I could imagine that those molecules. I could imagine that these are the basic dark and light these are the basic dark and light these are the basic dark and light contrasts of the of the language system. contrasts of the of the language system. contrasts of the of the language system. And as I say that, I'm saying that from And as I say that, I'm saying that from And as I say that, I'm saying that from the orientation of a vision scientist the orientation of a vision scientist the orientation of a vision scientist who thinks of all visual images built up who thinks of all visual images built up who thinks of all visual images built up in a very basic way of a hierarchical in a very basic way of a hierarchical in a very basic way of a hierarchical model of the ability to see dark and model of the ability to see dark and model of the ability to see dark and light. So, I could imagine this kind of light. So, I could imagine this kind of light. So, I could imagine this kind of primitive to more sophisticated primitive to more sophisticated primitive to more sophisticated um pyramid of sound to language. pyramid of sound to language. pyramid of sound to language. Is this a crazy idea? Do we have any uh Is this a crazy idea? Do we have any uh Is this a crazy idea? Do we have any uh Do we have any evidence this is the way Do we have any evidence this is the way Do we have any evidence this is the way it works? Uh no, it's not a crazy idea. it works? Uh no, it's not a crazy idea. it works? Uh no, it's not a crazy idea. And in fact, you hit upon one of the key And in fact, you hit upon one of the key And in fact, you hit upon one of the key distinctions in the field of research distinctions in the field of research distinctions in the field of research that I had started out in, which is that I had started out in, which is that I had started out in, which is vocal learning research. So, for vocal learning research. So, for vocal learning research. So, for vocal communication, uh you have most vertebrate species uh you have most vertebrate species uh you have most vertebrate species vocalize. But most of them are producing vocalize. But most of them are producing vocalize. But most of them are producing innate sounds that they're born with innate sounds that they're born with innate sounds that they're born with uh producing. Uh that is babies crying, uh producing. Uh that is babies crying, uh producing. Uh that is babies crying, for example, or dogs barking. for example, or dogs barking. for example, or dogs barking. Uh and only a few species have learned Uh and only a few species have learned Uh and only a few species have learned vocal communication, the ability to vocal communication, the ability to vocal communication, the ability to imitate sounds. And that's is what makes imitate sounds. And that's is what makes imitate sounds. And that's is what makes spoken language special. When people spoken language special. When people spoken language special. When people think of what's special about language, think of what's special about language, think of what's special about language, it's the learned vocalizations. It's the it's the learned vocalizations. It's the it's the learned vocalizations. It's the what that is what's rare. what that is what's rare. what that is what's rare. And so the distinction between nateness And so the distinction between nateness And so the distinction between nateness and learned um is more of a bigger and learned um is more of a bigger and learned um is more of a bigger dichotomy when it comes to vocalizations dichotomy when it comes to vocalizations dichotomy when it comes to vocalizations than for other behaviors in the animal than for other behaviors in the animal than for other behaviors in the animal kingdom. And uh And uh And uh when you go in the brain, you see it when you go in the brain, you see it when you go in the brain, you see it there as well. Uh and so all the things there as well. Uh and so all the things there as well. Uh and so all the things you talked about, the breathing, the you talked about, the breathing, the you talked about, the breathing, the grunting, and so forth, a lot of that is grunting, and so forth, a lot of that is grunting, and so forth, a lot of that is handled by the brainstem circuits, you handled by the brainstem circuits, you handled by the brainstem circuits, you know, right around the level of your know, right around the level of your know, right around the level of your neck and below. neck and below. neck and below. Uh like a reflex kind of thing. So or like a reflex kind of thing. So or like a reflex kind of thing. So or even some emotional aspects of your even some emotional aspects of your even some emotional aspects of your behavior in the hypothalamus and so behavior in the hypothalamus and so behavior in the hypothalamus and so forth. But for a learned behavior, learning how But for a learned behavior, learning how But for a learned behavior, learning how to speak, to speak, to speak, uh learning how to play the piano, uh learning how to play the piano, uh learning how to play the piano, teaching a dog to learn how to do teaching a dog to learn how to do teaching a dog to learn how to do tricks, is using the forebrain circuits. is using the forebrain circuits. is using the forebrain circuits. And what has happened is that there's a And what has happened is that there's a And what has happened is that there's a lot of forebrain circuits that are lot of forebrain circuits that are lot of forebrain circuits that are controlling learning how to move body controlling learning how to move body controlling learning how to move body parts in these species, but not for the parts in these species, but not for the parts in these species, but not for the vocalizations. But in humans and in vocalizations. But in humans and in vocalizations. But in humans and in parrots and some other species, parrots and some other species, parrots and some other species, somehow we acquired circuits where the somehow we acquired circuits where the somehow we acquired circuits where the forebrain has taken over the brainstem forebrain has taken over the brainstem forebrain has taken over the brainstem and now using that brainstem not only to and now using that brainstem not only to and now using that brainstem not only to produce the innate behaviors or vocal produce the innate behaviors or vocal produce the innate behaviors or vocal behaviors, but the learned ones as well. behaviors, but the learned ones as well. behaviors, but the learned ones as well. Do we have any sense of when Do we have any sense of when Do we have any sense of when modern or sophisticated language modern or sophisticated language modern or sophisticated language evolved? You know, uh thinking back to evolved? You know, uh thinking back to evolved? You know, uh thinking back to the species that we evolved from and the species that we evolved from and the species that we evolved from and even within Homo sapiens, um have has even within Homo sapiens, um have has even within Homo sapiens, um have has there been an evolution of language? Has there been an evolution of language? Has there been an evolution of language? Has there been a devolution of language? there been a devolution of language? there been a devolution of language? Yeah. Yeah yeah I would say um Yeah yeah I would say um Yeah yeah I would say um and to be able to answer that and to be able to answer that and to be able to answer that question, it does come with the caveat question, it does come with the caveat question, it does come with the caveat that I think we humans overrate that I think we humans overrate that I think we humans overrate ourselves when it compared to other ourselves when it compared to other ourselves when it compared to other species. And so it makes species. And so it makes species. And so it makes even scientists even scientists even scientists go astray in trying to hypothesize go astray in trying to hypothesize go astray in trying to hypothesize when you especially don't find fossil when you especially don't find fossil when you especially don't find fossil evidence of language that easily. evidence of language that easily. evidence of language that easily. In out there in terms of what happened in out there in terms of what happened in out there in terms of what happened in the past. the past. the past. We amongst the primates which we humans amongst the primates which we humans amongst the primates which we humans belong to, we are the only ones that belong to, we are the only ones that belong to, we are the only ones that have this advanced vocal learning have this advanced vocal learning have this advanced vocal learning ability. Now when you when you when you it was assumed that it was only Homo it was assumed that it was only Homo it was assumed that it was only Homo sapiens. Then you can go back in time now based Then you can go back in time now based Then you can go back in time now based upon genomic data upon genomic data upon genomic data not only of us living humans but of the not only of us living humans but of the not only of us living humans but of the fossils that have been found for Homo fossils that have been found for Homo fossils that have been found for Homo sapiens of Neanderthals, of Denisovan of Neanderthals, of Denisovan of Neanderthals, of Denisovan individuals and discover that our individuals and discover that our individuals and discover that our ancestor, our human ancestors supposedly ancestor, our human ancestors supposedly ancestor, our human ancestors supposedly hybridized with these other hybridized with these other hybridized with these other hominid species. hominid species. hominid species. And it was assumed that these other And it was assumed that these other And it was assumed that these other hominid species don't learn how to hominid species don't learn how to hominid species don't learn how to imitate sounds. imitate sounds. imitate sounds. I don't know of any species today that's I don't know of any species today that's I don't know of any species today that's a vocal learner that can have children a vocal learner that can have children a vocal learner that can have children with a non-vocal learning species. with a non-vocal learning species. with a non-vocal learning species. I don't see it. Doesn't mean it didn't I don't see it. Doesn't mean it didn't I don't see it. Doesn't mean it didn't exist. And when we look at the genetic data And when we look at the genetic data And when we look at the genetic data from these ancestral hominids that you from these ancestral hominids that you from these ancestral hominids that you know where we can look at genes that are know where we can look at genes that are know where we can look at genes that are involved in learn vocal communication, involved in learn vocal communication, involved in learn vocal communication, they have the same sequence as we humans they have the same sequence as we humans they have the same sequence as we humans do. For genes that function in speech For genes that function in speech For genes that function in speech circuits. So I think Neanderthals had spoken So I think Neanderthals had spoken So I think Neanderthals had spoken language. I'm not going to say it's as language. I'm not going to say it's as language. I'm not going to say it's as advanced as what it is in humans, I advanced as what it is in humans, I advanced as what it is in humans, I don't know. don't know. don't know. But I think it's been there for at least But I think it's been there for at least But I think it's been there for at least between 500,000 to a million years. between 500,000 to a million years. between 500,000 to a million years. That our ancestors had this ability and That our ancestors had this ability and That our ancestors had this ability and that we've been coming more and more that we've been coming more and more that we've been coming more and more advanced with it culturally and possibly advanced with it culturally and possibly advanced with it culturally and possibly genetically. But I think it's evolved sometime in the But I think it's evolved sometime in the But I think it's evolved sometime in the last 500,000 to a million years. last 500,000 to a million years. last 500,000 to a million years. Incredible. Maybe we could talk a little bit more Maybe we could talk a little bit more Maybe we could talk a little bit more about the overlap between brain circuits about the overlap between brain circuits about the overlap between brain circuits that control language and speech in that control language and speech in that control language and speech in humans and other animals. humans and other animals. humans and other animals. Uh you know, I was weaned in the in the you know, I was weaned in the in the you know, I was weaned in the in the neuroscience era where birdsong and the neuroscience era where birdsong and the neuroscience era where birdsong and the uh the ability of birds to learn their the ability of birds to learn their the ability of birds to learn their tutor song was a tutor song was a tutor song was a was and still is a prominent field and was and still is a prominent field and was and still is a prominent field and um subfield of neuroscience. And then of um subfield of neuroscience. And then of um subfield of neuroscience. And then of course neuroimaging of uh humans uh course neuroimaging of uh humans uh course neuroimaging of uh humans uh speaking and learning, etc. And this speaking and learning, etc. And this speaking and learning, etc. And this notion of a critical period, a time in notion of a critical period, a time in notion of a critical period, a time in which language is learned more easily which language is learned more easily which language is learned more easily than it is later in life. And than it is later in life. And than it is later in life. And the names of the different brain areas the names of the different brain areas the names of the different brain areas were quite different. Um it one opens were quite different. Um it one opens were quite different. Um it one opens the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's and the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's and the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's and Broca's for the humans and you look at Broca's for the humans and you look at Broca's for the humans and you look at the birds of it, I remember you know HVC the birds of it, I remember you know HVC the birds of it, I remember you know HVC Yeah, robustus striatum, area X, That's Yeah, robustus striatum, area X, That's Yeah, robustus striatum, area X, That's right. Yes. uh etc. right. Yes. uh etc. right. Yes. uh etc. But um for most of our listeners that But um for most of our listeners that But um for most of our listeners that those names won't mean a whole lot. But those names won't mean a whole lot. But those names won't mean a whole lot. But um but in terms of homologies um but in terms of homologies um but in terms of homologies between areas in terms of function, what between areas in terms of function, what between areas in terms of function, what do we know? And um how similar or do we know? And um how similar or do we know? And um how similar or different are the brains uh brain areas different are the brains uh brain areas different are the brains uh brain areas controlling uh speech and language in controlling uh speech and language in controlling uh speech and language in say a songbird and a and a young child say a songbird and a and a young child say a songbird and a and a young child human child? Yeah. So so going back to human child? Yeah. So so going back to human child? Yeah. So so going back to the 1950s or and even a little earlier the 1950s or and even a little earlier the 1950s or and even a little earlier and Peter Marler and others who had and Peter Marler and others who had and Peter Marler and others who had gotten involved in neuroethology, the gotten involved in neuroethology, the gotten involved in neuroethology, the study of neurobiology of behavior in a study of neurobiology of behavior in a study of neurobiology of behavior in a natural way, right? natural way, right? natural way, right? Um you know, they start to find that Um you know, they start to find that Um you know, they start to find that behaviorally there are these species of birds like there are these species of birds like there are these species of birds like songbirds and parrots and now we also songbirds and parrots and now we also songbirds and parrots and now we also know hummingbirds, just three of them know hummingbirds, just three of them know hummingbirds, just three of them out of the 40-something bird groups out of the 40-something bird groups out of the 40-something bird groups out there on the planet orders, there on the planet orders, there on the planet orders, that they can imitate sounds like we do. that they can imitate sounds like we do. that they can imitate sounds like we do. And so that was a similarity. In other And so that was a similarity. In other And so that was a similarity. In other words, they had this kind of behavior words, they had this kind of behavior words, they had this kind of behavior that's more similar to us than that's more similar to us than that's more similar to us than chimpanzees have with us or than chimpanzees have with us or than chimpanzees have with us or than chickens have with them, right? They're chickens have with them, right? They're chickens have with them, right? They're closer relatives. And then they closer relatives. And then they closer relatives. And then they discovered even more similarities, these discovered even more similarities, these discovered even more similarities, these critical periods that if you remove a critical periods that if you remove a critical periods that if you remove a child and you know, this unfortunately child and you know, this unfortunately child and you know, this unfortunately happens where a child is feral and that happens where a child is feral and that happens where a child is feral and that is not raised with human and goes is not raised with human and goes is not raised with human and goes through their puberty phase of growth, through their puberty phase of growth, through their puberty phase of growth, becomes hard for them to learn a becomes hard for them to learn a becomes hard for them to learn a language as an adult. So, there's this language as an adult. So, there's this language as an adult. So, there's this critical period where you learn best. critical period where you learn best. critical period where you learn best. And even later on when you're in regular And even later on when you're in regular And even later on when you're in regular society, it's hard to learn. Well, the society, it's hard to learn. Well, the society, it's hard to learn. Well, the same birds undergo these same thing. And same birds undergo these same thing. And same birds undergo these same thing. And then it was discovered that if they then it was discovered that if they then it was discovered that if they become deaf, we humans become deaf, our become deaf, we humans become deaf, our become deaf, we humans become deaf, our speech starts to deteriorate without any speech starts to deteriorate without any speech starts to deteriorate without any kind of therapy. kind of therapy. kind of therapy. Uh if a non-human primate or Uh if a non-human primate or Uh if a non-human primate or um you know, or let's say a chicken um you know, or let's say a chicken um you know, or let's say a chicken becomes deaf, uh their vocalizations becomes deaf, uh their vocalizations becomes deaf, uh their vocalizations don't deteriorate, very little at least. don't deteriorate, very little at least. don't deteriorate, very little at least. Uh well, this happens in the vocal Uh well, this happens in the vocal Uh well, this happens in the vocal learning birds. So, there were all these learning birds. So, there were all these learning birds. So, there were all these behavioral parallels that came along in behavioral parallels that came along in behavioral parallels that came along in a package. And then people looked into a package. And then people looked into a package. And then people looked into the brain, Fernando Nottebohm, former the brain, Fernando Nottebohm, former the brain, Fernando Nottebohm, former PhD advisor, and began to discover the PhD advisor, and began to discover the PhD advisor, and began to discover the area X you talked about, uh the robust area X you talked about, uh the robust area X you talked about, uh the robust nucleus of the arcopallium. And um nucleus of the arcopallium. And um nucleus of the arcopallium. And um and these brain pathways were not found and these brain pathways were not found and these brain pathways were not found in the species who couldn't imitate. So, in the species who couldn't imitate. So, in the species who couldn't imitate. So, there was a parallel here. there was a parallel here. there was a parallel here. And then uh jumping many years later, And then uh jumping many years later, And then uh jumping many years later, you know, I started to dig down into you know, I started to dig down into you know, I started to dig down into these brain circuits to discover that these brain circuits to discover that these brain circuits to discover that these brain circuits have parallel these brain circuits have parallel these brain circuits have parallel functions with the brain circuits for functions with the brain circuits for functions with the brain circuits for humans even though they're by a humans even though they're by a humans even though they're by a different name like Broca's and different name like Broca's and different name like Broca's and laryngeal motor cortex. And most laryngeal motor cortex. And most laryngeal motor cortex. And most recently, we discovered not only the recently, we discovered not only the recently, we discovered not only the actual circuitry and the connectivity actual circuitry and the connectivity actual circuitry and the connectivity are similar, but the underlying genes are similar, but the underlying genes are similar, but the underlying genes that are expressed in these brain that are expressed in these brain that are expressed in these brain regions in a specialized way different regions in a specialized way different regions in a specialized way different from the rest of the brain are also from the rest of the brain are also from the rest of the brain are also similar between humans and songbirds and similar between humans and songbirds and similar between humans and songbirds and parrots. So, all the way down to the parrots. So, all the way down to the parrots. So, all the way down to the genes and now we're finding the specific genes and now we're finding the specific genes and now we're finding the specific mutations are also similar, not always identical are also similar, not always identical are also similar, not always identical but similar. Uh which indicates but similar. Uh which indicates but similar. Uh which indicates remarkable convergence for a so-called remarkable convergence for a so-called remarkable convergence for a so-called complex behavior in species separated by complex behavior in species separated by complex behavior in species separated by 300 million years in a common ancestor. 300 million years in a common ancestor. 300 million years in a common ancestor. And not only that, we are discovering And not only that, we are discovering And not only that, we are discovering that mutations in these genes that cause that mutations in these genes that cause that mutations in these genes that cause speech deficits in humans like in FoxP2, speech deficits in humans like in FoxP2, speech deficits in humans like in FoxP2, uh if you put those same mutations or uh if you put those same mutations or uh if you put those same mutations or similar type of deficits in these vocal similar type of deficits in these vocal similar type of deficits in these vocal learning birds, you get similar learning birds, you get similar learning birds, you get similar deficits. So, convergence of the deficits. So, convergence of the deficits. So, convergence of the behavior is associated with similar behavior is associated with similar behavior is associated with similar genetic disorders of the behavior. genetic disorders of the behavior. genetic disorders of the behavior. Incredible. I have to ask, do hummingbirds sing or I have to ask, do hummingbirds sing or I have to ask, do hummingbirds sing or do they hum? do they hum? do they hum? Hummingbirds hum with their wings and Hummingbirds hum with their wings and Hummingbirds hum with their wings and sing with their syrinx. sing with their syrinx. sing with their syrinx. In a coordinated way? In a coordinated In a coordinated way? In a coordinated In a coordinated way? In a coordinated way. There is some species of way. There is some species of way. There is some species of hummingbirds um hummingbirds um hummingbirds um that actually will um Doug Archbold that actually will um Doug Archbold that actually will um Doug Archbold showed this that will flap uh their showed this that will flap uh their showed this that will flap uh their wings and create a slapping sound with wings and create a slapping sound with wings and create a slapping sound with their wings that's in unison with their wings that's in unison with their wings that's in unison with their song. And oh and you would not know it, song. And oh and you would not know it, song. And oh and you would not know it, but it sounds like a particular syllable but it sounds like a particular syllable but it sounds like a particular syllable in their songs uh even though it's their in their songs uh even though it's their in their songs uh even though it's their wings and their voice at the same time. wings and their voice at the same time. wings and their voice at the same time. Hummingbirds are clapping to their song. Hummingbirds are clapping to their song. Hummingbirds are clapping to their song. Clapping with their snapping their Clapping with their snapping their Clapping with their snapping their wings together uh in unison with the wings together uh in unison with the wings together uh in unison with the song to make it like if I'm going ba song to make it like if I'm going ba song to make it like if I'm going ba da ba da ba da ba da ba da ba da ba da you know, and I banged on the table. you know, and I banged on the table. you know, and I banged on the table. Except they make it almost sound like Except they make it almost sound like Except they make it almost sound like their voice with their wings. their voice with their wings. their voice with their wings. Incredible. Yes. I I'm Yes. I I'm Yes. I I'm And they got some of the smallest brains And they got some of the smallest brains And they got some of the smallest brains around. would say mind-blown. would say mind-blown. would say mind-blown. Yeah, yes. Incredible. Yeah, yes. Incredible. Yeah, yes. Incredible. Yes. Incredible. I love hummingbirds and Yes. Incredible. I love hummingbirds and Yes. Incredible. I love hummingbirds and I always feel like it's such a special I always feel like it's such a special I always feel like it's such a special thing to get a moment to see one because thing to get a moment to see one because thing to get a moment to see one because they move around so fast and they flit they move around so fast and they flit they move around so fast and they flit away so fast in these ballistic away so fast in these ballistic away so fast in these ballistic trajectories Yep. that when you get to see one Yep. that when you get to see one Yep. that when you get to see one stationary for a moment or even just stationary for a moment or even just stationary for a moment or even just hovering there, it's uh you feel like hovering there, it's uh you feel like hovering there, it's uh you feel like you're extracting so much from their you're extracting so much from their you're extracting so much from their little microcosm of life. But now little microcosm of life. But now little microcosm of life. But now I realize they're playing music I realize they're playing music I realize they're playing music essentially. exactly. And what's amazing about exactly. And what's amazing about exactly. And what's amazing about hummingbirds and I will going to say hummingbirds and I will going to say hummingbirds and I will going to say vocal learning species in general is vocal learning species in general is vocal learning species in general is that for whatever reason they seem to that for whatever reason they seem to that for whatever reason they seem to evolve multiple complex traits. evolve multiple complex traits. evolve multiple complex traits. You know, this idea that the evolving You know, this idea that the evolving You know, this idea that the evolving language, spoken language in particular, language, spoken language in particular, language, spoken language in particular, comes along with a set of comes along with a set of comes along with a set of specializations. Incredible. When I was coming up in neuroscience, I When I was coming up in neuroscience, I When I was coming up in neuroscience, I learned that I think it was the work of learned that I think it was the work of learned that I think it was the work of Peter Marler that um Peter Marler that um Peter Marler that um young birds learn songbirds learn their young birds learn songbirds learn their young birds learn songbirds learn their tutor's song tutor's song tutor's song and learn it quite well, but that and learn it quite well, but that and learn it quite well, but that they could learn the song of another they could learn the song of another they could learn the song of another tutor. In other words, they could learn tutor. In other words, they could learn tutor. In other words, they could learn a different, and for the listeners I'm a different, and for the listeners I'm a different, and for the listeners I'm doing air quotes here, a different doing air quotes here, a different doing air quotes here, a different language, a different bird song, language, a different bird song, language, a different bird song, different than their own species song, different than their own species song, different than their own species song, but never as well as they could learn but never as well as they could learn but never as well as they could learn their own natural their own natural their own natural genetically linked song. Yes. genetically linked song. Yes. genetically linked song. Yes. Genetically linked meaning that it would Genetically linked meaning that it would Genetically linked meaning that it would be like me being raised in a different be like me being raised in a different be like me being raised in a different culture and um culture and um culture and um that I would learn that the other that I would learn that the other that I would learn that the other language, but not as well as I would language, but not as well as I would language, but not as well as I would have learned English. This this is the have learned English. This this is the have learned English. This this is the idea. Yes. Is that true? Yes. Is that true? Yes. Is that true? That is true. Yes, and that's and that's That is true. Yes, and that's and that's That is true. Yes, and that's and that's what I learned going up as well and what I learned going up as well and what I learned going up as well and talked to Peter Marler himself about and talked to Peter Marler himself about and talked to Peter Marler himself about before he passed. before he passed. before he passed. Um yeah, this he used to call it the Um yeah, this he used to call it the Um yeah, this he used to call it the innate predisposition to learn. innate predisposition to learn. innate predisposition to learn. All right, so All right, so All right, so um which would be kind of the equivalent in which would be kind of the equivalent in which would be kind of the equivalent in the linguistic community of universal the linguistic community of universal the linguistic community of universal grammar. There is something genetically grammar. There is something genetically grammar. There is something genetically influencing our vocal communication on influencing our vocal communication on influencing our vocal communication on top of what we learn culturally. And so top of what we learn culturally. And so top of what we learn culturally. And so there's this balance between the genetic there's this balance between the genetic there's this balance between the genetic control of speech or a song in these control of speech or a song in these control of speech or a song in these birds and the learned uh cultural birds and the learned uh cultural birds and the learned uh cultural control. And so yes, if you were to take And so yes, if you were to take And so yes, if you were to take um you know, um you know, um you know, um I mean in this case we actually tried I mean in this case we actually tried I mean in this case we actually tried this at Rockefeller later on, take a this at Rockefeller later on, take a this at Rockefeller later on, take a zebra finch and raise it with a canary, zebra finch and raise it with a canary, zebra finch and raise it with a canary, it would sing a song that was sort of it would sing a song that was sort of it would sing a song that was sort of like a hybrid in between. We call it a like a hybrid in between. We call it a like a hybrid in between. We call it a caninch, right? Uh and vice versa for the canary. Uh and vice versa for the canary. Uh and vice versa for the canary. Because there's something different Because there's something different Because there's something different about their vocal musculature or the or about their vocal musculature or the or about their vocal musculature or the or the circuitry in the brain. the circuitry in the brain. the circuitry in the brain. And with a zebra finch, even with a And with a zebra finch, even with a And with a zebra finch, even with a closely related species, if you would closely related species, if you would closely related species, if you would take a zebra finch take a zebra finch take a zebra finch uh young animal and in one cage next to uh young animal and in one cage next to uh young animal and in one cage next to it place its own species adult male, it place its own species adult male, it place its own species adult male, right? And in the other cage place a right? And in the other cage place a right? And in the other cage place a Bengali finch next to it, it would Bengali finch next to it, it would Bengali finch next to it, it would preferably learn the song from the preferably learn the song from the preferably learn the song from the its own species neighbor. But if you its own species neighbor. But if you its own species neighbor. But if you remove its neighbor, it would learn that remove its neighbor, it would learn that remove its neighbor, it would learn that Bengali finch very well. Fantastic. Bengali finch very well. Fantastic. Bengali finch very well. Fantastic. So, there's it has something to do So, there's it has something to do So, there's it has something to do with also the social bonding with your with also the social bonding with your with also the social bonding with your own species. Incredible. own species. Incredible. own species. Incredible. That raises a question that I've based That raises a question that I've based That raises a question that I've based on something I also heard, but I don't on something I also heard, but I don't on something I also heard, but I don't have any uh scientific peer-reviewed have any uh scientific peer-reviewed have any uh scientific peer-reviewed publication to point to, which is this publication to point to, which is this publication to point to, which is this idea of pigeon, not the bird, but this idea of pigeon, not the bird, but this idea of pigeon, not the bird, but this idea of when multiple cultures and this idea of when multiple cultures and this idea of when multiple cultures and languages converge in a given geographic languages converge in a given geographic languages converge in a given geographic area, that the children of all the area, that the children of all the area, that the children of all the different native languages will come up different native languages will come up different native languages will come up with their own language. with their own language. with their own language. I think this was in island culture, I think this was in island culture, I think this was in island culture, maybe in Hawaii, called pigeon, which is maybe in Hawaii, called pigeon, which is maybe in Hawaii, called pigeon, which is sort of a hybrid of the various sort of a hybrid of the various sort of a hybrid of the various languages that their parents speak at languages that their parents speak at languages that their parents speak at home and that they themselves speak and home and that they themselves speak and home and that they themselves speak and that somehow pigeon, again, not the that somehow pigeon, again, not the that somehow pigeon, again, not the bird, but a language called pigeon for bird, but a language called pigeon for bird, but a language called pigeon for reasons I don't know, reasons I don't know, reasons I don't know, harbors certain basic elements of all harbors certain basic elements of all harbors certain basic elements of all language. Mhm. Is that true? Is that not language. Mhm. Is that true? Is that not language. Mhm. Is that true? Is that not true? I would say I haven't studied true? I would say I haven't studied true? I would say I haven't studied enough myself in terms of pigeon enough myself in terms of pigeon enough myself in terms of pigeon specifically, but in terms of cultural specifically, but in terms of cultural specifically, but in terms of cultural evolution of language and hybridization evolution of language and hybridization evolution of language and hybridization between different cultures and so forth, between different cultures and so forth, between different cultures and so forth, uh even amongst birds with different uh even amongst birds with different uh even amongst birds with different dialects, uh and you bring them dialects, uh and you bring them dialects, uh and you bring them together, uh together, uh together, uh you know, what is going on here is you know, what is going on here is you know, what is going on here is cultural evolution remarkably tracks cultural evolution remarkably tracks cultural evolution remarkably tracks genetic evolution. So, if you bring genetic evolution. So, if you bring genetic evolution. So, if you bring people from two separate populations people from two separate populations people from two separate populations together that have been in their together that have been in their together that have been in their separate populations evolutionarily at separate populations evolutionarily at separate populations evolutionarily at least for hundreds of generations, so least for hundreds of generations, so least for hundreds of generations, so someone speaking Chinese, someone speaking Chinese, someone speaking Chinese, someone speaking English, speaking English, speaking English, and that child then's learning from both and that child then's learning from both and that child then's learning from both of them, of them, of them, yes, that child's going to be able to yes, that child's going to be able to yes, that child's going to be able to pick up and merge uh pick up and merge uh pick up and merge uh phonemes and words together in a way phonemes and words together in a way phonemes and words together in a way that an adult wouldn't because why? that an adult wouldn't because why? that an adult wouldn't because why? They're experiencing both languages at They're experiencing both languages at They're experiencing both languages at the same time during their critical the same time during their critical the same time during their critical period uh years in a way that adults period uh years in a way that adults period uh years in a way that adults would not be able to experience. And so, would not be able to experience. And so, would not be able to experience. And so, you get a hybrid. you get a hybrid. you get a hybrid. And the lowest common denominator is And the lowest common denominator is And the lowest common denominator is going to be what they share. And so, the going to be what they share. And so, the going to be what they share. And so, the phonemes that they retained in each of phonemes that they retained in each of phonemes that they retained in each of their languages is what's going to be, I languages is what's going to be, I languages is what's going to be, I imagine, used the most. Interesting. imagine, used the most. Interesting. imagine, used the most. Interesting. So, we've got So, we've got So, we've got brain circuits in songbirds and in brain circuits in songbirds and in brain circuits in songbirds and in humans that in many ways are similar, humans that in many ways are similar, humans that in many ways are similar, perhaps not in their exact wiring, but perhaps not in their exact wiring, but perhaps not in their exact wiring, but in their basic contour of wiring, and in their basic contour of wiring, and in their basic contour of wiring, and genes that are expressed in both sets of genes that are expressed in both sets of genes that are expressed in both sets of neural circuits in very distinct species neural circuits in very distinct species neural circuits in very distinct species that are responsible for these that are responsible for these that are responsible for these phenomena we're calling speech and phenomena we're calling speech and phenomena we're calling speech and language. What sorts of things are those genes What sorts of things are those genes What sorts of things are those genes controlling? What's I could imagine they controlling? What's I could imagine they controlling? What's I could imagine they were controlling the wiring of were controlling the wiring of were controlling the wiring of connections between brain areas, you connections between brain areas, you connections between brain areas, you know, essentially a map of, you know, of know, essentially a map of, you know, of know, essentially a map of, you know, of a circuit. I just feel like an engineer a circuit. I just feel like an engineer a circuit. I just feel like an engineer would on a circuit for speech and would on a circuit for speech and would on a circuit for speech and language. Nature designed the circuit language. Nature designed the circuit language. Nature designed the circuit for speech and language. But presumably for speech and language. But presumably for speech and language. But presumably other things, too, like the ability to other things, too, like the ability to other things, too, like the ability to um connect motor patterns within the throat of motor patterns within the throat of motor patterns within the throat of muscles within the throat, when the muscles within the throat, when the muscles within the throat, when the control of the tongue. I mean, what are control of the tongue. I mean, what are control of the tongue. I mean, what are what are these genes doing? You're what are these genes doing? You're what are these genes doing? You're pretty good. Yeah, you made some very pretty good. Yeah, you made some very pretty good. Yeah, you made some very good guesses there that make sense. Uh good guesses there that make sense. Uh good guesses there that make sense. Uh So, so, yes. One of the things that differ so, yes. One of the things that differ so, yes. One of the things that differ in the speech pathways of us and these in the speech pathways of us and these in the speech pathways of us and these song pathways of birds is some of the song pathways of birds is some of the song pathways of birds is some of the connections are fundamentally different connections are fundamentally different connections are fundamentally different than the surrounding circuits. Like a than the surrounding circuits. Like a than the surrounding circuits. Like a um, a direct cortical connection uh, um, a direct cortical connection uh, um, a direct cortical connection uh, from the areas that control from the areas that control from the areas that control vocalizations in the cortex to the motor vocalizations in the cortex to the motor vocalizations in the cortex to the motor neurons that control the larynx in neurons that control the larynx in neurons that control the larynx in humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we actually made a prediction actually made a prediction actually made a prediction uh, that since some of these connections uh, that since some of these connections uh, that since some of these connections differ, we're going to find genes that differ, we're going to find genes that differ, we're going to find genes that control neuroconnectivity uh, and that control neuroconnectivity uh, and that control neuroconnectivity uh, and that specialize in that function that specialize in that function that specialize in that function that differ. And that's exactly what we differ. And that's exactly what we differ. And that's exactly what we found. Uh, found. Uh, found. Uh, the um, genes that control what we call the um, genes that control what we call the um, genes that control what we call axon guidance and formation of axon guidance and formation of axon guidance and formation of connections. And what was interesting, connections. And what was interesting, connections. And what was interesting, it was sort of in the opposite direction it was sort of in the opposite direction it was sort of in the opposite direction that we expected. That is that we expected. That is that we expected. That is some of these genes actually, a number some of these genes actually, a number some of these genes actually, a number of them that control neuroconnectivity of them that control neuroconnectivity of them that control neuroconnectivity were turned off were turned off were turned off in the speech circuit. All right. Uh, in the speech circuit. All right. Uh, in the speech circuit. All right. Uh, and it didn't make sense to us at first and it didn't make sense to us at first and it didn't make sense to us at first and so we started to realize the and so we started to realize the and so we started to realize the function of these genes are to repel function of these genes are to repel function of these genes are to repel connections from forming. So repulsive connections from forming. So repulsive connections from forming. So repulsive molecules. And so when you turn them molecules. And so when you turn them molecules. And so when you turn them off, they allow certain connections to off, they allow certain connections to off, they allow certain connections to form that normally would have not form that normally would have not form that normally would have not formed. So it's So by turning it off, formed. So it's So by turning it off, formed. So it's So by turning it off, you got a gain of function for speech, you got a gain of function for speech, you got a gain of function for speech, right? Um, other genes that surprised us were genes other genes that surprised us were genes other genes that surprised us were genes involved in calcium buffering, involved in calcium buffering, involved in calcium buffering, neuroprotection. Like a parvalbumin or heat shock Like a parvalbumin or heat shock Like a parvalbumin or heat shock protein. So when your brain gets hot, protein. So when your brain gets hot, protein. So when your brain gets hot, these proteins turn on. And we couldn't these proteins turn on. And we couldn't these proteins turn on. And we couldn't figure out for a long time, why is that figure out for a long time, why is that figure out for a long time, why is that the case? And then the idea popped to me the case? And then the idea popped to me the case? And then the idea popped to me one day. I said, "Ah." When I heard the one day. I said, "Ah." When I heard the one day. I said, "Ah." When I heard the larynx is the fastest firing muscles in larynx is the fastest firing muscles in larynx is the fastest firing muscles in the body. All right. In order to vibrate the body. All right. In order to vibrate the body. All right. In order to vibrate sound and modulate sound in the way sound and modulate sound in the way sound and modulate sound in the way we do, you have to control you have to we do, you have to control you have to we do, you have to control you have to move those muscles, you know, three to move those muscles, you know, three to move those muscles, you know, three to four to five times faster than just four to five times faster than just four to five times faster than just regular walking or running. regular walking or running. regular walking or running. And so um, And so um, And so um, when you stick electrodes in the when you stick electrodes in the when you stick electrodes in the brain areas that control learned brain areas that control learned brain areas that control learned vocalizations in these birds and I think vocalizations in these birds and I think vocalizations in these birds and I think in humans as well, in humans as well, in humans as well, uh those neurons are firing at a higher uh those neurons are firing at a higher uh those neurons are firing at a higher rate to control these muscles. rate to control these muscles. rate to control these muscles. And so, what is that going to do? You're And so, what is that going to do? You're And so, what is that going to do? You're going to have lots of toxicity in those going to have lots of toxicity in those going to have lots of toxicity in those neurons unless you upregulate molecules neurons unless you upregulate molecules neurons unless you upregulate molecules that take out uh the extra load that is take out uh the extra load that is take out uh the extra load that is needed to control the larynx. And then needed to control the larynx. And then needed to control the larynx. And then finally, a third set of genes that are finally, a third set of genes that are finally, a third set of genes that are specialized in these speech circuit are specialized in these speech circuit are specialized in these speech circuit are involved in neuroplasticity. involved in neuroplasticity. involved in neuroplasticity. Uh neuroplasticity meaning allowing Uh neuroplasticity meaning allowing Uh neuroplasticity meaning allowing the brain circuits to be more flexible the brain circuits to be more flexible the brain circuits to be more flexible uh so you can learn better. And why is uh so you can learn better. And why is uh so you can learn better. And why is that? I think learning how to produce that? I think learning how to produce that? I think learning how to produce speech is a more complex learning speech is a more complex learning speech is a more complex learning ability than say learning how to walk ability than say learning how to walk ability than say learning how to walk or learning how to do tricks and or learning how to do tricks and or learning how to do tricks and jumps and so forth that dogs do. jumps and so forth that dogs do. jumps and so forth that dogs do. Yeah, it's interesting as you say that Yeah, it's interesting as you say that Yeah, it's interesting as you say that because I because I because I realized that many aspects of speech I realized that many aspects of speech I realized that many aspects of speech are sort of reflexive. I'm not thinking are sort of reflexive. I'm not thinking are sort of reflexive. I'm not thinking about each word I'm going to say. I they about each word I'm going to say. I they about each word I'm going to say. I they just sort of roll out of my mouth, just sort of roll out of my mouth, just sort of roll out of my mouth, hopefully with forethought. We both know hopefully with forethought. We both know hopefully with forethought. We both know people that uh people that uh people that uh seem to speak uh think less fewer seem to speak uh think less fewer seem to speak uh think less fewer synapses between their brain and their synapses between their brain and their synapses between their brain and their mouth than others, right? A lot of mouth than others, right? A lot of mouth than others, right? A lot of examples out there. And some people are examples out there. And some people are examples out there. And some people are very deliberate in their speech, but very deliberate in their speech, but very deliberate in their speech, but nonetheless, that um much of speech is nonetheless, that um much of speech is nonetheless, that um much of speech is uh has to be precise and some of it less uh has to be precise and some of it less uh has to be precise and some of it less precise. In terms of plasticity of speech and the In terms of plasticity of speech and the In terms of plasticity of speech and the ability to learn multiple languages, but ability to learn multiple languages, but ability to learn multiple languages, but even just one language, even just one language, even just one language, what's going on in the critical period, what's going on in the critical period, what's going on in the critical period, the so-called critical period? Why is it the so-called critical period? Why is it the so-called critical period? Why is it that um so my niece speaks Spanish that um so my niece speaks Spanish that um so my niece speaks Spanish she's Guatemalan, speaks Spanish and she's Guatemalan, speaks Spanish and she's Guatemalan, speaks Spanish and English incredibly well. She's 14 years English incredibly well. She's 14 years English incredibly well. She's 14 years old. Mhm. I've struggled with Spanish my Mhm. I've struggled with Spanish my Mhm. I've struggled with Spanish my whole life. My father's bilingual, my whole life. My father's bilingual, my whole life. My father's bilingual, my mother is not. I've tried to learn mother is not. I've tried to learn mother is not. I've tried to learn Spanish as a as an adult. It's Spanish as a as an adult. It's Spanish as a as an adult. It's really challenging. I'm told that had I really challenging. I'm told that had I really challenging. I'm told that had I learned it when I was eight, I would be learned it when I was eight, I would be learned it when I was eight, I would be better off. That's right. Um or it would better off. That's right. Um or it would better off. That's right. Um or it would be installed within me. be installed within me. be installed within me. So, the first question is So, the first question is So, the first question is it easier to learn multiple languages is it easier to learn multiple languages is it easier to learn multiple languages without an accent early in life and if without an accent early in life and if without an accent early in life and if so why? And then the second question is so why? And then the second question is so why? And then the second question is if one can already speak more than one if one can already speak more than one if one can already speak more than one language as a consequence of childhood language as a consequence of childhood language as a consequence of childhood learning, is it easier to acquire new learning, is it easier to acquire new learning, is it easier to acquire new languages later on? languages later on? languages later on? So so the answer to both of these So so the answer to both of these So so the answer to both of these questions is yes and that questions is yes and that questions is yes and that but I but I but to explain this but I but I but to explain this but I but I but to explain this I need to let you know I need to let you know I need to let you know actually the entire brain actually the entire brain actually the entire brain is undergoing a critical period is undergoing a critical period is undergoing a critical period development not just the speech development not just the speech development not just the speech pathways. And so it's easier to learn pathways. And so it's easier to learn pathways. And so it's easier to learn how to play a piano. It's easier to how to play a piano. It's easier to how to play a piano. It's easier to learn how to ride a bike for the first learn how to ride a bike for the first learn how to ride a bike for the first time and so forth as a young child than time and so forth as a young child than time and so forth as a young child than it is later in life. What I mean easier it is later in life. What I mean easier it is later in life. What I mean easier in terms of when you start from in terms of when you start from in terms of when you start from you start from first principles of you start from first principles of you start from first principles of learning something. So the very first learning something. So the very first learning something. So the very first time if you're going to learn Chinese as time if you're going to learn Chinese as time if you're going to learn Chinese as a child versus the very first time you a child versus the very first time you a child versus the very first time you learn Chinese as an adult or learning learn Chinese as an adult or learning learn Chinese as an adult or learning play piano as a child versus an adult. play piano as a child versus an adult. play piano as a child versus an adult. But the speech pathways or let's say speech the speech pathways or let's say speech the speech pathways or let's say speech behavior I think has a stronger critical behavior I think has a stronger critical behavior I think has a stronger critical period change to it than other circuits. period change to it than other circuits. period change to it than other circuits. And why is what's going on there in And why is what's going on there in And why is what's going on there in general? If you If you If you Why do you need a critical period to Why do you need a critical period to Why do you need a critical period to make you more stable? To make you more make you more stable? To make you more make you more stable? To make you more stubborn so to speak. stubborn so to speak. stubborn so to speak. The reason I believe is that The reason I believe is that The reason I believe is that the brain is not for brain can only hold the brain is not for brain can only hold the brain is not for brain can only hold so much information. so much information. so much information. And if you if you if you are undergoing rapid learning to learn are undergoing rapid learning to learn are undergoing rapid learning to learn to acquire new knowledge, you also have to acquire new knowledge, you also have to acquire new knowledge, you also have to you know, dump stuff. Put put in memory you know, dump stuff. Put put in memory you know, dump stuff. Put put in memory or information in the trash like in a or information in the trash like in a or information in the trash like in a computer. You you only have so many computer. You you only have so many computer. You you only have so many gigabases of memory. gigabases of memory. gigabases of memory. And so therefore And so therefore And so therefore plus also for survival, you don't want plus also for survival, you don't want plus also for survival, you don't want to keep forgetting things. to keep forgetting things. to keep forgetting things. And so the brain is designed, I And so the brain is designed, I And so the brain is designed, I believe, to undergo this critical period and to undergo this critical period and to undergo this critical period and solidify the circuits with what you solidify the circuits with what you solidify the circuits with what you learned as a child and you use that for learned as a child and you use that for learned as a child and you use that for the rest of your life. And we humans the rest of your life. And we humans the rest of your life. And we humans stay even more plastic in our brain stay even more plastic in our brain stay even more plastic in our brain functions controlled by a gene called functions controlled by a gene called functions controlled by a gene called SRGAP2. We have an extra copy of it that SRGAP2. We have an extra copy of it that SRGAP2. We have an extra copy of it that leaves our speech circuit and other leaves our speech circuit and other leaves our speech circuit and other brain regions in a more immature state brain regions in a more immature state brain regions in a more immature state throughout life compared to other throughout life compared to other throughout life compared to other animals. So, we're more immature. animals. So, we're more immature. animals. So, we're more immature. We're still juvenile-like compared to We're still juvenile-like compared to We're still juvenile-like compared to other animals. other animals. other animals. I knew it. But we But we still go I knew it. But we But we still go I knew it. But we But we still go through the critical periods like they through the critical periods like they through the critical periods like they all do. And now, the question you asked all do. And now, the question you asked all do. And now, the question you asked about if you learn more about if you learn more about if you learn more um languages as a child, can you Is it languages as a child, can you Is it languages as a child, can you Is it easier to learn as an adult? And that's easier to learn as an adult? And that's easier to learn as an adult? And that's a common uh finding out there in the a common uh finding out there in the a common uh finding out there in the literature. There's some that argue literature. There's some that argue literature. There's some that argue against it, but for those that support against it, but for those that support against it, but for those that support it, the idea there is it, the idea there is it, the idea there is um you are born with a set of innate um you are born with a set of innate um you are born with a set of innate sounds you can produce of phonemes, sounds you can produce of phonemes, sounds you can produce of phonemes, and you narrow that down because not all and you narrow that down because not all and you narrow that down because not all languages use all of them. And so, you languages use all of them. And so, you languages use all of them. And so, you narrow down the ones you use to string narrow down the ones you use to string narrow down the ones you use to string the phonemes together in words that you the phonemes together in words that you the phonemes together in words that you learn, and you maintain those phonemes learn, and you maintain those phonemes learn, and you maintain those phonemes as an adult. And here comes along as an adult. And here comes along as an adult. And here comes along another language that's using those another language that's using those another language that's using those phonemes or in the in different phonemes or in the in different phonemes or in the in different combinations you're not used to, uh and combinations you're not used to, uh and combinations you're not used to, uh and therefore, you it's like starting from therefore, you it's like starting from therefore, you it's like starting from first principles. But if you already first principles. But if you already first principles. But if you already have them in multiple languages that have them in multiple languages that have them in multiple languages that you're using, then it makes it easier to you're using, then it makes it easier to you're using, then it makes it easier to use them in another third or fourth use them in another third or fourth use them in another third or fourth language. I see. Incredible. language. I see. Incredible. language. I see. Incredible. So, it's not like your brain has So, it's not like your brain has So, it's not like your brain has maintained greater plasticity. Is has maintained greater plasticity. Is has maintained greater plasticity. Is your brain has maintained greater your brain has maintained greater your brain has maintained greater ability to produce different sounds ability to produce different sounds ability to produce different sounds that then allows you to learn another that then allows you to learn another that then allows you to learn another language faster. Got it. language faster. Got it. language faster. Got it. Are the hand gestures associated with Are the hand gestures associated with Are the hand gestures associated with sounds or with meanings of words? sounds or with meanings of words? sounds or with meanings of words? I think the hand gestures are associated I think the hand gestures are associated I think the hand gestures are associated with both the sounds and the meaning. Uh with both the sounds and the meaning. Uh with both the sounds and the meaning. Uh When I say sound like if you are really When I say sound like if you are really When I say sound like if you are really angry, right? Uh and you are making a angry, right? Uh and you are making a angry, right? Uh and you are making a loud screaming noise, right? You may loud screaming noise, right? You may loud screaming noise, right? You may make hand gestures that are look like make hand gestures that are look like make hand gestures that are look like you're going to beat the wall, right? you're going to beat the wall, right? you're going to beat the wall, right? Because you're making loud sounds and Because you're making loud sounds and Because you're making loud sounds and loud gestures. All right? Um but if you loud gestures. All right? Um but if you loud gestures. All right? Um but if you want to explain something like come over want to explain something like come over want to explain something like come over here, what I just do now to you for here, what I just do now to you for here, what I just do now to you for those who can't see me, I swung my hand those who can't see me, I swung my hand those who can't see me, I swung my hand towards you and swung it here to me. towards you and swung it here to me. towards you and swung it here to me. That has a meaning to it to come here. That has a meaning to it to come here. That has a meaning to it to come here. So, just like with the voice, So, just like with the voice, So, just like with the voice, this the hand gestures are producing this the hand gestures are producing this the hand gestures are producing both. Uh both. Uh both. Uh uh you know, both qualities of uh you know, both qualities of uh you know, both qualities of sound. And for people that speak sound. And for people that speak sound. And for people that speak multiple languages, especially those multiple languages, especially those multiple languages, especially those that learn those multiple languages that learn those multiple languages that learn those multiple languages early in development, do they switch early in development, do they switch early in development, do they switch their patterns of motor movements their patterns of motor movements their patterns of motor movements according to, let's say, going from according to, let's say, going from according to, let's say, going from Italian to Arabic um or from Arabic to Italian to Arabic um or from Arabic to Italian to Arabic um or from Arabic to French um in a way that matches the French um in a way that matches the French um in a way that matches the precision of language that they're precision of language that they're precision of language that they're speaking? You know what? You just asked speaking? You know what? You just asked speaking? You know what? You just asked me a question I don't know the answer me a question I don't know the answer me a question I don't know the answer to. I would imagine that would make to. I would imagine that would make to. I would imagine that would make sense because of sense because of sense because of switching uh in terms of sometimes of switching uh in terms of sometimes of switching uh in terms of sometimes people might call this code switching, people might call this code switching, people might call this code switching, even different dialects of the same even different dialects of the same even different dialects of the same language. Could you do that with your language. Could you do that with your language. Could you do that with your gestures? I imagine so, but I really gestures? I imagine so, but I really gestures? I imagine so, but I really don't know if that's true or not. Well, don't know if that's true or not. Well, don't know if that's true or not. Well, I certainly don't know from my own I certainly don't know from my own I certainly don't know from my own experience because I only speak one experience because I only speak one experience because I only speak one language. Before we continue with today's Before we continue with today's Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly discussion, I'd like to just briefly discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens, acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens, acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens, now called AG1. now called AG1. now called AG1. Athletic Greens, aka AG1, is an Athletic Greens, aka AG1, is an Athletic Greens, aka AG1, is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and drink that also has adaptogens and drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking digestive enzymes. I've been taking digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012, Athletic Greens since way back in 2012, Athletic Greens since way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking the podcast. The reason I started taking the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still Athletic Greens and the reason I still Athletic Greens and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day is drink Athletic Greens twice a day is drink Athletic Greens twice a day is that it supplies total foundational that it supplies total foundational that it supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin, mineral needs, coverage of my vitamin, mineral needs, coverage of my vitamin, mineral needs, and it supplies is and it supplies is and it supplies is nutrients that I need to support my gut nutrients that I need to support my gut nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system. of you know, supports the immune system. of you know, supports the immune system. It also supports the so-called gut-brain It also supports the so-called gut-brain It also supports the so-called gut-brain axis, which is vital for mood, for axis, which is vital for mood, for axis, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus, and energy levels, for regulating focus, and energy levels, for regulating focus, and many other features of our mental health many other features of our mental health many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our and physical health that impact our and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance daily performance and high performance daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in any endeavors we might be involved in any endeavors we might be involved in. If you'd like to try Athletic in. If you'd like to try Athletic in. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to Greens, you can go to Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They're and claim a special offer. They're and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus giving away five free travel packs plus giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 with a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 with a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 with every order. And of course, vitamin D3 every order. And of course, vitamin D3 every order. And of course, vitamin D3 K2 are vital for all sorts of things K2 are vital for all sorts of things K2 are vital for all sorts of things like hormone health and metabolic health like hormone health and metabolic health like hormone health and metabolic health and K2 for cardiovascular health and K2 for cardiovascular health and K2 for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to calcium regulation. Again, you can go to calcium regulation. Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. To to claim that special offer. To to claim that special offer. To go a little bit into the abstract, but go a little bit into the abstract, but go a little bit into the abstract, but not too far, um what about modes of not too far, um what about modes of not too far, um what about modes of speech and language that seem to have a speech and language that seem to have a speech and language that seem to have a depth of emotionality and meaning, but depth of emotionality and meaning, but depth of emotionality and meaning, but for which it departs from structured for which it departs from structured for which it departs from structured language? Here's what I mean, uh poetry. Mhm. Uh I Here's what I mean, uh poetry. Mhm. Uh I Here's what I mean, uh poetry. Mhm. Uh I think of musicians. Like, there's some think of musicians. Like, there's some think of musicians. Like, there's some Bob Dylan songs that to me, uh I Bob Dylan songs that to me, uh I Bob Dylan songs that to me, uh I understand the individual words, understand the individual words, understand the individual words, I like to think there's an emotion I like to think there's an emotion I like to think there's an emotion associated with it, at least I associated with it, at least I associated with it, at least I experience some sort of emotion, and I experience some sort of emotion, and I experience some sort of emotion, and I have a guess about what he was have a guess about what he was have a guess about what he was experiencing, but if I were to just read experiencing, but if I were to just read experiencing, but if I were to just read it linearly without the music and it linearly without the music and it linearly without the music and without him singing it or somebody without him singing it or somebody without him singing it or somebody singing it like him, it wouldn't hold singing it like him, it wouldn't hold singing it like him, it wouldn't hold any meaning. So, in other words, any meaning. So, in other words, any meaning. So, in other words, uh words that seem to have meaning, but uh words that seem to have meaning, but uh words that seem to have meaning, but not associated with language, but not associated with language, but not associated with language, but somehow tap into an emotionality. somehow tap into an emotionality. somehow tap into an emotionality. Yep, absolutely. So, so we call this Yep, absolutely. So, so we call this Yep, absolutely. So, so we call this difference um semantic communication, difference um semantic communication, difference um semantic communication, communication with meaning, and communication with meaning, and communication with meaning, and affective communication, communication affective communication, communication affective communication, communication that has more of an emotional that has more of an emotional that has more of an emotional feeling content to it, you know, but not feeling content to it, you know, but not feeling content to it, you know, but not with, you know, the semantics. And the with, you know, the semantics. And the with, you know, the semantics. And the two can be mixed up. Like, with singing two can be mixed up. Like, with singing two can be mixed up. Like, with singing words that have meaning, but also have words that have meaning, but also have words that have meaning, but also have this affective emotional you just love this affective emotional you just love this affective emotional you just love the sound of the singer that you're the sound of the singer that you're the sound of the singer that you're hearing. And uh And uh And uh initially um initially um initially um uh you know, psychologists, scientists uh you know, psychologists, scientists uh you know, psychologists, scientists in general thought that these were going in general thought that these were going in general thought that these were going to be controlled by different brain to be controlled by different brain to be controlled by different brain circuits. Uh and in and it is the case there are Uh and in and it is the case there are Uh and in and it is the case there are emotional brain centers in the emotional brain centers in the emotional brain centers in the hypothalamus, in the cingulate cortex, hypothalamus, in the cingulate cortex, hypothalamus, in the cingulate cortex, and so forth that do give tone to the and so forth that do give tone to the and so forth that do give tone to the sounds. But um But um But um I believe, you know, based upon imaging I believe, you know, based upon imaging I believe, you know, based upon imaging work and work we see in birds when work and work we see in birds when work and work we see in birds when birds are communicating semantic birds are communicating semantic birds are communicating semantic information in their sounds, which is information in their sounds, which is information in their sounds, which is not too often, but it happens, versus uh not too often, but it happens, versus uh not too often, but it happens, versus uh affective communication, saying because affective communication, saying because affective communication, saying because I'm trying to attract the mate, my I'm trying to attract the mate, my I'm trying to attract the mate, my courtship song, or defend my territory, courtship song, or defend my territory, courtship song, or defend my territory, it's the same brain circuits. It's the it's the same brain circuits. It's the it's the same brain circuits. It's the same speech-like or song circuits are same speech-like or song circuits are same speech-like or song circuits are being used in different ways. being used in different ways. being used in different ways. Uh a friend of mine who's also a Uh a friend of mine who's also a Uh a friend of mine who's also a therapist uh said to me, you know, it's therapist uh said to me, you know, it's therapist uh said to me, you know, it's possible to say I love you with intense possible to say I love you with intense possible to say I love you with intense hatred, and to say I hate you with hatred, and to say I hate you with hatred, and to say I hate you with intense love, and uh reminded me that intense love, and uh reminded me that intense love, and uh reminded me that it's possible to hear both of those it's possible to hear both of those it's possible to hear both of those statements uh in either way. So, uh I statements uh in either way. So, uh I statements uh in either way. So, uh I guess it's not just limited to song or guess it's not just limited to song or guess it's not just limited to song or poetry, it also um there's something poetry, it also um there's something poetry, it also um there's something about the intention about the intention about the intention and the emotional context in which and the emotional context in which and the emotional context in which something's spoken that it can heavily something's spoken that it can heavily something's spoken that it can heavily shape the way that uh we interpret what shape the way that uh we interpret what shape the way that uh we interpret what we hear. That's right. And and I we hear. That's right. And and I we hear. That's right. And and I consider all of that actually meaning, consider all of that actually meaning, consider all of that actually meaning, even though I defined it as even though I defined it as even though I defined it as people commonly do, semantic and as people commonly do, semantic and as people commonly do, semantic and affective communication, affective communication, affective communication, affective communication to say I hate affective communication to say I hate affective communication to say I hate you, but meant love, right? Is um you, but meant love, right? Is um you, but meant love, right? Is um does have emotional meaning to it. You does have emotional meaning to it. You does have emotional meaning to it. You know, and so, you know, one's more like know, and so, you know, one's more like know, and so, you know, one's more like an object kind of meaning or an abstract an object kind of meaning or an abstract an object kind of meaning or an abstract kind of meaning. kind of meaning. kind of meaning. Th- There's several other points here I Th- There's several other points here I Th- There's several other points here I think it's important for the those think it's important for the those think it's important for the those listening out there to hear, is that listening out there to hear, is that listening out there to hear, is that when I say also this effective and um when I say also this effective and um when I say also this effective and um semantic communication um being used by semantic communication um being used by semantic communication um being used by similar brain circuits, it also matters similar brain circuits, it also matters similar brain circuits, it also matters the side of the brain. Uh in birds and the side of the brain. Uh in birds and the side of the brain. Uh in birds and in humans, in humans, in humans, um there's left-right dominance um there's left-right dominance um there's left-right dominance uh for learned uh communication, learned uh for learned uh communication, learned uh for learned uh communication, learned sound communication. Uh so the left in sound communication. Uh so the left in sound communication. Uh so the left in us humans is more dominant for speech, us humans is more dominant for speech, us humans is more dominant for speech, but the right has a more balanced for but the right has a more balanced for but the right has a more balanced for singing or processing musical sounds as singing or processing musical sounds as singing or processing musical sounds as opposed to processing speech. Both get opposed to processing speech. Both get opposed to processing speech. Both get used for both reasons. And so when used for both reasons. And so when used for both reasons. And so when people say your right brain is your people say your right brain is your people say your right brain is your artistic brain and your left brain is artistic brain and your left brain is artistic brain and your left brain is your thinking brain, this is what your thinking brain, this is what your thinking brain, this is what they're referring to. Uh and uh so they're referring to. Uh and uh so they're referring to. Uh and uh so that's another distinction. The second that's another distinction. The second that's another distinction. The second uh thing that's useful to know uh thing that's useful to know uh thing that's useful to know is that all vocal learning species use is that all vocal learning species use is that all vocal learning species use their learned sounds for this emotional, their learned sounds for this emotional, their learned sounds for this emotional, effective kind of communication, effective kind of communication, effective kind of communication, but only a few of them, like humans and but only a few of them, like humans and but only a few of them, like humans and some parrots and dolphins, use it for some parrots and dolphins, use it for some parrots and dolphins, use it for the semantic kind of communication we the semantic kind of communication we the semantic kind of communication we calling speech. calling speech. calling speech. And and that has led a number of people And and that has led a number of people And and that has led a number of people to hypothesize that the evolution of to hypothesize that the evolution of to hypothesize that the evolution of spoken language, of speech, evolved spoken language, of speech, evolved spoken language, of speech, evolved first for singing, uh for this more like first for singing, uh for this more like first for singing, uh for this more like emotional kind of mate attraction, like emotional kind of mate attraction, like emotional kind of mate attraction, like the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin kind of songs and so forth. Uh and then kind of songs and so forth. Uh and then kind of songs and so forth. Uh and then later on, it became used for abstract later on, it became used for abstract later on, it became used for abstract communication like we're doing now. How communication like we're doing now. How communication like we're doing now. How interesting. Well, that's a perfect interesting. Well, that's a perfect interesting. Well, that's a perfect segue for me to be able to ask you about segue for me to be able to ask you about segue for me to be able to ask you about your background um your background um your background um and motor control not only of the hands and motor control not only of the hands and motor control not only of the hands but of the body. So you have a number of but of the body. So you have a number of but of the body. So you have a number of important distinctions to your name, but important distinctions to your name, but important distinctions to your name, but one of them um is that you were a member one of them um is that you were a member one of them um is that you were a member of the Alvin Ailey Dance uh of the Alvin Ailey Dance uh of the Alvin Ailey Dance uh school of dance school of dance. school of dance school of dance. school of dance school of dance. Um so you're an accomplished or Um so you're an accomplished or Um so you're an accomplished or and quite able dancer, right? Um tell us and quite able dancer, right? Um tell us and quite able dancer, right? Um tell us a little bit about your um background in a little bit about your um background in a little bit about your um background in the world of dance and as the world of dance and as the world of dance and as how it informs your interest in how it informs your interest in how it informs your interest in neuroscience, excuse me, and perhaps neuroscience, excuse me, and perhaps neuroscience, excuse me, and perhaps even how it relates specifically to your even how it relates specifically to your even how it relates specifically to your work on speech and language. Yes. work on speech and language. Yes. work on speech and language. Yes. Well, it's interesting and then Well, it's interesting and then Well, it's interesting and then this kind of history even goes before my this kind of history even goes before my this kind of history even goes before my time. So, in my family, my mother and time. So, in my family, my mother and time. So, in my family, my mother and father's side, they both went to the father's side, they both went to the father's side, they both went to the High School of Music and Art here in New High School of Music and Art here in New High School of Music and Art here in New York City. Uh and particularly my York City. Uh and particularly my York City. Uh and particularly my mother's family going back multiple mother's family going back multiple mother's family going back multiple generations, they were singers. And I generations, they were singers. And I generations, they were singers. And I even did my family genealogy and found even did my family genealogy and found even did my family genealogy and found out not only, you know, we have some out not only, you know, we have some out not only, you know, we have some relationships to some well-known relationships to some well-known relationships to some well-known singers, distant relationships like singers, distant relationships like singers, distant relationships like Thelonious Monk, but going back to the Thelonious Monk, but going back to the Thelonious Monk, but going back to the plantations in North Carolina and so plantations in North Carolina and so plantations in North Carolina and so forth, my ancestors were singers in the forth, my ancestors were singers in the forth, my ancestors were singers in the church for the you know, the towns and church for the you know, the towns and church for the you know, the towns and so forth. And this somehow got passed on so forth. And this somehow got passed on so forth. And this somehow got passed on multiple generations to my family and I multiple generations to my family and I multiple generations to my family and I thought I was going to grow up and be a thought I was going to grow up and be a thought I was going to grow up and be a famous singer, right? And my me and my famous singer, right? And my me and my famous singer, right? And my me and my brothers and sister formed a band when brothers and sister formed a band when brothers and sister formed a band when we were kids and so forth and but it we were kids and so forth and but it we were kids and so forth and but it turned out that I didn't inherit the turned out that I didn't inherit the turned out that I didn't inherit the singing talents of some of my other singing talents of some of my other singing talents of some of my other family members even though, you know, I family members even though, you know, I family members even though, you know, I was you know, okay, you know, but not like you know, okay, you know, but not like you know, okay, you know, but not like my brother, not like my mother or my brother, not like my mother or my brother, not like my mother or my aunts and my cousin Pute Fe who's now a aunts and my cousin Pute Fe who's now a aunts and my cousin Pute Fe who's now a talented Native American singer. And so talented Native American singer. And so talented Native American singer. And so um so uh what that then influenced me to do other that then influenced me to do other that then influenced me to do other things and I started uh things and I started uh things and I started uh you know, competing in dance contests. you know, competing in dance contests. you know, competing in dance contests. Uh you know, actually this is around the Uh you know, actually this is around the Uh you know, actually this is around the time of the Saturday Night Fever and I time of the Saturday Night Fever and I time of the Saturday Night Fever and I was as a teenager and I started winning was as a teenager and I started winning was as a teenager and I started winning dance contests and I thought, oh, I can dance contests and I thought, oh, I can dance contests and I thought, oh, I can dance. And I auditioned for the High dance. And I auditioned for the High dance. And I auditioned for the High School of Performing Arts and I got in School of Performing Arts and I got in School of Performing Arts and I got in here in New York City uh and got into a here in New York City uh and got into a here in New York City uh and got into a ballet dance and got in, right? And and ballet dance and got in, right? And and ballet dance and got in, right? And and thought if I learn ballet, I can learn thought if I learn ballet, I can learn thought if I learn ballet, I can learn everything else. It was that idea if you everything else. It was that idea if you everything else. It was that idea if you learn something classical, it can teach learn something classical, it can teach learn something classical, it can teach you for everything else. you for everything else. you for everything else. Uh and I was yeah, at Alvin Ailey dance Uh and I was yeah, at Alvin Ailey dance Uh and I was yeah, at Alvin Ailey dance school, Joffrey Ballet dance school. And school, Joffrey Ballet dance school. And school, Joffrey Ballet dance school. And at the end of my senior uh at the end of my senior uh at the end of my senior uh concert, uh I was had this uh concert, uh I was had this uh concert, uh I was had this opportunity to audition for the Alvin opportunity to audition for the Alvin opportunity to audition for the Alvin Ailey dance company, and I had an Ailey dance company, and I had an Ailey dance company, and I had an opportunity to go to college. And I also opportunity to go to college. And I also opportunity to go to college. And I also fell in love with another passion that fell in love with another passion that fell in love with another passion that my father had, which was science. my father had, which was science. my father had, which was science. And so I liked science in high school, And so I liked science in high school, And so I liked science in high school, and I found an overlap also between the and I found an overlap also between the and I found an overlap also between the arts and sciences. You know, both arts and sciences. You know, both arts and sciences. You know, both require creativity, hard work, require creativity, hard work, require creativity, hard work, discipline, you know, new discovery. discipline, you know, new discovery. discipline, you know, new discovery. Both weren't boring to me. Both weren't boring to me. Both weren't boring to me. And the one decision I made at that at And the one decision I made at that at And the one decision I made at that at that senior dance concert was, you know, that senior dance concert was, you know, that senior dance concert was, you know, when talking to the Alvin Ailey when talking to the Alvin Ailey when talking to the Alvin Ailey recruiter and thinking about it, I have recruiter and thinking about it, I have recruiter and thinking about it, I have to make a decision. to make a decision. to make a decision. And I thought And I thought And I thought something my mother taught me, because something my mother taught me, because something my mother taught me, because she was grown up in the 1960s cultural she was grown up in the 1960s cultural she was grown up in the 1960s cultural revolution, do something that has revolution, do something that has revolution, do something that has a positive impact on society. And I a positive impact on society. And I a positive impact on society. And I thought I can do that better as a dancer thought I can do that better as a dancer thought I can do that better as a dancer than a scientist. than a scientist. than a scientist. So now jump, So now jump, So now jump, I get into college, I get into college, I get into college, undergraduate school, I major in undergraduate school, I major in undergraduate school, I major in molecular biology and mathematics. I molecular biology and mathematics. I molecular biology and mathematics. I decide I want to be a biologist, got decide I want to be a biologist, got decide I want to be a biologist, got into graduate school, wanted to study into graduate school, wanted to study into graduate school, wanted to study the brain at you know, at the brain at you know, at the brain at you know, at the Rockefeller University. So I went from Rockefeller University. So I went from Rockefeller University. So I went from Hunter College to Rockefeller Hunter College to Rockefeller Hunter College to Rockefeller University. And so now I got to the University. And so now I got to the University. And so now I got to the brain. And I And why did I choose the brain. And I And why did I choose the brain. And I And why did I choose the brain? It's because it controls dancing. brain? It's because it controls dancing. brain? It's because it controls dancing. But I didn't There wasn't anybody But I didn't There wasn't anybody But I didn't There wasn't anybody studying dancing. Now I wanted to study studying dancing. Now I wanted to study studying dancing. Now I wanted to study the brain, something that it does that's the brain, something that it does that's the brain, something that it does that's really interesting and complex. And I really interesting and complex. And I really interesting and complex. And I thought, ah, language is what it does. thought, ah, language is what it does. thought, ah, language is what it does. You couldn't study that in mice, you You couldn't study that in mice, you You couldn't study that in mice, you couldn't study in non-human primates, couldn't study in non-human primates, couldn't study in non-human primates, but these birds do this wonderful thing but these birds do this wonderful thing but these birds do this wonderful thing that Fernando Nottebohm was studying at that Fernando Nottebohm was studying at that Fernando Nottebohm was studying at Rockefeller. And so that's what got me Rockefeller. And so that's what got me Rockefeller. And so that's what got me into the birds. into the birds. into the birds. Uh and um Uh and um Uh and um uh and then jumping now 15 years later, uh and then jumping now 15 years later, uh and then jumping now 15 years later, you know, you know, you know, yeah, that's right. Even after I'm into yeah, that's right. Even after I'm into yeah, that's right. Even after I'm into now having my own lab studying vocal now having my own lab studying vocal now having my own lab studying vocal learning in these birds as a model for learning in these birds as a model for learning in these birds as a model for language in humans, it turns out that uh language in humans, it turns out that uh language in humans, it turns out that uh you know, Ani Patel and uh you know, uh you know, Ani Patel and uh you know, uh you know, Ani Patel and uh you know, others uh have discovered um that uh others uh have discovered um that uh others uh have discovered um that uh only vocal learning species can learn only vocal learning species can learn only vocal learning species can learn how to dance. how to dance. how to dance. Is that right? Is that right? Is that right? That's right. Yes. That's right. Yes. That's right. Yes. That I So, I've seen these I'm just That I So, I've seen these I'm just That I So, I've seen these I'm just scrolling through the files here in scrolling through the files here in scrolling through the files here in my in my mind. I think about every once my in my mind. I think about every once my in my mind. I think about every once in a while someone will I love uh in a while someone will I love uh in a while someone will I love uh parrots. Um every once in a while parrots. Um every once in a while parrots. Um every once in a while someone will send me one of these little someone will send me one of these little someone will send me one of these little Instagram or Twitter videos of a parrot Instagram or Twitter videos of a parrot Instagram or Twitter videos of a parrot doing what looks to me like dance. doing what looks to me like dance. doing what looks to me like dance. Typically, it's a cockatoo. That's Typically, it's a cockatoo. That's Typically, it's a cockatoo. That's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. even foot stomping to the sound and with even foot stomping to the sound and with even foot stomping to the sound and with famous one called Snowball out there, famous one called Snowball out there, famous one called Snowball out there, but there are there are many Snowballs but there are there are many Snowballs but there are there are many Snowballs out there. Yes. out there. Yes. out there. Yes. They're all All the dancing birds are They're all All the dancing birds are They're all All the dancing birds are named Snowball? Oh, that's an named Snowball? Oh, that's an named Snowball? Oh, that's an interesting tactic. Um interesting tactic. Um interesting tactic. Um so, only animals with language dance. so, only animals with language dance. so, only animals with language dance. Yeah, vocal learning in particular, the Yeah, vocal learning in particular, the Yeah, vocal learning in particular, the ability to imitate sounds. ability to imitate sounds. ability to imitate sounds. Yes. Incredible. Yes. And this now is Yes. Incredible. Yes. And this now is Yes. Incredible. Yes. And this now is bringing my life full circle. bringing my life full circle. bringing my life full circle. All right? And I And so, when that All right? And I And so, when that All right? And I And so, when that was discovered in 2009, was discovered in 2009, was discovered in 2009, uh at that same time in my lab at Duke, we at that same time in my lab at Duke, we at that same time in my lab at Duke, we had discovered that vocal learning brain had discovered that vocal learning brain had discovered that vocal learning brain pathways in songbirds as well as in pathways in songbirds as well as in pathways in songbirds as well as in humans and in parrots, right? Like humans and in parrots, right? Like humans and in parrots, right? Like Snowball, uh are embedded within circuits that uh are embedded within circuits that uh are embedded within circuits that control learning how to move. control learning how to move. control learning how to move. And that led us to a theory we call the And that led us to a theory we call the And that led us to a theory we call the brain pathway or motor theory of vocal brain pathway or motor theory of vocal brain pathway or motor theory of vocal learning origin. learning origin. learning origin. Where the brain pathways for vocal Where the brain pathways for vocal Where the brain pathways for vocal learning and speech evolved by a whole learning and speech evolved by a whole learning and speech evolved by a whole duplication of the surrounding motor duplication of the surrounding motor duplication of the surrounding motor circuits involving learning how to move. circuits involving learning how to move. circuits involving learning how to move. Now, how does that explain dance, right? Now, how does that explain dance, right? Now, how does that explain dance, right? Well, when Snowball, the cockatoos, are when Snowball, the cockatoos, are when Snowball, the cockatoos, are dancing, they're using the brain regions dancing, they're using the brain regions dancing, they're using the brain regions around their speech-like circuits to around their speech-like circuits to around their speech-like circuits to do this dancing behavior. And so, what's do this dancing behavior. And so, what's do this dancing behavior. And so, what's going on there? What we what we going on there? What we what we going on there? What we what we hypothesize and now like to test is that hypothesize and now like to test is that hypothesize and now like to test is that when this when speech evolved in when this when speech evolved in when this when speech evolved in humans and the equivalent behavior in humans and the equivalent behavior in humans and the equivalent behavior in parrots and songbirds, parrots and songbirds, parrots and songbirds, it required a very tight integration in it required a very tight integration in it required a very tight integration in the brain regions that can hear sound the brain regions that can hear sound the brain regions that can hear sound with the brain regions that control your with the brain regions that control your with the brain regions that control your muscles from moving your larynx and muscles from moving your larynx and muscles from moving your larynx and tongue and so forth for producing sound. tongue and so forth for producing sound. tongue and so forth for producing sound. And that tight auditory motor And that tight auditory motor And that tight auditory motor integration, we argued then contaminated integration, we argued then contaminated integration, we argued then contaminated the surrounding brain regions. the surrounding brain regions. the surrounding brain regions. And that contamination of the And that contamination of the And that contamination of the surrounding brain regions now allows surrounding brain regions now allows surrounding brain regions now allows us humans in particular and parrots to us humans in particular and parrots to us humans in particular and parrots to coordinate our muscle movements of the coordinate our muscle movements of the coordinate our muscle movements of the rest of the body with sound in the same rest of the body with sound in the same rest of the body with sound in the same way we do for speech sounds. way we do for speech sounds. way we do for speech sounds. Well, So we're speaking with our bodies Well, So we're speaking with our bodies Well, So we're speaking with our bodies when we dance. Incredible. And and I when we dance. Incredible. And and I when we dance. Incredible. And and I have to say that as poor as I am at have to say that as poor as I am at have to say that as poor as I am at speaking multiple languages, I'm even speaking multiple languages, I'm even speaking multiple languages, I'm even worse at dancing. So worse at dancing. So worse at dancing. So But I guarantee you're better than a But I guarantee you're better than a But I guarantee you're better than a monkey. Uh but not Snowball the monkey. Uh but not Snowball the monkey. Uh but not Snowball the cockatoo. Maybe not Snowball. You on cockatoo. Maybe not Snowball. You on cockatoo. Maybe not Snowball. You on YouTube we have a video where there's YouTube we have a video where there's YouTube we have a video where there's some scientists dancing with Snowball some scientists dancing with Snowball some scientists dancing with Snowball and you'll see Snowball's doing better and you'll see Snowball's doing better and you'll see Snowball's doing better than some of the scientists. than some of the scientists. than some of the scientists. Okay, well as long as I'm not the worst Okay, well as long as I'm not the worst Okay, well as long as I'm not the worst of all scientists at dancing. of all scientists at dancing. of all scientists at dancing. Um There's always neuroplasticity. May it There's always neuroplasticity. May it There's always neuroplasticity. May it save me someday. save me someday. save me someday. You said something incredible that I You said something incredible that I You said something incredible that I completely believe even though I have um completely believe even though I have um completely believe even though I have um minimum to let's just say minimum to let's just say minimum to let's just say minimum dancing ability. Okay, I can get by at a dancing ability. Okay, I can get by at a dancing ability. Okay, I can get by at a party or wedding without complete party or wedding without complete party or wedding without complete embarrassment, but I don't have any embarrassment, but I don't have any embarrassment, but I don't have any structured training. structured training. structured training. So the body clearly can communicate with the body clearly can communicate with the body clearly can communicate with movement. I as a trained dancer and movement. I as a trained dancer and movement. I as a trained dancer and knowing other trained dancers, knowing other trained dancers, knowing other trained dancers, I always think of I always think of I always think of dance and bodily movement and dance and bodily movement and dance and bodily movement and communication through bodily movement as communication through bodily movement as communication through bodily movement as a form of wordlessness, like a state of a form of wordlessness, like a state of a form of wordlessness, like a state of wordlessness. In fact, the few times wordlessness. In fact, the few times wordlessness. In fact, the few times when I think that maybe I'm actually when I think that maybe I'm actually when I think that maybe I'm actually dancing modestly well for the context dancing modestly well for the context dancing modestly well for the context that I'm in, where I see other people that I'm in, where I see other people that I'm in, where I see other people dancing and they seem to just be very dancing and they seem to just be very dancing and they seem to just be very much in the movement, it's almost like a much in the movement, it's almost like a much in the movement, it's almost like a state of non-language, state of non-language, state of non-language, non-spoken language. non-spoken language. non-spoken language. Mhm. Um and yet what you're telling me is that and yet what you're telling me is that and yet what you're telling me is that there's a direct bridge at some level there's a direct bridge at some level there's a direct bridge at some level between the movement of the body and between the movement of the body and between the movement of the body and language. So, is there a language of and language. So, is there a language of and language. So, is there a language of the body that is distinct from the body that is distinct from the body that is distinct from the language of speech? And language of speech? And language of speech? And if so, or if not, how do those map onto if so, or if not, how do those map onto if so, or if not, how do those map onto one another? What does that Venn diagram one another? What does that Venn diagram one another? What does that Venn diagram look like? look like? look like? Yeah. So, so So, let me define Yeah. So, so So, let me define Yeah. So, so So, let me define first dance in this context of vocal first dance in this context of vocal first dance in this context of vocal learning species. This is the kind of learning species. This is the kind of learning species. This is the kind of dancing that we are specialized in doing dancing that we are specialized in doing dancing that we are specialized in doing and other in the vocal learning species and other in the vocal learning species and other in the vocal learning species are specialized in doing is are specialized in doing is are specialized in doing is synchronizing body movements of muscles synchronizing body movements of muscles synchronizing body movements of muscles to the rhythmic beat of music. And for to the rhythmic beat of music. And for to the rhythmic beat of music. And for some reason, we like doing it. We like some reason, we like doing it. We like some reason, we like doing it. We like synchronizing to sound synchronizing to sound synchronizing to sound and doing it together as a group of and doing it together as a group of and doing it together as a group of people. And that kind of communication amongst And that kind of communication amongst And that kind of communication amongst ourselves is more like the effective kind of is more like the effective kind of is more like the effective kind of communication I mentioned earlier, communication I mentioned earlier, communication I mentioned earlier, unlike the semantic kind. So, we humans unlike the semantic kind. So, we humans unlike the semantic kind. So, we humans are using our voices more for the are using our voices more for the are using our voices more for the semantic abstract communication, but semantic abstract communication, but semantic abstract communication, but we're using learned dance for the we're using learned dance for the we're using learned dance for the effective emotional bonding kind of effective emotional bonding kind of effective emotional bonding kind of communication. It doesn't mean we can't communicate It doesn't mean we can't communicate It doesn't mean we can't communicate semantic information in dance, and we do semantic information in dance, and we do semantic information in dance, and we do it. Um but it's not as popular. You know, Um but it's not as popular. You know, Um but it's not as popular. You know, like a ballet that, you know, in the like a ballet that, you know, in the like a ballet that, you know, in the Nutcracker. It is popular, you know, Nutcracker. It is popular, you know, Nutcracker. It is popular, you know, where they are communicating, you know, where they are communicating, you know, where they are communicating, you know, um the Arabian guy comes out, which I um the Arabian guy comes out, which I um the Arabian guy comes out, which I was the Arabian guy in the ballet was the Arabian guy in the ballet was the Arabian guy in the ballet Nutcracker. That's how I remember it. Nutcracker. That's how I remember it. Nutcracker. That's how I remember it. Yeah, for the Westchester Ballet Company Yeah, for the Westchester Ballet Company Yeah, for the Westchester Ballet Company when I was a teenager. Uh when I was a teenager. Uh when I was a teenager. Uh you know, we're trying to you know, we're trying to you know, we're trying to communicate meaning in our ballet communicate meaning in our ballet communicate meaning in our ballet dancing and it can go on with a whole dancing and it can go on with a whole dancing and it can go on with a whole story and so forth. And but people don't story and so forth. And but people don't story and so forth. And but people don't interpret that as clearly as speech. You interpret that as clearly as speech. You interpret that as clearly as speech. You know, they're seeing the ballet with know, they're seeing the ballet with know, they're seeing the ballet with semantic communication with a lot of semantic communication with a lot of semantic communication with a lot of emotional content. emotional content. emotional content. Whereas you go out to a club, you know, Whereas you go out to a club, you know, Whereas you go out to a club, you know, yeah, you're not coming yeah, you're not coming yeah, you're not coming communicating here. Okay, how are you communicating here. Okay, how are you communicating here. Okay, how are you feeling today? Tell me about your day feeling today? Tell me about your day feeling today? Tell me about your day and so forth. You're trying to and so forth. You're trying to and so forth. You're trying to synchronize with other people in an synchronize with other people in an synchronize with other people in an effective way. And I think that's effective way. And I think that's effective way. And I think that's because the dance brain circuit inherited the dance brain circuit inherited the dance brain circuit inherited the more ancient part of the speech the more ancient part of the speech the more ancient part of the speech circuit which was for singing. circuit which was for singing. circuit which was for singing. I always had the feeling that with I always had the feeling that with I always had the feeling that with certain forms of music, um in particular certain forms of music, um in particular certain forms of music, um in particular opera, but any kind of um music where opera, but any kind of um music where opera, but any kind of um music where there are some long notes um sung that there are some long notes um sung that there are some long notes um sung that at some level there was a literal at some level there was a literal at some level there was a literal resonance created between the singer and resonance created between the singer and resonance created between the singer and the listener. That um the listener. That um the listener. That um or I think of like the deep voice of a or I think of like the deep voice of a or I think of like the deep voice of a of a Johnny Cash or where at some level of a Johnny Cash or where at some level of a Johnny Cash or where at some level you can almost feel the voice in your you can almost feel the voice in your you can almost feel the voice in your own body. own body. own body. Mhm. And Mhm. And Mhm. And in theory that could be the in theory that could be the in theory that could be the vibration of the vibration of the vibration of the or the firing of the phrenic nerve the or the firing of the phrenic nerve the or the firing of the phrenic nerve controlling the diaphragm for all I controlling the diaphragm for all I controlling the diaphragm for all I know. Is there any evidence that there's know. Is there any evidence that there's know. Is there any evidence that there's a coordination between performer and a coordination between performer and a coordination between performer and audience at the at the level of mind and audience at the at the level of mind and audience at the at the level of mind and body? Um I'm going to say possibly yes. Uh and I'm going to say possibly yes. Uh and I'm going to say possibly yes. Uh and the reason why is because I just came the reason why is because I just came the reason why is because I just came back from a conference on the back from a conference on the back from a conference on the neurobiology of dance. neurobiology of dance. neurobiology of dance. Uh um that Clearly I'm going to the Uh um that Clearly I'm going to the Uh um that Clearly I'm going to the wrong meetings. wrong meetings. wrong meetings. uh you know Vision science can be so uh you know Vision science can be so uh you know Vision science can be so boring. Yes. Well, one of my colleagues boring. Yes. Well, one of my colleagues boring. Yes. Well, one of my colleagues took a picture and uh Jonathan Fritz took a picture and uh Jonathan Fritz took a picture and uh Jonathan Fritz they or organized or particular section they or organized or particular section they or organized or particular section on this conference in Virginia. on this conference in Virginia. on this conference in Virginia. And this is the first time I in the And this is the first time I in the And this is the first time I in the room with room with room with so many neuroscientists studying the so many neuroscientists studying the so many neuroscientists studying the neurobiology of dance. It's a new field neurobiology of dance. It's a new field neurobiology of dance. It's a new field now in the last 5 years. now in the last 5 years. now in the last 5 years. And there was one there was one there was one a lab where they were putting EEG a lab where they were putting EEG a lab where they were putting EEG electrodes on the dancers electrodes on the dancers electrodes on the dancers on two different dancers partnering with on two different dancers partnering with on two different dancers partnering with each other each other each other as well as well as well as the audience. the audience. the audience. You know, seeing the dance and some You know, seeing the dance and some You know, seeing the dance and some you know, argued okay, if you're you know, argued okay, if you're you know, argued okay, if you're listening to the music as well, how you listening to the music as well, how you listening to the music as well, how you respond because you're asking a respond because you're asking a respond because you're asking a question about music and I'm giving you question about music and I'm giving you question about music and I'm giving you an answer about dance. an answer about dance. an answer about dance. And what they found is that And what they found is that And what they found is that you know, you know, you know, the dancers when they resonated with the dancers when they resonated with the dancers when they resonated with each other during the dance or the each other during the dance or the each other during the dance or the audience listening to the dancers and audience listening to the dancers and audience listening to the dancers and the music, there was some resonance the music, there was some resonance the music, there was some resonance going on there that they score is higher going on there that they score is higher going on there that they score is higher resonance. Their brain activity with resonance. Their brain activity with resonance. Their brain activity with these wireless EEG signals are showing these wireless EEG signals are showing these wireless EEG signals are showing something different. And so that's why I something different. And so that's why I something different. And so that's why I say possibly that it needs to it needs say possibly that it needs to it needs say possibly that it needs to it needs more rigorous study. more rigorous study. more rigorous study. And you know, this is some stuff they And you know, this is some stuff they And you know, this is some stuff they published but it's not prime time yet. published but it's not prime time yet. published but it's not prime time yet. But they're trying to figure this out. I But they're trying to figure this out. I But they're trying to figure this out. I love it. So at least love it. So at least love it. So at least if I can't dance well, maybe I can hear if I can't dance well, maybe I can hear if I can't dance well, maybe I can hear and feel what it is to dance in a and feel what it is to dance in a and feel what it is to dance in a certain way. certain way. certain way. That's right. And and this will be That's right. And and this will be That's right. And and this will be some people will think that they even some people will think that they even some people will think that they even songs that they hear songs that they hear songs that they hear and they can almost sing to themselves and they can almost sing to themselves and they can almost sing to themselves in their own head and they know what in their own head and they know what in their own head and they know what they want it to sound like and you know they want it to sound like and you know they want it to sound like and you know when it really sounds good what it when it really sounds good what it when it really sounds good what it sounds like but they can't get their sounds like but they can't get their sounds like but they can't get their voice to do it. voice to do it. voice to do it. I'm raising For those listening, I'm raising For those listening, I'm raising For those listening, I'm raising my hand. No no musical ability. raising my hand. No no musical ability. raising my hand. No no musical ability. Others in my household have tremendous Others in my household have tremendous Others in my household have tremendous musical ability with instruments and musical ability with instruments and musical ability with instruments and with voice but with voice but with voice but not me. not me. not me. and so this is one of my one of my and so this is one of my one of my and so this is one of my one of my selfish goals of trying to find the selfish goals of trying to find the selfish goals of trying to find the genetics of why is can some people sing really of why is can some people sing really of why is can some people sing really well and some not. Is there some genetic well and some not. Is there some genetic well and some not. Is there some genetic predisposition to that? And then can I predisposition to that? And then can I predisposition to that? And then can I modify my own muscles or brain circuits modify my own muscles or brain circuits modify my own muscles or brain circuits to sing better? to sing better? to sing better? You're still after the sing. I guess You're still after the sing. I guess You're still after the sing. I guess this is what happens when siblings are this is what happens when siblings are this is what happens when siblings are um varying in proficiency, is that um varying in proficiency, is that um varying in proficiency, is that competitiveness among competitiveness among competitiveness among brothers and sisters never goes away. brothers and sisters never goes away. brothers and sisters never goes away. I've been trying to breathe as good as I've been trying to breathe as good as I've been trying to breathe as good as my brother Mark and Victor, you know, my brother Mark and Victor, you know, my brother Mark and Victor, you know, for uh the whole my entire life. for uh the whole my entire life. for uh the whole my entire life. All right, watch out Mark and Victor, All right, watch out Mark and Victor, All right, watch out Mark and Victor, he's coming for you with neuroscience to he's coming for you with neuroscience to he's coming for you with neuroscience to back him. to back him. to back him. Earlier you said that you discovered Earlier you said that you discovered Earlier you said that you discovered that you could dance. that you could dance. that you could dance. That that caught my ear. Um it sounds That that caught my ear. Um it sounds That that caught my ear. Um it sounds like you didn't actually have to I'm not like you didn't actually have to I'm not like you didn't actually have to I'm not suggesting you didn't work hard at it, suggesting you didn't work hard at it, suggesting you didn't work hard at it, but that at the moment where you but that at the moment where you but that at the moment where you discovered it, um it just sort of was a discovered it, um it just sort of was a discovered it, um it just sort of was a skill that you had that up until that a skill that you had that up until that a skill that you had that up until that point you didn't target a life in point you didn't target a life in point you didn't target a life in the world of dance, but the fact that the world of dance, but the fact that the world of dance, but the fact that you quote unquote discovered that you quote unquote discovered that you quote unquote discovered that you could dance really well and then went to could dance really well and then went to could dance really well and then went to this incredible school of dance and this incredible school of dance and this incredible school of dance and did well, um tells me that perhaps there did well, um tells me that perhaps there did well, um tells me that perhaps there is a an ability that was built up in is a an ability that was built up in is a an ability that was built up in childhood and/or that perhaps we do all childhood and/or that perhaps we do all childhood and/or that perhaps we do all have different genetic leanings for have different genetic leanings for have different genetic leanings for different uh motor functions. Yeah. different uh motor functions. Yeah. different uh motor functions. Yeah. Well, the for me there could be both Well, the for me there could be both Well, the for me there could be both explanations could be possible. For the explanations could be possible. For the explanations could be possible. For the first, um first, um first, um yeah, I grew up in a family listening to yeah, I grew up in a family listening to yeah, I grew up in a family listening to Motown songs, you know, dancing, you Motown songs, you know, dancing, you Motown songs, you know, dancing, you know, at uh parties and so forth, family know, at uh parties and so forth, family know, at uh parties and so forth, family parties, and you know, an parties, and you know, an parties, and you know, an African-American family basically, and African-American family basically, and African-American family basically, and uh so I grew up dancing uh from a uh so I grew up dancing uh from a uh so I grew up dancing uh from a young child, um but this young child, um but this young child, um but this discovery, you know, maybe dancing this discovery, you know, maybe dancing this discovery, you know, maybe dancing even more so uh even more so uh even more so uh in terms of a of a talent, in terms of a of a talent, in terms of a of a talent, it could the genetic component, if it could the genetic component, if it could the genetic component, if it really exists, I don't know. You know, really exists, I don't know. You know, really exists, I don't know. You know, with my 23andMe uh results, you know, it with my 23andMe uh results, you know, it with my 23andMe uh results, you know, it says I have uh the genetic uh says I have uh the genetic uh says I have uh the genetic uh substitutions that are associated with substitutions that are associated with substitutions that are associated with uh you know, high-intensity athletes and uh you know, high-intensity athletes and uh you know, high-intensity athletes and fast-twitch muscles. And who knows? fast-twitch muscles. And who knows? fast-twitch muscles. And who knows? Maybe that could have has to do with me Maybe that could have has to do with me Maybe that could have has to do with me being able to synchronize being able to synchronize being able to synchronize uh my body uh my body uh my body to rhythmic sounds to rhythmic sounds to rhythmic sounds maybe better than some others. maybe better than some others. maybe better than some others. It turns out that my genetics also show It turns out that my genetics also show It turns out that my genetics also show that I have genetic substitute that I have genetic substitute that I have genetic substitute that doesn't that makes it hard for me to doesn't that makes it hard for me to doesn't that makes it hard for me to sing on pitch. sing on pitch. sing on pitch. And so that does correlate with my you And so that does correlate with my you And so that does correlate with my you know even though I can sing on pitch know even though I can sing on pitch know even though I can sing on pitch especially if I hear a piano especially if I hear a piano especially if I hear a piano or you know it's kind of playing it but or you know it's kind of playing it but or you know it's kind of playing it but you know maybe that's why my sibling you know maybe that's why my sibling you know maybe that's why my sibling you know who didn't have that genetic know who didn't have that genetic know who didn't have that genetic predisposition in his 23andme results predisposition in his 23andme results predisposition in his 23andme results you know could go along with the genetic you know could go along with the genetic you know could go along with the genetic component as well. I'm imagining family component as well. I'm imagining family component as well. I'm imagining family gatherings with 23andme data and intense gatherings with 23andme data and intense gatherings with 23andme data and intense arguments about it and innate learned arguments about it and innate learned arguments about it and innate learned ability. Fun. ability. Fun. ability. Fun. Love to be in attendance at I'm not Love to be in attendance at I'm not Love to be in attendance at I'm not inviting myself to your Thanksgiving inviting myself to your Thanksgiving inviting myself to your Thanksgiving dinner by the way but I suppose I am. dinner by the way but I suppose I am. dinner by the way but I suppose I am. You're welcome to. Thank you. You're welcome to. Thank you. You're welcome to. Thank you. I'll bring my 23andme data. I'll bring my 23andme data. I'll bring my 23andme data. I'd love to chat a moment about facial I'd love to chat a moment about facial I'd love to chat a moment about facial expression because that's a form of expression because that's a form of expression because that's a form of motor pattern that you know I think for motor pattern that you know I think for motor pattern that you know I think for most people out there most people out there most people out there just think about smiling and frowning just think about smiling and frowning just think about smiling and frowning but there are of course you know but there are of course you know but there are of course you know thousands if not millions of micro thousands if not millions of micro thousands if not millions of micro expressions and things of that sort many expressions and things of that sort many expressions and things of that sort many of which are subconscious of which are subconscious of which are subconscious and we are all familiar with the fact and we are all familiar with the fact and we are all familiar with the fact that when what somebody says doesn't that when what somebody says doesn't that when what somebody says doesn't match some specific feature of their match some specific feature of their match some specific feature of their facial expression that it can facial expression that it can facial expression that it can call you know that mismatch can queue call you know that mismatch can queue call you know that mismatch can queue our attention especially among who know our attention especially among who know our attention especially among who know each other very well like you somebody each other very well like you somebody each other very well like you somebody will say well you said that but you your will say well you said that but you your will say well you said that but you your right eye twitch to the you know a right eye twitch to the you know a right eye twitch to the you know a little bit in a way that tells me that little bit in a way that tells me that little bit in a way that tells me that you didn't really mean that this these you didn't really mean that this these you didn't really mean that this these kinds of things or kinds of things or kinds of things or when the in the opposite example when the in the opposite example when the in the opposite example when the emotionality and the content of our emotionality and the content of our emotionality and the content of our speech is matched to a facial expression speech is matched to a facial expression speech is matched to a facial expression there's something that's just so there's something that's just so there's something that's just so wonderful about that because it seems wonderful about that because it seems wonderful about that because it seems like everything's aligned. like everything's aligned. like everything's aligned. Yeah. So, how does the motor circuitry Yeah. So, how does the motor circuitry Yeah. So, how does the motor circuitry that controls facial expression map on that controls facial expression map on that controls facial expression map on to the brain circuits that control to the brain circuits that control to the brain circuits that control language, speech, and even bodily and language, speech, and even bodily and language, speech, and even bodily and hand movements? hand movements? hand movements? Yeah. Uh you ask a great Yeah. Uh you ask a great Yeah. Uh you ask a great question because we both know some question because we both know some question because we both know some colleagues like Win rich wall that colleagues like Win rich wall that colleagues like Win rich wall that Rockefeller University who study facial Rockefeller University who study facial Rockefeller University who study facial expression and the neurology behind it expression and the neurology behind it expression and the neurology behind it and now we both share some students that and now we both share some students that and now we both share some students that we're co-mentoring and talk about this we're co-mentoring and talk about this we're co-mentoring and talk about this same question that you brought up and same question that you brought up and same question that you brought up and what I'm learning a lot is that what I'm learning a lot is that what I'm learning a lot is that non-human primates have a lot of non-human primates have a lot of non-human primates have a lot of diversity in their facial expression diversity in their facial expression diversity in their facial expression like we humans do. And what we know like we humans do. And what we know like we humans do. And what we know about the neurobiology about the neurobiology about the neurobiology of brain regions controlling those of brain regions controlling those of brain regions controlling those muscles of the face is that these muscles of the face is that these muscles of the face is that these non-human primates and some other non-human primates and some other non-human primates and some other species that don't learn how to imitate species that don't learn how to imitate species that don't learn how to imitate vocalizations, they have vocalizations, they have vocalizations, they have strong connections from the cortical strong connections from the cortical strong connections from the cortical regions to the motor neurons that regions to the motor neurons that regions to the motor neurons that control facial expressions. control facial expressions. control facial expressions. But absent connections or weak But absent connections or weak But absent connections or weak connections to the motor neurons that connections to the motor neurons that connections to the motor neurons that control the voice. control the voice. control the voice. So, I think our diverse facial So, I think our diverse facial So, I think our diverse facial expression, even though it's more expression, even though it's more expression, even though it's more diverse in these non-human primates, diverse in these non-human primates, diverse in these non-human primates, there was already pre-existing diversity there was already pre-existing diversity there was already pre-existing diversity of communication whether it's of communication whether it's of communication whether it's intentional or unconscious through intentional or unconscious through intentional or unconscious through facial expression in our ancestors. facial expression in our ancestors. facial expression in our ancestors. And on top of that, we humans now add And on top of that, we humans now add And on top of that, we humans now add the voice the voice the voice uh along with those facial expressions. uh along with those facial expressions. uh along with those facial expressions. I see. The and in terms of language I see. The and in terms of language I see. The and in terms of language learning when we're kids, I mean I don't learning when we're kids, I mean I don't learning when we're kids, I mean I don't children fortunately are not told to children fortunately are not told to children fortunately are not told to fake their expressions or to smile when fake their expressions or to smile when fake their expressions or to smile when they say I'm happy. Um they say I'm happy. Um they say I'm happy. Um so, at some point everybody learns for so, at some point everybody learns for so, at some point everybody learns for better or for worse how to better or for worse how to better or for worse how to uh untangle these different components of untangle these different components of untangle these different components of hand movement, body posture, speech, and hand movement, body posture, speech, and hand movement, body posture, speech, and facial expression. facial expression. facial expression. Yes. But in it in their best form, I Yes. But in it in their best form, I Yes. But in it in their best form, I would say um would say um would say um assuming that the best form is always I assuming that the best form is always I assuming that the best form is always I guess there are instances where, you guess there are instances where, you guess there are instances where, you know, for safety reasons one might need know, for safety reasons one might need know, for safety reasons one might need to feign some of these to feign some of these to feign some of these some of these aspects of language, but some of these aspects of language, but some of these aspects of language, but in most cases when those are aligned, in most cases when those are aligned, in most cases when those are aligned, it seems like that could reflect that it seems like that could reflect that it seems like that could reflect that all the different circuitries are all the different circuitries are all the different circuitries are operating in parallel, but that the operating in parallel, but that the operating in parallel, but that the ability to misalign these is also ability to misalign these is also ability to misalign these is also a powerful aspect to our maturation. I a powerful aspect to our maturation. I a powerful aspect to our maturation. I even think of theater, for instance, even think of theater, for instance, even think of theater, for instance, where deliberate disentangling of where deliberate disentangling of where deliberate disentangling of these areas is important, but also we these areas is important, but also we these areas is important, but also we know when an actor when it feels real. know when an actor when it feels real. know when an actor when it feels real. Yeah. Um, and when it looks like when Yeah. Um, and when it looks like when Yeah. Um, and when it looks like when bad acting is often times when the bad acting is often times when the bad acting is often times when the facial expression or body posture just facial expression or body posture just facial expression or body posture just doesn't quite match what we're hearing. doesn't quite match what we're hearing. doesn't quite match what we're hearing. Yeah. Uh, so Yeah. Uh, so Yeah. Uh, so are these skills that people that are these skills that people that are these skills that people that learn and acquire according to learn and acquire according to learn and acquire according to adaptability and profession or do you adaptability and profession or do you adaptability and profession or do you think that all children and all adults think that all children and all adults think that all children and all adults eventually learn how to couple and eventually learn how to couple and eventually learn how to couple and uncouple these circuits a little bit? uncouple these circuits a little bit? uncouple these circuits a little bit? Yeah, I think it's the similar Yeah, I think it's the similar Yeah, I think it's the similar argument I mentioned earlier about the argument I mentioned earlier about the argument I mentioned earlier about the innate and the learned for the innate and the learned for the innate and the learned for the vocalizations. And by the way, when I vocalizations. And by the way, when I vocalizations. And by the way, when I say we humans have facial expressions say we humans have facial expressions say we humans have facial expressions associated with our vocalizations in a associated with our vocalizations in a associated with our vocalizations in a different way than primates, non-human different way than primates, non-human different way than primates, non-human primates, it's the learned vocalizations primates, it's the learned vocalizations primates, it's the learned vocalizations I'm talking about. So, there is a I'm talking about. So, there is a I'm talking about. So, there is a common view out there that facial common view out there that facial common view out there that facial expressions in non-human species like expressions in non-human species like expressions in non-human species like non-human primates or you can have them non-human primates or you can have them non-human primates or you can have them in birds, too, are um in birds, too, are um in birds, too, are um innate. All right? And so, they're All right? And so, they're All right? And so, they're reflexive control. I don't they're reflexive control. I don't they're reflexive control. I don't believe that. I think there's some believe that. I think there's some believe that. I think there's some learned component to it, and I think we learned component to it, and I think we learned component to it, and I think we have more learning component to it as have more learning component to it as have more learning component to it as well. But, we also have an innate component. And we also have an innate component. And we also have an innate component. And so, if you try to put your hands behind so, if you try to put your hands behind so, if you try to put your hands behind your back and hold your fists or your back and hold your fists or your back and hold your fists or even just not and try to speak and try even just not and try to speak and try even just not and try to speak and try to communicate, it's actually harder to communicate, it's actually harder to communicate, it's actually harder to do. You have to force yourself or put it do. You have to force yourself or put it do. You have to force yourself or put it by your side. by your side. by your side. This comes naturally. Facial expressions This comes naturally. Facial expressions This comes naturally. Facial expressions comes naturally because there's an comes naturally because there's an comes naturally because there's an innate component. And yes, you have to innate component. And yes, you have to innate component. And yes, you have to learn how to dissociate the two, learn how to dissociate the two, learn how to dissociate the two, communicate something angry with your communicate something angry with your communicate something angry with your hands or with your face, but um you hands or with your face, but um you hands or with your face, but um you know, uh politely with your voice. It's know, uh politely with your voice. It's know, uh politely with your voice. It's very hard to distinct to separate out very hard to distinct to separate out very hard to distinct to separate out those two because there is that innate those two because there is that innate those two because there is that innate component that brings them together. component that brings them together. component that brings them together. Um so it's like an email, too. You're so it's like an email, too. You're so it's like an email, too. You're you're emailing and someone says you're emailing and someone says you're emailing and someone says something by email, someone can something by email, someone can something by email, someone can interpret that angrily or gently. Um interpret that angrily or gently. Um interpret that angrily or gently. Um and it be becomes ambiguous. The and it be becomes ambiguous. The and it be becomes ambiguous. The facial expressions get rid of that facial expressions get rid of that facial expressions get rid of that ambiguity. I'm so glad you brought that ambiguity. I'm so glad you brought that ambiguity. I'm so glad you brought that up because my next question was and is up because my next question was and is up because my next question was and is about written language. Uh the first about written language. Uh the first about written language. Uh the first question I'll ask is when you write question I'll ask is when you write question I'll ask is when you write either type or write things out by hand, either type or write things out by hand, either type or write things out by hand, do you hear the content of what you want do you hear the content of what you want do you hear the content of what you want to write in your head? You just you to write in your head? You just you to write in your head? You just you personally. Yes, I do. Yeah, I and I know that I Yes, I do. Yeah, I and I know that I Yes, I do. Yeah, I and I know that I do because I was trying to figure out a do because I was trying to figure out a do because I was trying to figure out a debate about this issue and trying to debate about this issue and trying to debate about this issue and trying to resolve the debate with my own resolve the debate with my own resolve the debate with my own self-experimentation on me. I asked that self-experimentation on me. I asked that self-experimentation on me. I asked that because a quite well-known colleague because a quite well-known colleague because a quite well-known colleague of ours, Karl Deisseroth, at Stanford, of ours, Karl Deisseroth, at Stanford, of ours, Karl Deisseroth, at Stanford, who's been on this podcast and is you who's been on this podcast and is you who's been on this podcast and is you know, optogenetics fame and psychiatry know, optogenetics fame and psychiatry know, optogenetics fame and psychiatry fame, etc. fame, etc. fame, etc. I know him. Yeah, um he sends his I know him. Yeah, um he sends his I know him. Yeah, um he sends his regards. Told me that um Told me that um Told me that um his practice for writing and for his practice for writing and for his practice for writing and for thinking involves a quite painful thinking involves a quite painful thinking involves a quite painful um process of forcing himself to sit um process of forcing himself to sit um process of forcing himself to sit completely still completely still completely still and think in complete sentences, to and think in complete sentences, to and think in complete sentences, to force thinking in complete sentences. force thinking in complete sentences. force thinking in complete sentences. And when he told me that, I decided to And when he told me that, I decided to And when he told me that, I decided to try this exercise and it's quite try this exercise and it's quite try this exercise and it's quite difficult. First of all, it's difficult difficult. First of all, it's difficult difficult. First of all, it's difficult for the reason that you mentioned, which for the reason that you mentioned, which for the reason that you mentioned, which is that with many thoughts I want to is that with many thoughts I want to is that with many thoughts I want to look around and I start to gesticulate look around and I start to gesticulate look around and I start to gesticulate with my hands. So there it is again, the with my hands. So there it is again, the with my hands. So there it is again, the connection between language and hand connection between language and hand connection between language and hand movement, even if one isn't speaking. movement, even if one isn't speaking. movement, even if one isn't speaking. And the And the other part is that I And the And the other part is that I And the And the other part is that I that's challenging is I realized that that's challenging is I realized that that's challenging is I realized that while we write in complete sentences while we write in complete sentences while we write in complete sentences most of the time, we'll talk about how most of the time, we'll talk about how most of the time, we'll talk about how that's changing now and texting, etc., that's changing now and texting, etc., that's changing now and texting, etc., that we don't often think in complete we don't often think in complete we don't often think in complete sentences and specifically in simple sentences and specifically in simple sentences and specifically in simple declarative sentences. That a lot of our declarative sentences. That a lot of our declarative sentences. That a lot of our thoughts would be if were if they were thoughts would be if were if they were thoughts would be if were if they were written out onto a page would look written out onto a page would look written out onto a page would look pretty much like passive language that a pretty much like passive language that a pretty much like passive language that a good copy editor or a good editor would good copy editor or a good editor would good copy editor or a good editor would say, "Oh, like we need to cross this say, "Oh, like we need to cross this say, "Oh, like we need to cross this out, make this simple and declarative." out, make this simple and declarative." out, make this simple and declarative." So, what I'm getting at here is what is So, what I'm getting at here is what is So, what I'm getting at here is what is the process of going from a thought to the process of going from a thought to the process of going from a thought to language to written word. And language to written word. And language to written word. And I also wanted to touch on handwritten I also wanted to touch on handwritten I also wanted to touch on handwritten versus typed. But thought to language to versus typed. But thought to language to versus typed. But thought to language to written word, what's going on there? written word, what's going on there? written word, what's going on there? What do we know about the neural What do we know about the neural What do we know about the neural circuitry? And I was going to ask why is it so And I was going to ask why is it so And I was going to ask why is it so hard, but now I want to ask why is this hard, but now I want to ask why is this hard, but now I want to ask why is this even possible? It seems like a very even possible? It seems like a very even possible? It seems like a very challenging neuro-computational problem. challenging neuro-computational problem. challenging neuro-computational problem. Yeah. And and from coming from the Yeah. And and from coming from the Yeah. And and from coming from the linguistic world and even just the linguistic world and even just the linguistic world and even just the regular neurobiology world, regular neurobiology world, regular neurobiology world, going back to something I said before is going back to something I said before is going back to something I said before is about a separate language module in the about a separate language module in the about a separate language module in the brain. You know, there was this thought brain. You know, there was this thought brain. You know, there was this thought or hypothesis that this language module or hypothesis that this language module or hypothesis that this language module has all these complex algorithms to has all these complex algorithms to has all these complex algorithms to them. And they're signaling to the speech And they're signaling to the speech And they're signaling to the speech circuit how to produce the sounds, the circuit how to produce the sounds, the circuit how to produce the sounds, the hand circuit how to write them or hand circuit how to write them or hand circuit how to write them or gesture, uh the visual pathway on how to gesture, uh the visual pathway on how to gesture, uh the visual pathway on how to interpret them from reading, interpret them from reading, interpret them from reading, uh and the auditory pathway for uh and the auditory pathway for uh and the auditory pathway for listening. I don't think that's the case, all I don't think that's the case, all I don't think that's the case, all right? Uh and you know, that this right? Uh and you know, that this right? Uh and you know, that this thinking where there's this thinking where there's this thinking where there's this internal speech going on. What I think internal speech going on. What I think internal speech going on. What I think is going on is to explain what you're is going on is to explain what you're is going on is to explain what you're asking is about asking is about asking is about that I'm going to take it from the that I'm going to take it from the that I'm going to take it from the perspective of something. You read perspective of something. You read perspective of something. You read something on a paper, something on a paper, something on a paper, the signal from the paper goes through the signal from the paper goes through the signal from the paper goes through your eyes, it goes to the back of your eyes, it goes to the back of your eyes, it goes to the back of your brain to your visual cortical regions brain to your visual cortical regions brain to your visual cortical regions eventually. Uh and then you now got to eventually. Uh and then you now got to eventually. Uh and then you now got to interpret that signal in your visual interpret that signal in your visual interpret that signal in your visual pathway of what you're reading. How are you of what you're reading. How are you of what you're reading. How are you going to do that in turn speech? That going to do that in turn speech? That going to do that in turn speech? That visual signal then goes to your speech visual signal then goes to your speech visual signal then goes to your speech pathway in the motor cortex in front pathway in the motor cortex in front pathway in the motor cortex in front here in Broca's area. here in Broca's area. here in Broca's area. And you silently speak what you read in And you silently speak what you read in And you silently speak what you read in your brain without moving your muscles. your brain without moving your muscles. your brain without moving your muscles. Sometimes actually, if you put Sometimes actually, if you put Sometimes actually, if you put electrodes EEG electrodes EEG electrodes EEG uh EMG electrodes on your uh EMG electrodes on your uh EMG electrodes on your laryngeal muscles, even on birds you can laryngeal muscles, even on birds you can laryngeal muscles, even on birds you can do this, you'll see activity there while do this, you'll see activity there while do this, you'll see activity there while you're reading or trying to speak you're reading or trying to speak you're reading or trying to speak silently even though no sound's coming silently even though no sound's coming silently even though no sound's coming out. And so your And so your And so your speech pathway is now speaking what speech pathway is now speaking what speech pathway is now speaking what you're reading. you're reading. you're reading. Now to finish it off, that signal is Now to finish it off, that signal is Now to finish it off, that signal is sent to your auditory pathway so you can sent to your auditory pathway so you can sent to your auditory pathway so you can hear what you're speaking in your own hear what you're speaking in your own hear what you're speaking in your own head. That's incredible. That's incredible. That's incredible. And this is why it's complicated because And this is why it's complicated because And this is why it's complicated because you're using like three different you're using like three different you're using like three different pathways, the visual, the speaking motor pathways, the visual, the speaking motor pathways, the visual, the speaking motor one, and the auditory to read. Oh, and one, and the auditory to read. Oh, and one, and the auditory to read. Oh, and then you got to write. Right? Okay, here then you got to write. Right? Okay, here then you got to write. Right? Okay, here comes the fourth one. Now the hand area comes the fourth one. Now the hand area comes the fourth one. Now the hand area that's next to your speech pathway has that's next to your speech pathway has that's next to your speech pathway has got to take that auditory signal or even got to take that auditory signal or even got to take that auditory signal or even the adjacent motor signals for speaking the adjacent motor signals for speaking the adjacent motor signals for speaking and translate it into a visual signal on and translate it into a visual signal on and translate it into a visual signal on paper. So you're So you're using at least four So you're So you're using at least four So you're So you're using at least four brain circuits brain circuits brain circuits uh which includes the speech production and which includes the speech production and which includes the speech production and the speech perception pathways to write. the speech perception pathways to write. the speech perception pathways to write. Incredible. And finally explains to me why when I So I finally explains to me why when I So I finally explains to me why when I So I was weaned teaching undergraduates, was weaned teaching undergraduates, was weaned teaching undergraduates, graduate students, and medical students, graduate students, and medical students, graduate students, and medical students, and I have observed that and I have observed that and I have observed that when I'm teaching, I have to stop when I'm teaching, I have to stop when I'm teaching, I have to stop speaking if I'm going to write something speaking if I'm going to write something speaking if I'm going to write something on the board. I just have to stop all on the board. I just have to stop all on the board. I just have to stop all speaking completely. Right. Turns out speaking completely. Right. Turns out speaking completely. Right. Turns out this is an advantage to catch because it this is an advantage to catch because it this is an advantage to catch because it allows me to catch my voice. It allows me to catch my voice. It allows me to catch my voice. It allows me to slow down a bit, um you know, me to slow down a bit, um you know, me to slow down a bit, um you know, breathe and inhale some oxygen, and so breathe and inhale some oxygen, and so breathe and inhale some oxygen, and so on because I tend to speak quickly if on because I tend to speak quickly if on because I tend to speak quickly if I'm not writing something out. So, I'm not writing something out. So, I'm not writing something out. So, there's a break in the circuitry for me. there's a break in the circuitry for me. there's a break in the circuitry for me. Or at least they are distinct enough Or at least they are distinct enough Or at least they are distinct enough that I have to stop and then write that I have to stop and then write that I have to stop and then write something. Yes, that does imply Yes, that does imply Yes, that does imply competing brain circuits for your competing brain circuits for your competing brain circuits for your conscious attention. conscious attention. conscious attention. We have colleagues um up at Columbia Med We have colleagues um up at Columbia Med We have colleagues um up at Columbia Med who are known, at least in our circles, who are known, at least in our circles, who are known, at least in our circles, for dictate voice dictating their for dictate voice dictating their for dictate voice dictating their papers, not writing them out, but just papers, not writing them out, but just papers, not writing them out, but just speaking into a voice recorder. Uh I've speaking into a voice recorder. Uh I've speaking into a voice recorder. Uh I've written papers that way. It doesn't feel written papers that way. It doesn't feel written papers that way. It doesn't feel quite as natural for me as writing quite as natural for me as writing quite as natural for me as writing things out, but not because I can go things out, but not because I can go things out, but not because I can go quickly from thought to language to quickly from thought to language to quickly from thought to language to typing. I type reasonably fast. I can typing. I type reasonably fast. I can typing. I type reasonably fast. I can touch type now. I don't think I ever touch type now. I don't think I ever touch type now. I don't think I ever taught my I think I taught myself. I taught my I think I taught myself. I taught my I think I taught myself. I never took a touch typing course. It never took a touch typing course. It never took a touch typing course. It just sort of happened now. I think my just sort of happened now. I think my just sort of happened now. I think my motor system seems to know where the motor system seems to know where the motor system seems to know where the keys are with enough uh keys are with enough uh keys are with enough uh enough accuracy that it works. enough accuracy that it works. enough accuracy that it works. The This is remarkable to me that any of us This is remarkable to me that any of us This is remarkable to me that any of us can do this, but can do this, but can do this, but when it comes to writing, what I've when it comes to writing, what I've when it comes to writing, what I've found is that if my rate of thought and found is that if my rate of thought and found is that if my rate of thought and my rate of writing are aligned nicely, my rate of writing are aligned nicely, my rate of writing are aligned nicely, things go well. things go well. things go well. Uh however, if I'm thinking much faster however, if I'm thinking much faster however, if I'm thinking much faster than I can write, that's a problem. And than I can write, that's a problem. And than I can write, that's a problem. And certainly if I'm thinking more slowly certainly if I'm thinking more slowly certainly if I'm thinking more slowly than I want to write, that's also a than I want to write, that's also a than I want to write, that's also a problem. And the solution for me has problem. And the solution for me has problem. And the solution for me has been to write with a pen. I'm in love been to write with a pen. I'm in love been to write with a pen. I'm in love with these and I have no relationship to with these and I have no relationship to with these and I have no relationship to the company, at least not now, although the company, at least not now, although the company, at least not now, although if they want to come you know, if they if they want to come you know, if they if they want to come you know, if they want to work with us, I love these Pilot want to work with us, I love these Pilot want to work with us, I love these Pilot V5 V7s because not necessarily because V5 V7s because not necessarily because V5 V7s because not necessarily because of the ink or the feel, although I of the ink or the feel, although I of the ink or the feel, although I like that as well, but because of the like that as well, but because of the like that as well, but because of the rate that it allows me to write. They rate that it allows me to write. They rate that it allows me to write. They write very well slowly and they write very well slowly and they write very well slowly and they write very well quickly. very well quickly. very well quickly. Mhm. And so, I've have this theory Mhm. And so, I've have this theory Mhm. And so, I've have this theory supported only by my own anecdata, no supported only by my own anecdata, no supported only by my own anecdata, no peer-reviewed study, that peer-reviewed study, that peer-reviewed study, that writing by hand is fundamentally writing by hand is fundamentally writing by hand is fundamentally different than typing out information. different than typing out information. different than typing out information. Mhm. Is there any evidence that this Mhm. Is there any evidence that this Mhm. Is there any evidence that this motor pathway for writing motor pathway for writing motor pathway for writing is better or somehow different than the motor or somehow different than the motor or somehow different than the motor pathway for typing? pathway for typing? pathway for typing? Yeah, that that's interesting. Um and I Yeah, that that's interesting. Um and I Yeah, that that's interesting. Um and I don't know of any studies. Um I have my don't know of any studies. Um I have my don't know of any studies. Um I have my own personal experience as well, but own personal experience as well, but own personal experience as well, but trying to put this into the context, if trying to put this into the context, if trying to put this into the context, if I had to, I had to, I had to, you know, design an experiment to test you know, design an experiment to test you know, design an experiment to test the hypothesis here that you know, to the hypothesis here that you know, to the hypothesis here that you know, to explain your experience and mine is that explain your experience and mine is that explain your experience and mine is that writing by hand, I'm I would argue writing by hand, I'm I would argue writing by hand, I'm I would argue requires a different set of requires a different set of requires a different set of less skills with the fingers less skills with the fingers less skills with the fingers than typing. than typing. than typing. So, you have you have to coordinate your So, you have you have to coordinate your So, you have you have to coordinate your fingers more in opposite directions and fingers more in opposite directions and fingers more in opposite directions and so forth so forth so forth with typing. Uh but also writing by hand with typing. Uh but also writing by hand with typing. Uh but also writing by hand requires more arm movement. requires more arm movement. requires more arm movement. Uh and so, therefore, Uh and so, therefore, Uh and so, therefore, I would argue that the I would argue that the I would argue that the um the difficulty there could be in the difficulty there could be in the difficulty there could be in the types of muscles and the fine motor types of muscles and the fine motor types of muscles and the fine motor control you need of those muscles along control you need of those muscles along control you need of those muscles along with speaking in your brain at the same with speaking in your brain at the same with speaking in your brain at the same time. So, basically, I'm coarse. I'm a time. So, basically, I'm coarse. I'm a time. So, basically, I'm coarse. I'm a brute. And so, it makes sense that I brute. And so, it makes sense that I brute. And so, it makes sense that I would have a more primitive writing would have a more primitive writing would have a more primitive writing device would work. device would work. device would work. That's right. Yes. But but let me let me That's right. Yes. But but let me let me That's right. Yes. But but let me let me add to this in terms of the add to this in terms of the add to this in terms of the I my own personal experience, right? I my own personal experience, right? I my own personal experience, right? What I find is What I find is What I find is I can write I can write something faster I can write I can write something faster I can write I can write something faster by hand by hand by hand um for a short period of time compared um for a short period of time compared um for a short period of time compared to typing. And that is because I think I to typing. And that is because I think I to typing. And that is because I think I run out of the energy in my arm I run out of the energy in my arm I run out of the energy in my arm movements faster than I run out of muscle energy faster than I run out of muscle energy faster than I run out of muscle energy in my finger movements. Uh in my finger movements. Uh in my finger movements. Uh and I think it takes a longer time for us to I think it takes a longer time for us to I think it takes a longer time for us to write words with our fingers because and write words with our fingers because and write words with our fingers because and in terms of the speech. So in terms of the speech. So in terms of the speech. So I think your writing whether it's by I think your writing whether it's by I think your writing whether it's by hand or typing and your speech they only hand or typing and your speech they only hand or typing and your speech they only will align very well if you can type as will align very well if you can type as will align very well if you can type as fast as you can speak or write as fast as you can speak or write as fast as you can speak or write as fast as you can speak in your head. I love as you can speak in your head. I love as you can speak in your head. I love it. So what you've done if I understand it. So what you've done if I understand it. So what you've done if I understand correctly is created a bridge between correctly is created a bridge between correctly is created a bridge between thought and writing and that bridge is thought and writing and that bridge is thought and writing and that bridge is speech. That bridge is speech. That's speech. That bridge is speech. That's speech. That bridge is speech. That's right. That's right. When you're writing That's right. When you're writing That's right. When you're writing something out you're speaking it to something out you're speaking it to something out you're speaking it to yourself. And if you're speaking faster than you And if you're speaking faster than you And if you're speaking faster than you can type you got a problem. can type you got a problem. can type you got a problem. I see. I do a number of podcast I see. I do a number of podcast I see. I do a number of podcast episodes that are not with guests but episodes that are not with guests but episodes that are not with guests but solo episodes and as listeners know solo episodes and as listeners know solo episodes and as listeners know these are very long episodes often two these are very long episodes often two these are very long episodes often two or more hours and or more hours and or more hours and we joke around the podcast studio that I we joke around the podcast studio that I we joke around the podcast studio that I will get locked into a mode of speech I will get locked into a mode of speech I will get locked into a mode of speech where some of it is more elaborate and where some of it is more elaborate and where some of it is more elaborate and anecdotal and then I'll and then I'll anecdotal and then I'll and then I'll anecdotal and then I'll and then I'll punch out simple declarative sentences. punch out simple declarative sentences. punch out simple declarative sentences. I find it very hard to switch from one I find it very hard to switch from one I find it very hard to switch from one module to the next. The thing that I module to the next. The thing that I module to the next. The thing that I have done in order to have done in order to have done in order to make that transition more fluid and prep make that transition more fluid and prep make that transition more fluid and prep for those podcast episodes is actually for those podcast episodes is actually for those podcast episodes is actually to read the lyrics of songs Mhm. and to read the lyrics of songs Mhm. and to read the lyrics of songs Mhm. and to sing them in my head sing them in my head sing them in my head as a way of warming up my vocal cords as a way of warming up my vocal cords as a way of warming up my vocal cords but luckily for those around me but luckily for those around me but luckily for those around me when I do that I'm not actually singing when I do that I'm not actually singing when I do that I'm not actually singing out loud. And so this what you're out loud. And so this what you're out loud. And so this what you're telling me telling me telling me supports this idea that even when we are supports this idea that even when we are supports this idea that even when we are imagining singing or writing in our mind we are singing or writing in our mind we are singing or writing in our mind we are exercising our vocal cords. exercising our vocal cords. exercising our vocal cords. You're actually getting little low You're actually getting little low You're actually getting little low potentials of electrical currents potentials of electrical currents potentials of electrical currents reaching your muscles there which also reaching your muscles there which also reaching your muscles there which also means you're exercising your speech means you're exercising your speech means you're exercising your speech brain circuits too without actually you brain circuits too without actually you brain circuits too without actually you know going with the full volume activity know going with the full volume activity know going with the full volume activity in the muscles. Incredible. Yeah. And in the muscles. Incredible. Yeah. And in the muscles. Incredible. Yeah. And this idea of singing helps you as this idea of singing helps you as this idea of singing helps you as well. Uh um well. Uh um well. Uh um uh even with Parkinson's patients and so uh even with Parkinson's patients and so uh even with Parkinson's patients and so forth, when they want to say something, forth, when they want to say something, forth, when they want to say something, singing or listening to music helps them singing or listening to music helps them singing or listening to music helps them move better. And the idea there is that move better. And the idea there is that move better. And the idea there is that the brain circuits for singing, or let's the brain circuits for singing, or let's the brain circuits for singing, or let's say the function of the brain circuits say the function of the brain circuits say the function of the brain circuits for speech being used for singing first for speech being used for singing first for speech being used for singing first is the more ancestral trait. And that's is the more ancestral trait. And that's is the more ancestral trait. And that's why it's easier to do things with why it's easier to do things with why it's easier to do things with singing sometimes than it is with singing sometimes than it is with singing sometimes than it is with speaking. I love it. speaking. I love it. speaking. I love it. Stutter is a um particularly interesting Stutter is a um particularly interesting Stutter is a um particularly interesting case and one that every once in a case and one that every once in a case and one that every once in a while I I'll get questions about this while I I'll get questions about this while I I'll get questions about this from our audience. Um from our audience. Um from our audience. Um stutter is complicated in a number stutter is complicated in a number stutter is complicated in a number of ways, but culturally um in my of ways, but culturally um in my of ways, but culturally um in my understanding from these emails that I understanding from these emails that I understanding from these emails that I receive is that um stutter can often um receive is that um stutter can often um receive is that um stutter can often um cause people to hide and speak less Mhm. cause people to hide and speak less Mhm. cause people to hide and speak less Mhm. because it can be embarrassing and we're because it can be embarrassing and we're because it can be embarrassing and we're we are often not patient with we are often not patient with we are often not patient with stutter. We also have the assumption stutter. We also have the assumption stutter. We also have the assumption that if somebody is stuttering, that if somebody is stuttering, that if somebody is stuttering, that their thinking is slow, but it turns out their thinking is slow, but it turns out their thinking is slow, but it turns out there many examples historically of there many examples historically of there many examples historically of people who could not speak well, but who people who could not speak well, but who people who could not speak well, but who were brilliant thinkers. Mhm. Um I don't were brilliant thinkers. Mhm. Um I don't were brilliant thinkers. Mhm. Um I don't know how well they could write, but um know how well they could write, but um know how well they could write, but um they found other modes of communication. they found other modes of communication. they found other modes of communication. Uh I realize that you're not a speech Uh I realize that you're not a speech Uh I realize that you're not a speech pathologist or therapist, but uh what is pathologist or therapist, but uh what is pathologist or therapist, but uh what is the current neurobiological the current neurobiological the current neurobiological understanding of stutter and are uh understanding of stutter and are uh understanding of stutter and are uh what's being developed in terms of what's being developed in terms of what's being developed in terms of treatments for stutter? Yes, so treatments for stutter? Yes, so treatments for stutter? Yes, so we actually uh we actually uh we actually uh accidentally came across stuttering in accidentally came across stuttering in accidentally came across stuttering in songbirds. And we've uh published several papers on And we've uh published several papers on And we've uh published several papers on this to try to figure out the this to try to figure out the this to try to figure out the neurobiological basis. The first study neurobiological basis. The first study neurobiological basis. The first study we had was we had was we had was a brain area a brain area a brain area uh called the basal ganglia, this what's uh called the basal ganglia, this what's uh called the basal ganglia, this what's the striatum part of the basal the striatum part of the basal the striatum part of the basal ganglia, involved in coordinating ganglia, involved in coordinating ganglia, involved in coordinating movements, learning how to make movements, learning how to make movements, learning how to make movements. When it was damaged in these in this in When it was damaged in these in this in When it was damaged in these in this in the speech-like pathway in these birds, the speech-like pathway in these birds, the speech-like pathway in these birds, what we found is that they started to what we found is that they started to what we found is that they started to stutter as the brain region recovered. as the brain region recovered. as the brain region recovered. And unlike humans, they actually And unlike humans, they actually And unlike humans, they actually recovered after three or four months. recovered after three or four months. recovered after three or four months. And why is that the case? Because bird And why is that the case? Because bird And why is that the case? Because bird brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a way that human or mammal brains don't. way that human or mammal brains don't. way that human or mammal brains don't. Uh and it was the new neurons that were Uh and it was the new neurons that were Uh and it was the new neurons that were coming in into the circuit, uh but not coming in into the circuit, uh but not coming in into the circuit, uh but not quite, you know, with the right proper quite, you know, with the right proper quite, you know, with the right proper activity, uh was resulting in this stuttering in uh was resulting in this stuttering in uh was resulting in this stuttering in these birds. these birds. these birds. Uh and after it was repaired, not Uh and after it was repaired, not Uh and after it was repaired, not exactly the old song came back as a exactly the old song came back as a exactly the old song came back as a after repair, but still it recovered a after repair, but still it recovered a after repair, but still it recovered a lot better. And it's now known, they lot better. And it's now known, they lot better. And it's now known, they call this neurogen- neurogenics uh call this neurogen- neurogenics uh call this neurogen- neurogenics uh stuttering in humans, uh with damage to stuttering in humans, uh with damage to stuttering in humans, uh with damage to the basal ganglia or some type of the basal ganglia or some type of the basal ganglia or some type of disruption to the basal ganglia at a disruption to the basal ganglia at a disruption to the basal ganglia at a young age also causes stuttering in young age also causes stuttering in young age also causes stuttering in humans. And even those who are born with humans. And even those who are born with humans. And even those who are born with stuttering, uh um it's often the stuttering, uh um it's often the stuttering, uh um it's often the basal ganglia uh that's disrupted than basal ganglia uh that's disrupted than basal ganglia uh that's disrupted than some other brain circuit. And we think some other brain circuit. And we think some other brain circuit. And we think the speech part of the basal ganglia. the speech part of the basal ganglia. the speech part of the basal ganglia. Can adults who maintain a stutter from Can adults who maintain a stutter from Can adults who maintain a stutter from childhood uh repair that stutter? They childhood uh repair that stutter? They childhood uh repair that stutter? They can repair it with uh therapy, with can repair it with uh therapy, with can repair it with uh therapy, with learning how to speak slower, uh learning how to speak slower, uh learning how to speak slower, uh learning how to tap out a rhythm. There learning how to tap out a rhythm. There learning how to tap out a rhythm. There is some And yeah, I'm not a speech is some And yeah, I'm not a speech is some And yeah, I'm not a speech pathologist, but I started reading this pathologist, but I started reading this pathologist, but I started reading this literature uh and talking to others that, you know, uh and talking to others that, you know, uh and talking to others that, you know, um colleagues who actually study um colleagues who actually study um colleagues who actually study stuttering. So, yes, there stuttering. So, yes, there stuttering. So, yes, there are ways to overcome the stuttering are ways to overcome the stuttering are ways to overcome the stuttering through um through um through um through uh you know, behavioral therapy. through uh you know, behavioral therapy. through uh you know, behavioral therapy. Uh and I think all of the uh tools out Uh and I think all of the uh tools out Uh and I think all of the uh tools out there have something to do with sensory motor have something to do with sensory motor have something to do with sensory motor integration. Uh controlling what you integration. Uh controlling what you integration. Uh controlling what you hear with what you output in a uh hear with what you output in a uh hear with what you output in a uh thoughtful, controlled way helps reduce thoughtful, controlled way helps reduce thoughtful, controlled way helps reduce the stuttering. There are a couple the stuttering. There are a couple the stuttering. There are a couple examples from real life that I want to examples from real life that I want to examples from real life that I want to touch on, and um one is somewhat touch on, and um one is somewhat touch on, and um one is somewhat facetious, but um facetious, but um facetious, but um but now I realize is a serious but now I realize is a serious but now I realize is a serious neurobiological issue. Serious meaning I neurobiological issue. Serious meaning I neurobiological issue. Serious meaning I think interesting, which is that every think interesting, which is that every think interesting, which is that every once in a while I will have a once in a while I will have a once in a while I will have a conversation with somebody who says the conversation with somebody who says the conversation with somebody who says the last word of the sentence along with me. last word of the sentence along with me. last word of the sentence along with me. Mhm. And it seems annoying in some Mhm. And it seems annoying in some Mhm. And it seems annoying in some instances, uh, but I'm guessing this is instances, uh, but I'm guessing this is instances, uh, but I'm guessing this is just a breakthrough of the motor pattern just a breakthrough of the motor pattern just a breakthrough of the motor pattern that they're hearing what I'm saying that they're hearing what I'm saying that they're hearing what I'm saying very well. So, I'm going to interpret very well. So, I'm going to interpret very well. So, I'm going to interpret this it kindly and think they're hearing this it kindly and think they're hearing this it kindly and think they're hearing what I'm saying. what I'm saying. what I'm saying. They're literally hearing it in their They're literally hearing it in their They're literally hearing it in their mind. Mhm. And they're getting that low-level Mhm. And they're getting that low-level Mhm. And they're getting that low-level electrical activity to their throat, and electrical activity to their throat, and electrical activity to their throat, and they're just joining me in the uh, in they're just joining me in the uh, in they're just joining me in the uh, in the enunciation of what I'm saying. the enunciation of what I'm saying. the enunciation of what I'm saying. Probably without realizing it. So, can Probably without realizing it. So, can Probably without realizing it. So, can we assume that might be the case? we assume that might be the case? we assume that might be the case? Well, I wouldn't be surprised so Well, I wouldn't be surprised so Well, I wouldn't be surprised so that you know, the motor theory of that you know, the motor theory of that you know, the motor theory of speech perception where this idea speech perception where this idea speech perception where this idea originally came, what you hear originally came, what you hear originally came, what you hear is going through your speech circuit, is going through your speech circuit, is going through your speech circuit, and then also activating those muscles and then also activating those muscles and then also activating those muscles slightly. Uh, so yes. Um, Uh, so yes. Um, Uh, so yes. Um, so one might argue so one might argue so one might argue okay, is that speech circuit now okay, is that speech circuit now okay, is that speech circuit now interpreting what that person is interpreting what that person is interpreting what that person is speaking? Now you listening to me, and speaking? Now you listening to me, and speaking? Now you listening to me, and it's going to finish it off because it's going to finish it off because it's going to finish it off because it's already going through their brain, and already going through their brain, and already going through their brain, and they can predict it. That would be one they can predict it. That would be one they can predict it. That would be one theory. And I don't think the one theory. And I don't think the one theory. And I don't think the verdict out there is known, but that's verdict out there is known, but that's verdict out there is known, but that's one. The other is one. The other is one. The other is uh, synchronizing turn-taking in the uh, synchronizing turn-taking in the uh, synchronizing turn-taking in the in the um, conversation. in the um, conversation. in the um, conversation. Where you're acknowledging that we Where you're acknowledging that we Where you're acknowledging that we understand each other uh, by finishing understand each other uh, by finishing understand each other uh, by finishing off what I say. Uh, and it's almost like off what I say. Uh, and it's almost like off what I say. Uh, and it's almost like a social bonding kind of thing. The a social bonding kind of thing. The a social bonding kind of thing. The other could be I want the person to shut other could be I want the person to shut other could be I want the person to shut up so I can speak as well and take that up so I can speak as well and take that up so I can speak as well and take that turn. And and each pair of people have a turn. And and each pair of people have a turn. And and each pair of people have a rhythm to their conversation. And if you rhythm to their conversation. And if you rhythm to their conversation. And if you have somebody who's over-talkative have somebody who's over-talkative have somebody who's over-talkative versus under-talkative or vice versa, versus under-talkative or vice versa, versus under-talkative or vice versa, that rhythm can be lost in them that rhythm can be lost in them that rhythm can be lost in them finishing ideas and going back and finishing ideas and going back and finishing ideas and going back and forth. But I think forth. But I think forth. But I think having something to do with turn taking having something to do with turn taking having something to do with turn taking as well makes a lot of sense. I have a as well makes a lot of sense. I have a as well makes a lot of sense. I have a colleague at Stanford who says that colleague at Stanford who says that colleague at Stanford who says that interruption is a sign of interest. interruption is a sign of interest. interruption is a sign of interest. I'm not sure that everyone agrees. I I'm not sure that everyone agrees. I I'm not sure that everyone agrees. I think it's highly contextual. think it's highly contextual. think it's highly contextual. Yes. But there is this form of a Yes. But there is this form of a Yes. But there is this form of a verbal nod. verbal nod. verbal nod. Mhm. Uh saying mhm or things of that Mhm. Uh saying mhm or things of that Mhm. Uh saying mhm or things of that sort. And there many of these sort. And there many of these sort. And there many of these and I'm often told by my audience, you and I'm often told by my audience, you and I'm often told by my audience, you know, that I don't interrupt my guests know, that I don't interrupt my guests know, that I don't interrupt my guests and things of that sort. Often times and things of that sort. Often times and things of that sort. Often times I'll just get caught in the natural flow I'll just get caught in the natural flow I'll just get caught in the natural flow of the conversation. of the conversation. of the conversation. Right. Uh but Right. Uh but Right. Uh but Well, I think we've had pretty good Well, I think we've had pretty good Well, I think we've had pretty good turn taking here, I hope. turn taking here, I hope. turn taking here, I hope. So far so good. I'm glad I'm glad So far so good. I'm glad I'm glad So far so good. I'm glad I'm glad you feel that way because especially in you feel that way because especially in you feel that way because especially in the context of a discussion about the context of a discussion about the context of a discussion about language, it seems important. language, it seems important. language, it seems important. Um Texting is a very interesting evolution is a very interesting evolution is a very interesting evolution of language because of language because of language because what you've told us is that we have a what you've told us is that we have a what you've told us is that we have a thought, it's translated into language. thought, it's translated into language. thought, it's translated into language. It might not be complete sentences, but It might not be complete sentences, but It might not be complete sentences, but texting, I have to imagine this is the texting, I have to imagine this is the texting, I have to imagine this is the first time in human evolution where first time in human evolution where first time in human evolution where we've written with our thumbs. So I we've written with our thumbs. So I we've written with our thumbs. So I don't know, you know, it seems more don't know, you know, it seems more don't know, you know, it seems more primitive to me than typing with fingers primitive to me than typing with fingers primitive to me than typing with fingers or writing hands, but hey, who am who am or writing hands, but hey, who am who am or writing hands, but hey, who am who am I to judge the evolution of our species I to judge the evolution of our species I to judge the evolution of our species in one direction or the other? in one direction or the other? in one direction or the other? But the shorthand the shorthand the shorthand grammatically often grammatically often grammatically often grammatically deficient incomplete sentence form of deficient incomplete sentence form of deficient incomplete sentence form of texting is an incredible thing to see. texting is an incredible thing to see. texting is an incredible thing to see. Um Early in relationships, romantic Early in relationships, romantic Early in relationships, romantic relationships, people will often relationships, people will often relationships, people will often evaluate the other's text and their evaluate the other's text and their evaluate the other's text and their ability to use proper grammar and ability to use proper grammar and ability to use proper grammar and spelling, etc. This often quickly spelling, etc. This often quickly spelling, etc. This often quickly degrades and there's an acceptance that degrades and there's an acceptance that degrades and there's an acceptance that we're just trying to communicate through we're just trying to communicate through we're just trying to communicate through shorthand. Almost um shorthand. Almost um shorthand. Almost um military like shorthand, but with military like shorthand, but with military like shorthand, but with internally consistent between people, internally consistent between people, internally consistent between people, but there's no general consensus of what but there's no general consensus of what but there's no general consensus of what things mean. But, you know, um WTFs and things mean. But, you know, um WTFs and things mean. But, you know, um WTFs and like and OMGs and all sorts of things. like and OMGs and all sorts of things. like and OMGs and all sorts of things. I wonder sometimes whether or not we are I wonder sometimes whether or not we are I wonder sometimes whether or not we are getting less proficient at speech getting less proficient at speech getting less proficient at speech because we are not required to write and because we are not required to write and because we are not required to write and think in complete sentences. Mhm. I I'm think in complete sentences. Mhm. I I'm think in complete sentences. Mhm. I I'm not being judgmental here. I see this in not being judgmental here. I see this in not being judgmental here. I see this in my colleagues. I see this in myself. my colleagues. I see this in myself. my colleagues. I see this in myself. This is not a judgment of the younger This is not a judgment of the younger This is not a judgment of the younger generation. Um generation. Um generation. Um I also know that slang has existed I also know that slang has existed I also know that slang has existed for decades, if not hundreds of years, but I decades, if not hundreds of years, but I decades, if not hundreds of years, but I also know that I don't speak the same also know that I don't speak the same also know that I don't speak the same way that I did when I was a teenager way that I did when I was a teenager way that I did when I was a teenager because I've suppressed a lot of that because I've suppressed a lot of that because I've suppressed a lot of that slang. Not because it's inappropriate um slang. Not because it's inappropriate um slang. Not because it's inappropriate um or offensive, although some of it was, or offensive, although some of it was, or offensive, although some of it was, frankly, um but because it's out of context. but because it's out of context. but because it's out of context. Mhm. So, what do you think's happening Mhm. So, what do you think's happening Mhm. So, what do you think's happening to language? Are we getting better at to language? Are we getting better at to language? Are we getting better at speaking, worse at speaking, and what do speaking, worse at speaking, and what do speaking, worse at speaking, and what do you think the role of things like you think the role of things like you think the role of things like texting and tweeting and shorthand texting and tweeting and shorthand texting and tweeting and shorthand communication, hashtagging, communication, hashtagging, communication, hashtagging, uh what's that doing to the way that our uh what's that doing to the way that our uh what's that doing to the way that our brains work? Yeah, I think that um brains work? Yeah, I think that um brains work? Yeah, I think that um uh one, in terms of uh you know, uh one, in terms of uh you know, uh one, in terms of uh you know, uh measuring your level of sophistication measuring your level of sophistication measuring your level of sophistication and intelligence and you say OMG, right? and intelligence and you say OMG, right? and intelligence and you say OMG, right? I think that also could be a cultural I think that also could be a cultural I think that also could be a cultural thing that uh you belong to the next thing that uh you belong to the next thing that uh you belong to the next generation if you're you know, are you generation if you're you know, are you generation if you're you know, are you being cool if you're an older person, being cool if you're an older person, being cool if you're an older person, you know, using OMG and other things you know, using OMG and other things you know, using OMG and other things that the you know, younger that the you know, younger that the you know, younger generation would use. generation would use. generation would use. But, uh if you really think about it clearly, uh if you really think about it clearly, uh if you really think about it clearly, um uh texting uh texting uh texting actually has allowed for more rapid actually has allowed for more rapid actually has allowed for more rapid communication amongst people. communication amongst people. communication amongst people. I think with without the invention I think with without the invention I think with without the invention of the phone before then, or you know, of the phone before then, or you know, of the phone before then, or you know, uh texting back and forth, you had to uh texting back and forth, you had to uh texting back and forth, you had to wait days for a letter to show up. You wait days for a letter to show up. You wait days for a letter to show up. You you couldn't call somebody on the phone you couldn't call somebody on the phone you couldn't call somebody on the phone and talk as well, you know, and so this and talk as well, you know, and so this and talk as well, you know, and so this rapid communication, well, in terms of rapid communication, well, in terms of rapid communication, well, in terms of the rapid communication of writing in the rapid communication of writing in the rapid communication of writing in this case. this case. this case. Um so, I think actually Um so, I think actually Um so, I think actually it's more like a use it or lose it it's more like a use it or lose it it's more like a use it or lose it kind of a uh um kind of a uh um kind of a uh um thing with the brain. The more you use a thing with the brain. The more you use a thing with the brain. The more you use a particular brain region or circuit, the particular brain region or circuit, the particular brain region or circuit, the more enhanced. It's like a muscle. more enhanced. It's like a muscle. more enhanced. It's like a muscle. Uh the more you exercise it, the more Uh the more you exercise it, the more Uh the more you exercise it, the more healthier it is, the bigger it becomes, healthier it is, the bigger it becomes, healthier it is, the bigger it becomes, and the more space it takes, and the and the more space it takes, and the and the more space it takes, and the more you lose something else. more you lose something else. more you lose something else. So, I think texting I my is not So, I think texting I my is not So, I think texting I my is not decreasing uh the speech prowess or the uh the speech prowess or the uh the speech prowess or the intellectual prowess of speech. It's intellectual prowess of speech. It's intellectual prowess of speech. It's converting it and using it a lot in a converting it and using it a lot in a converting it and using it a lot in a different way. Uh different way. Uh different way. Uh in a way that may not be as rich in a way that may not be as rich in a way that may not be as rich in regular writing because uh you can regular writing because uh you can regular writing because uh you can only communicate so much nuance in only communicate so much nuance in only communicate so much nuance in short-term writing. But, um whatever short-term writing. But, um whatever short-term writing. But, um whatever that it whatever is being done, you got that it whatever is being done, you got that it whatever is being done, you got people texting hours and hours and hours people texting hours and hours and hours people texting hours and hours and hours on the phone. So, whatever your thumb on the phone. So, whatever your thumb on the phone. So, whatever your thumb circuit is going to get pretty big, circuit is going to get pretty big, circuit is going to get pretty big, actually. I do wonder whether you know, many people do wonder whether you know, many people do wonder whether you know, many people have lost their jobs based on tweets. have lost their jobs based on tweets. have lost their jobs based on tweets. Mhm. Um the short latency between Mhm. Um the short latency between Mhm. Um the short latency between thought and action and distribution of thought and action and distribution of thought and action and distribution of one's thoughts is incredible. Yes. one's thoughts is incredible. Yes. one's thoughts is incredible. Yes. And and I'm not just talking about And and I'm not just talking about And and I'm not just talking about people who have um who apparently would people who have um who apparently would people who have um who apparently would have poor prefrontal top-down control. have poor prefrontal top-down control. have poor prefrontal top-down control. This is geek speak, by the way, for This is geek speak, by the way, for This is geek speak, by the way, for people that lack impulse control. But, people that lack impulse control. But, people that lack impulse control. But, high-level academics, I'm not going to high-level academics, I'm not going to high-level academics, I'm not going to point fingers at anyone, but examples of point fingers at anyone, but examples of point fingers at anyone, but examples of in where you see these tweets and you in where you see these tweets and you in where you see these tweets and you go, "What were they thinking?" Yep. Uh go, "What were they thinking?" Yep. Uh go, "What were they thinking?" Yep. Uh so, presumably there's an optimal uh presumably there's an optimal uh presumably there's an optimal uh strategy between the thought speech strategy between the thought speech strategy between the thought speech motor pathway, especially when the motor pathway, especially when the motor pathway, especially when the motor pathway engages communication with motor pathway engages communication with motor pathway engages communication with hundreds of thousands of people, and hundreds of thousands of people, and hundreds of thousands of people, and retweets in particular, and the cut and retweets in particular, and the cut and retweets in particular, and the cut and paste function, and the screenshot paste function, and the screenshot paste function, and the screenshot function are often the reason why speech function are often the reason why speech function are often the reason why speech propagates. Yep. So, to me, it's a propagates. Yep. So, to me, it's a propagates. Yep. So, to me, it's a little eerie that um the little eerie that um the little eerie that um the just that the neural circuitry can do just that the neural circuitry can do just that the neural circuitry can do this and that we are catching up a this and that we are catching up a this and that we are catching up a little bit more slowly to the technology little bit more slowly to the technology little bit more slowly to the technology and you've got these casualties of and you've got these casualties of and you've got these casualties of the that mismatch. I think I think the that mismatch. I think I think the that mismatch. I think I think that's a good adjective to use the that's a good adjective to use the that's a good adjective to use the casualties you know of what's going on because you know of what's going on because you know of what's going on because yes it is the case with texting what yes it is the case with texting what yes it is the case with texting what you're really losing there you're really losing there you're really losing there is not less so the ability to write but is not less so the ability to write but is not less so the ability to write but more the ability to interpret what is more the ability to interpret what is more the ability to interpret what is being written and you can over under being written and you can over under being written and you can over under interpret something that somebody means. interpret something that somebody means. interpret something that somebody means. On the flip side of that you know when On the flip side of that you know when On the flip side of that you know when if somebody's writing something very if somebody's writing something very if somebody's writing something very quick they could be writing instinctually more they could be writing instinctually more they could be writing instinctually more instinctually their true meaning instinctually their true meaning instinctually their true meaning and they don't have time to modify and they don't have time to modify and they don't have time to modify and color code what they're trying to say color code what they're trying to say color code what they're trying to say and that's what they really feel as and that's what they really feel as and that's what they really feel as opposed to saying it in a more nuanced opposed to saying it in a more nuanced opposed to saying it in a more nuanced way. So I think both sides of that way. So I think both sides of that way. So I think both sides of that casualty are present and that's a downturn are present and that's a downturn are present and that's a downturn you know you know you know unintended negative consequence of short term I negative consequence of short term I negative consequence of short term I mean short word communication. Yeah I mean short word communication. Yeah I mean short word communication. Yeah I agree that agree that agree that this whole phenomenon could be netting this whole phenomenon could be netting this whole phenomenon could be netting people that people that people that normally would only say these things out normally would only say these things out normally would only say these things out loud once inside the door of their own loud once inside the door of their own loud once inside the door of their own home or not at all. Right. It's a it's home or not at all. Right. It's a it's home or not at all. Right. It's a it's an interesting time that we're in an interesting time that we're in an interesting time that we're in vis-a-vis speech and language and vis-a-vis speech and language and vis-a-vis speech and language and motor patterns. It's part of the human motor patterns. It's part of the human motor patterns. It's part of the human evolution for language I think this evolution for language I think this evolution for language I think this is all part of our evolution. That's is all part of our evolution. That's is all part of our evolution. That's right. So for those of you thinking right. So for those of you thinking right. So for those of you thinking terrible thoughts please put them in the terrible thoughts please put them in the terrible thoughts please put them in the world and be a casualty and for those of world and be a casualty and for those of world and be a casualty and for those of you that are not please be very careful you that are not please be very careful you that are not please be very careful with how proficient your thought to with how proficient your thought to with how proficient your thought to language to motor action language to motor action language to motor action Yes. goes. Maybe the technology companies goes. Maybe the technology companies goes. Maybe the technology companies should install some buffers some AI should install some buffers some AI should install some buffers some AI based buffers. Right that's taking some based buffers. Right that's taking some based buffers. Right that's taking some EEG signals from your brain while you're EEG signals from your brain while you're EEG signals from your brain while you're texting to say okay this is uh you texting to say okay this is uh you texting to say okay this is uh you know, this is not a great thought. Slow know, this is not a great thought. Slow know, this is not a great thought. Slow down." Right. Or this doesn't reflect your best Right. Or this doesn't reflect your best Right. Or this doesn't reflect your best state. That brings me to the what was going to That brings me to the what was going to That brings me to the what was going to be the next question anyway, which is we be the next question anyway, which is we be the next question anyway, which is we are quickly moving toward a time where are quickly moving toward a time where are quickly moving toward a time where there will be an even faster transition there will be an even faster transition there will be an even faster transition from thought to speech to motor output from thought to speech to motor output from thought to speech to motor output and maybe won't require motor output. and maybe won't require motor output. and maybe won't require motor output. What I'm referring to here is some of What I'm referring to here is some of What I'm referring to here is some of the incredible work of our colleagues the incredible work of our colleagues the incredible work of our colleagues Eddie Chang at UCSF and others who are Eddie Chang at UCSF and others who are Eddie Chang at UCSF and others who are taking paralyzed human beings um and learning paralyzed human beings um and learning paralyzed human beings um and learning to translate the electrical signals of to translate the electrical signals of to translate the electrical signals of neurons in various areas, including neurons in various areas, including neurons in various areas, including speech and language areas, to computer speech and language areas, to computer speech and language areas, to computer screens that type out what these people screens that type out what these people screens that type out what these people are thinking. In other words, paralyzed are thinking. In other words, paralyzed are thinking. In other words, paralyzed people can put their thoughts on in into people can put their thoughts on in into people can put their thoughts on in into writing. That's a pretty extreme and writing. That's a pretty extreme and writing. That's a pretty extreme and wonderful example of recovery of wonderful example of recovery of wonderful example of recovery of function that is sure to continue to evolve. that is sure to continue to evolve. that is sure to continue to evolve. But I think we are headed toward a time But I think we are headed toward a time But I think we are headed toward a time not too long from now where not too long from now where not too long from now where my thoughts can be translated into words my thoughts can be translated into words my thoughts can be translated into words on a page if I allow that to happen. on a page if I allow that to happen. on a page if I allow that to happen. Yeah, so and Eddie Chang's work which I Yeah, so and Eddie Chang's work which I Yeah, so and Eddie Chang's work which I admire quite a bit and cite in my papers admire quite a bit and cite in my papers admire quite a bit and cite in my papers uh I think he's really one of those at uh I think he's really one of those at uh I think he's really one of those at the leading edge the leading edge the leading edge of trying to understand within humans of trying to understand within humans of trying to understand within humans uh the neurobiology of speech. And he uh the neurobiology of speech. And he uh the neurobiology of speech. And he may not say it directly, but I talked may not say it directly, but I talked may not say it directly, but I talked to him about this that supports this to him about this that supports this to him about this that supports this idea that the speech circuit and the separate that the speech circuit and the separate that the speech circuit and the separate language module, I don't really language module, I don't really language module, I don't really think that there's a separation there. think that there's a separation there. think that there's a separation there. So with that knowledge, yes, I'm So with that knowledge, yes, I'm So with that knowledge, yes, I'm putting electrodes in the human brain putting electrodes in the human brain putting electrodes in the human brain and then translating those electrical and then translating those electrical and then translating those electrical signals to speech currents. Yeah, we can signals to speech currents. Yeah, we can signals to speech currents. Yeah, we can start to tell what is that person start to tell what is that person start to tell what is that person thinking. Why? Because we often think in thinking. Why? Because we often think in thinking. Why? Because we often think in terms of speech. terms of speech. terms of speech. Uh and um without saying words. Uh and um without saying words. Uh and um without saying words. And that's a scary thought. And now And that's a scary thought. And now And that's a scary thought. And now imagine if you can now translate those imagine if you can now translate those imagine if you can now translate those into to that transmits something into to that transmits something into to that transmits something wirelessly and someone from some distant wirelessly and someone from some distant wirelessly and someone from some distant part of the planet is hearing your part of the planet is hearing your part of the planet is hearing your speech from a wireless signal uh without speech from a wireless signal uh without speech from a wireless signal uh without you speaking. Uh so you speaking. Uh so you speaking. Uh so probably that won't be done in an probably that won't be done in an probably that won't be done in an ethical way, who knows, you know, but uh ethical way, who knows, you know, but uh ethical way, who knows, you know, but uh I mean, the ethics of doing that I mean, the ethics of doing that I mean, the ethics of doing that probably, you know, might not happen, probably, you know, might not happen, probably, you know, might not happen, but who knows, we have these songbirds. but who knows, we have these songbirds. but who knows, we have these songbirds. You know, if we apply the same technique You know, if we apply the same technique You know, if we apply the same technique to them, we can start to hear what to them, we can start to hear what to them, we can start to hear what they're singing in their dreams or they're singing in their dreams or they're singing in their dreams or whatever uh even though they don't whatever uh even though they don't whatever uh even though they don't produce sounds, so we can find out by produce sounds, so we can find out by produce sounds, so we can find out by testing on them. It's coming. One way or testing on them. It's coming. One way or testing on them. It's coming. One way or another, it's coming. another, it's coming. another, it's coming. For those listening who are interested For those listening who are interested For those listening who are interested in getting better at speaking and in getting better at speaking and in getting better at speaking and understanding languages, are there any understanding languages, are there any understanding languages, are there any tools that you recommend? And here tools that you recommend? And here tools that you recommend? And here again, I like I realize you're not a again, I like I realize you're not a again, I like I realize you're not a speech therapist, but here I'm not speech therapist, but here I'm not speech therapist, but here I'm not thinking about ameliorating any kind of thinking about ameliorating any kind of thinking about ameliorating any kind of um speech deficiency. I'm thinking, for speech deficiency. I'm thinking, for speech deficiency. I'm thinking, for instance, do you recommend that people instance, do you recommend that people instance, do you recommend that people read different types of writing? read different types of writing? read different types of writing? Um would you recommend that people learn Um would you recommend that people learn Um would you recommend that people learn how to dance in order to become better how to dance in order to become better how to dance in order to become better at expressing themselves verbally? Um at expressing themselves verbally? Um at expressing themselves verbally? Um you know, and feel free to have some you know, and feel free to have some you know, and feel free to have some degrees of uh freedom in this some degrees of uh freedom in this some degrees of uh freedom in this answer. This These are obviously not uh answer. This These are obviously not uh answer. This These are obviously not uh peer-reviewed studies that we're peer-reviewed studies that we're peer-reviewed studies that we're referring to or although there may be um referring to or although there may be um referring to or although there may be um but I'm struck by the number of things but I'm struck by the number of things but I'm struck by the number of things that you do exceedingly well, and I that you do exceedingly well, and I that you do exceedingly well, and I can't help but ask can't help but ask can't help but ask um well, the singing the which I um well, the singing the which I um well, the singing the which I realize it may your brother didn't pay realize it may your brother didn't pay realize it may your brother didn't pay me to say this, may not be quite as good me to say this, may not be quite as good me to say this, may not be quite as good as your brother's yet, but is getting as your brother's yet, but is getting as your brother's yet, but is getting you'll surpass him, I'm guessing at you'll surpass him, I'm guessing at you'll surpass him, I'm guessing at some point. You're getting there. some point. You're getting there. some point. You're getting there. Exactly. There you go. Um Exactly. There you go. Um Exactly. There you go. Um you know, you know, you know, should kids learn how to dance and read should kids learn how to dance and read should kids learn how to dance and read hard books and simple books? Uh what do hard books and simple books? Uh what do hard books and simple books? Uh what do you recommend? Should adults learn how you recommend? Should adults learn how you recommend? Should adults learn how to do that? Everyone wants to know how to do that? Everyone wants to know how to do that? Everyone wants to know how to keep their brain working better, so to keep their brain working better, so to keep their brain working better, so to speak, but also I think people want to speak, but also I think people want to speak, but also I think people want to be able to speak well, and people to be able to speak well, and people to be able to speak well, and people want to be able to understand well. want to be able to understand well. want to be able to understand well. Yeah. So, Yeah. So, Yeah. So, what I've discovered personally, right, what I've discovered personally, right, what I've discovered personally, right, is that So, when I switched from uh is that So, when I switched from uh is that So, when I switched from uh pursuing a career in science from a pursuing a career in science from a pursuing a career in science from a career in dance, career in dance, career in dance, um I thought one day I would stop um I thought one day I would stop um I thought one day I would stop dancing. Um but I haven't because it I dancing. Um but I haven't because it I dancing. Um but I haven't because it I find it fulfilling for me. Um you know, find it fulfilling for me. Um you know, find it fulfilling for me. Um you know, just as a life experience. So, ever just as a life experience. So, ever just as a life experience. So, ever since I went started college, you know, since I went started college, you know, since I went started college, you know, my uh late teens and early 20s, I kept my uh late teens and early 20s, I kept my uh late teens and early 20s, I kept dancing even till this day. dancing even till this day. dancing even till this day. And there've been periods of time like And there've been periods of time like And there've been periods of time like during the pandemic where I slowed down during the pandemic where I slowed down during the pandemic where I slowed down on dancing and so forth. Um and when on dancing and so forth. Um and when on dancing and so forth. Um and when you do that, you realize, okay, there you do that, you realize, okay, there you do that, you realize, okay, there parts of your body where your there parts of your body where your there parts of your body where your muscle tone decreases a little bit and muscle tone decreases a little bit and muscle tone decreases a little bit and somewhat and or you could start to gain somewhat and or you could start to gain somewhat and or you could start to gain weight or I somehow don't gain weight or I somehow don't gain weight or I somehow don't gain weight that easily and I think it's related to that easily and I think it's related to that easily and I think it's related to my dance, if that's that that's my dance, if that's that that's my dance, if that's that that's meaningful to your audience. Um but what meaningful to your audience. Um but what meaningful to your audience. Um but what I found is, you know, in science I found is, you know, in science I found is, you know, in science we like to think of a separation between we like to think of a separation between we like to think of a separation between movements and action and cognition. And movements and action and cognition. And movements and action and cognition. And there is a separation between there is a separation between there is a separation between perception and production. Cognition perception and production. Cognition perception and production. Cognition being perception, production being perception, production being perception, production being movement, right? But, if the speech movement, right? But, if the speech movement, right? But, if the speech pathway is next to the movement pathway is next to the movement pathway is next to the movement pathways, what I discover is by dancing, pathways, what I discover is by dancing, pathways, what I discover is by dancing, it is helping me it is helping me it is helping me think. It is helping keeping my brain think. It is helping keeping my brain think. It is helping keeping my brain fresh. It's not just moving my muscles. fresh. It's not just moving my muscles. fresh. It's not just moving my muscles. I'm moving or using the circuitry in I'm moving or using the circuitry in I'm moving or using the circuitry in my brain to do control a whole big body, my brain to do control a whole big body, my brain to do control a whole big body, you need a lot of brain tissue to do you need a lot of brain tissue to do you need a lot of brain tissue to do that. And so, I argue if you want to that. And so, I argue if you want to that. And so, I argue if you want to stay cognitively stay cognitively stay cognitively intact into your old age, you better be intact into your old age, you better be intact into your old age, you better be moving. And you better be doing it consistently, And you better be doing it consistently, And you better be doing it consistently, whatever it's dancing, walking, running, whatever it's dancing, walking, running, whatever it's dancing, walking, running, and also practicing speech, and also practicing speech, and also practicing speech, oratory speech and so forth, or singing oratory speech and so forth, or singing oratory speech and so forth, or singing is controlling the brain circuits that is controlling the brain circuits that is controlling the brain circuits that are moving your facial musculature. And are moving your facial musculature. And are moving your facial musculature. And it's going to keep your cognitive it's going to keep your cognitive it's going to keep your cognitive circuits also in tune. And I'm circuits also in tune. And I'm circuits also in tune. And I'm convinced of that from my own personal convinced of that from my own personal convinced of that from my own personal experience. Now, for me, uh long slow runs are a Now, for me, uh long slow runs are a Now, for me, uh long slow runs are a wonderful way to kind of loosen the wonderful way to kind of loosen the wonderful way to kind of loosen the joints for long podcasts. Uh especially joints for long podcasts. Uh especially joints for long podcasts. Uh especially the solo podcast which can take many the solo podcast which can take many the solo podcast which can take many hours to record and um without those hours to record and um without those hours to record and um without those long slow runs, at least the day before long slow runs, at least the day before long slow runs, at least the day before or even the morning of, I don't think I or even the morning of, I don't think I or even the morning of, I don't think I could do it. At least not as well. All could do it. At least not as well. All could do it. At least not as well. All right, well, you're experiencing right, well, you're experiencing right, well, you're experiencing something similar. So, that's an N of 2. something similar. So, that's an N of 2. something similar. So, that's an N of 2. Yeah, N of 2. Uh I'm tempted to Yeah, N of 2. Uh I'm tempted to Yeah, N of 2. Uh I'm tempted to learn how to dance because uh there are learn how to dance because uh there are learn how to dance because uh there are a lot of reasons to learn how to dance. a lot of reasons to learn how to dance. a lot of reasons to learn how to dance. People can use their imagination. People can use their imagination. People can use their imagination. I definitely want to I definitely want to I definitely want to get the opportunity to talk about some get the opportunity to talk about some get the opportunity to talk about some of the newer work that you're into right of the newer work that you're into right of the newer work that you're into right now uh about genomes of animals. Um as you uh about genomes of animals. Um as you uh about genomes of animals. Um as you perhaps can tell from my quite authentic perhaps can tell from my quite authentic perhaps can tell from my quite authentic facial expressions, I adore the animal facial expressions, I adore the animal facial expressions, I adore the animal kingdom. I just find it amazing and it's kingdom. I just find it amazing and it's kingdom. I just find it amazing and it's what the reason I went into neurobiology what the reason I went into neurobiology what the reason I went into neurobiology in part. Um in part. Um in part. Um so many animals, so many different so many animals, so many different so many animals, so many different patterns of movement, so many body patterns of movement, so many body patterns of movement, so many body plans, so many specializations. plans, so many specializations. plans, so many specializations. What is the value of learning the What is the value of learning the What is the value of learning the genomes of all these animals? Yeah. genomes of all these animals? Yeah. genomes of all these animals? Yeah. You know, I can think of uh You know, I can think of uh You know, I can think of uh conservation based, you know, schemes of conservation based, you know, schemes of conservation based, you know, schemes of trying to preserve these precious uh trying to preserve these precious uh trying to preserve these precious uh critters. Um but what are you doing with critters. Um but what are you doing with critters. Um but what are you doing with the genomes of these animals? What do the genomes of these animals? What do the genomes of these animals? What do you want to understand about their brain you want to understand about their brain you want to understand about their brain circuits and how does this relate to circuits and how does this relate to circuits and how does this relate to some of the discussion we've have been some of the discussion we've have been some of the discussion we've have been having up until now? having up until now? having up until now? Yeah, I I've gotten very heavily Yeah, I I've gotten very heavily Yeah, I I've gotten very heavily involved in genomes um involved in genomes um involved in genomes um you know, not just to get at an you know, not just to get at an you know, not just to get at an individual gene involved in the trait of individual gene involved in the trait of individual gene involved in the trait of interest like spoken language, interest like spoken language, interest like spoken language, um but um but um but I realized that I realized that I realized that you know, nature has done natural you know, nature has done natural you know, nature has done natural experiments for us. experiments for us. experiments for us. Um with all these species out there with Um with all these species out there with Um with all these species out there with these various traits these various traits these various traits and the one that I'm studying like vocal and the one that I'm studying like vocal and the one that I'm studying like vocal learning has evolved multiple times learning has evolved multiple times learning has evolved multiple times among the animal kingdom. Even if it's among the animal kingdom. Even if it's among the animal kingdom. Even if it's rare, it's multiple times. rare, it's multiple times. rare, it's multiple times. And uh the similar genetic changes occurred in the similar genetic changes occurred in the similar genetic changes occurred in those species. But to find out what those species. But to find out what those species. But to find out what those genetic changes that are those genetic changes that are those genetic changes that are associated with the trait of interest associated with the trait of interest associated with the trait of interest and not some other trait like flying in and not some other trait like flying in and not some other trait like flying in birds as opposed to birds as opposed to birds as opposed to singing, um you have to do what's called singing, um you have to do what's called singing, um you have to do what's called comparative genomics, even in the comparative genomics, even in the comparative genomics, even in the context of studying the brain. And you context of studying the brain. And you context of studying the brain. And you need their genomes to compare the need their genomes to compare the need their genomes to compare the genomes and do like a GWAS, a genomes and do like a GWAS, a genomes and do like a GWAS, a genome-wide association study, not just genome-wide association study, not just genome-wide association study, not just within a species like humans, but across within a species like humans, but across within a species like humans, but across species. And so you need uh good genomes species. And so you need uh good genomes species. And so you need uh good genomes to do that. to do that. to do that. Plus, I've discovered I'm also interested in I've discovered I'm also interested in I've discovered I'm also interested in evolution and origins. How did these evolution and origins. How did these evolution and origins. How did these species come about a similar trait in uh species come about a similar trait in uh species come about a similar trait in uh in last, you know, 300 million years in last, you know, 300 million years in last, you know, 300 million years or 60 million years, depending who or 60 million years, depending who or 60 million years, depending who you're talking about. Uh and you need a you're talking about. Uh and you need a you're talking about. Uh and you need a good phylogenetic tree to do that. And good phylogenetic tree to do that. And good phylogenetic tree to do that. And to get a good phylogenetic tree, you to get a good phylogenetic tree, you to get a good phylogenetic tree, you also need their genomes. also need their genomes. also need their genomes. And so because of this, I got involved And so because of this, I got involved And so because of this, I got involved in large-scale consortiums to produce in large-scale consortiums to produce in large-scale consortiums to produce genomes of many different species, genomes of many different species, genomes of many different species, including my vocal learners and my their including my vocal learners and my their including my vocal learners and my their closest relatives that I'm fans of. Uh closest relatives that I'm fans of. Uh closest relatives that I'm fans of. Uh but I couldn't convince the funding but I couldn't convince the funding but I couldn't convince the funding agencies to give me the money to do agencies to give me the money to do agencies to give me the money to do that just for my own project. But when that just for my own project. But when that just for my own project. But when you get a whole bunch of people together you get a whole bunch of people together you get a whole bunch of people together who want to study various traits, you who want to study various traits, you who want to study various traits, you know, um heart disease or what or loss know, um heart disease or what or loss know, um heart disease or what or loss and gain of flight and so forth, and gain of flight and so forth, and gain of flight and so forth, suddenly we all need lots of genomes to suddenly we all need lots of genomes to suddenly we all need lots of genomes to do this. do this. do this. And so now that got me into a project to And so now that got me into a project to And so now that got me into a project to lead something called the Vertebrate lead something called the Vertebrate lead something called the Vertebrate Genomes Project to eventually sequence Genomes Project to eventually sequence Genomes Project to eventually sequence all 70,000 species on the planet. Uh and all 70,000 species on the planet. Uh and all 70,000 species on the planet. Uh and uh Earth BioGenome Project, all uh Earth BioGenome Project, all uh Earth BioGenome Project, all eukaryotic species, all 2 million of eukaryotic species, all 2 million of eukaryotic species, all 2 million of them. Uh and to no longer Uh and to no longer Uh and to no longer be in a situation where I wish I had be in a situation where I wish I had be in a situation where I wish I had this genome, now we have the genetic this genome, now we have the genetic this genome, now we have the genetic code of all life on the planet, create a code of all life on the planet, create a code of all life on the planet, create a database of all their traits, and find database of all their traits, and find database of all their traits, and find the genetic association with everything the genetic association with everything the genetic association with everything uh out there that makes a difference uh out there that makes a difference uh out there that makes a difference from one species to another. from one species to another. from one species to another. Uh one more piece of uh Uh one more piece of uh Uh one more piece of uh of the equation to add to this story of the equation to add to this story of the equation to add to this story is what I didn't realize as a is what I didn't realize as a is what I didn't realize as a neuroscientist were that these genomes neuroscientist were that these genomes neuroscientist were that these genomes are not only incomplete, are not only incomplete, are not only incomplete, uh but they have lots of errors in them. uh but they have lots of errors in them. uh but they have lots of errors in them. False gene duplications where mother and False gene duplications where mother and False gene duplications where mother and father chromosomes were so different father chromosomes were so different father chromosomes were so different from each other that the genome from each other that the genome from each other that the genome algorithm assembly algorithms treated algorithm assembly algorithms treated algorithm assembly algorithms treated them as two different genes in this part them as two different genes in this part them as two different genes in this part of the chromosome. of the chromosome. of the chromosome. Uh so there are a lot of these false Uh so there are a lot of these false Uh so there are a lot of these false duplicated genes that people were duplicated genes that people were duplicated genes that people were thought were real but were not, or thought were real but were not, or thought were real but were not, or missing parts of the genome because the missing parts of the genome because the missing parts of the genome because the enzymes used to sequence the DNA enzymes used to sequence the DNA enzymes used to sequence the DNA couldn't get through this regulatory couldn't get through this regulatory couldn't get through this regulatory region that folded up on itself, uh and region that folded up on itself, uh and region that folded up on itself, uh and uh made it hard to sequence. uh made it hard to sequence. uh made it hard to sequence. And so I end up in these consortiums And so I end up in these consortiums And so I end up in these consortiums uh pulling in the genome sequencing pulling in the genome sequencing pulling in the genome sequencing companies developing the technology to companies developing the technology to companies developing the technology to work with us to improve it further, and work with us to improve it further, and work with us to improve it further, and the computer science guys who then take the computer science guys who then take the computer science guys who then take that data and that technology and try to that data and that technology and try to that data and that technology and try to make the complete genomes and make the make the complete genomes and make the make the complete genomes and make the algorithms better to produce algorithms better to produce algorithms better to produce what we now just did recently and uh led what we now just did recently and uh led what we now just did recently and uh led by an effort by Adam Phillippy is the by an effort by Adam Phillippy is the by an effort by Adam Phillippy is the first human telomere-to-telomere genome first human telomere-to-telomere genome first human telomere-to-telomere genome with no errors, all complete, no missing with no errors, all complete, no missing with no errors, all complete, no missing sequence. And now we're trying to do the sequence. And now we're trying to do the sequence. And now we're trying to do the same thing with vertebrates uh and other same thing with vertebrates uh and other same thing with vertebrates uh and other species. Actually, we improved that even species. Actually, we improved that even species. Actually, we improved that even before we got to the what we call before we got to the what we call before we got to the what we call telomere-to-telomere from one end of the telomere-to-telomere from one end of the telomere-to-telomere from one end of the chromosome to another. chromosome to another. chromosome to another. And what we're discovering And what we're discovering And what we're discovering is in this dark matter of the genome is in this dark matter of the genome is in this dark matter of the genome that was missing before that was missing before that was missing before turns out to be some regulatory regions turns out to be some regulatory regions turns out to be some regulatory regions that are specialized in vocal learning that are specialized in vocal learning that are specialized in vocal learning species and we think are involved in species and we think are involved in species and we think are involved in developing speech circuits. Incredible. developing speech circuits. Incredible. developing speech circuits. Incredible. Well, so much to learn and that Well, so much to learn and that Well, so much to learn and that we're going to learn from this we're going to learn from this we're going to learn from this information. What Early on in these information. What Early on in these information. What Early on in these genome projects and connectome projects, genome projects and connectome projects, genome projects and connectome projects, I confess I was a little bit cynical. I confess I was a little bit cynical. I confess I was a little bit cynical. This would be about 10, 15 years ago. I This would be about 10, 15 years ago. I This would be about 10, 15 years ago. I thought, okay, necessary but not I thought, okay, necessary but not I thought, okay, necessary but not sufficient for anything. Uh we need it, sufficient for anything. Uh we need it, sufficient for anything. Uh we need it, but it's not clear what's going to but it's not clear what's going to but it's not clear what's going to happen. But you just gave a very clear happen. But you just gave a very clear happen. But you just gave a very clear example of what we stand to learn from example of what we stand to learn from example of what we stand to learn from this kind of information. And um this kind of information. And um this kind of information. And um I and I know from the conservation side, I and I know from the conservation side, I and I know from the conservation side, there's a huge interest in this because there's a huge interest in this because there's a huge interest in this because even though we would prefer to keep all even though we would prefer to keep all even though we would prefer to keep all these species alive rather than clone these species alive rather than clone these species alive rather than clone them, they're them, they're them, they're these sorts of projects do offer the these sorts of projects do offer the these sorts of projects do offer the possibility of potentially recreating possibility of potentially recreating possibility of potentially recreating species that were lost due to our own species that were lost due to our own species that were lost due to our own ignorance or um missteps or what have ignorance or um missteps or what have ignorance or um missteps or what have you. Yes. you. Yes. you. Yes. And and along those lines, And and along those lines, And and along those lines, uh because, you know, we got involved in because, you know, we got involved in because, you know, we got involved in genomics, some of the first species that genomics, some of the first species that genomics, some of the first species that we start working on are critically we start working on are critically we start working on are critically endangered species. And I'm doing that endangered species. And I'm doing that endangered species. And I'm doing that not only for uh not only for uh not only for uh for under, you know, perspective to for under, you know, perspective to for under, you know, perspective to understand their brains and the genes understand their brains and the genes understand their brains and the genes involved in their brain function, but I involved in their brain function, but I involved in their brain function, but I feel like it's a moral duty. So, the feel like it's a moral duty. So, the feel like it's a moral duty. So, the fact that now I've become more involved fact that now I've become more involved fact that now I've become more involved in genome biology and have helped in genome biology and have helped in genome biology and have helped develop these tools for more complete develop these tools for more complete develop these tools for more complete genomes, let's capture their genomes, let's capture their genomes, let's capture their genetic code now before they're gone. Uh genetic code now before they're gone. Uh genetic code now before they're gone. Uh and could we use that information uh to and could we use that information uh to and could we use that information uh to resurrect the species at some future resurrect the species at some future resurrect the species at some future time, if not in my lifetime, in sometime time, if not in my lifetime, in sometime time, if not in my lifetime, in sometime in the future in generations ahead of in the future in generations ahead of in the future in generations ahead of us. And so, um And so, um And so, um in do in anticipation of that, we in do in anticipation of that, we in do in anticipation of that, we created a database we call the Genome created a database we call the Genome created a database we call the Genome Ark, uh and no pun intended, like Noah's and no pun intended, like Noah's and no pun intended, like Noah's Ark, uh meant to store the genetic code Ark, uh meant to store the genetic code Ark, uh meant to store the genetic code as complete genome assemblies as complete genome assemblies as complete genome assemblies as possible for all species on the planet, possible for all species on the planet, possible for all species on the planet, uh to be used for basic science, but uh to be used for basic science, but uh to be used for basic science, but also at some point in the future. also at some point in the future. also at some point in the future. Uh and because of that, uh funding Uh and because of that, uh funding Uh and because of that, uh funding agencies or private foundations that are agencies or private foundations that are agencies or private foundations that are interested conservation have been interested conservation have been interested conservation have been reaching out to me now, a reaching out to me now, a reaching out to me now, a neuroscientist, uh to help them out in producing uh to help them out in producing uh to help them out in producing high-quality genome data of endangered high-quality genome data of endangered high-quality genome data of endangered species that they can use like Revive species that they can use like Revive species that they can use like Revive and Restore, who want to resurrect the and Restore, who want to resurrect the and Restore, who want to resurrect the passenger pigeon, or Colossal, who wants passenger pigeon, or Colossal, who wants passenger pigeon, or Colossal, who wants to resurrect the woolly mammoths. to resurrect the woolly mammoths. to resurrect the woolly mammoths. And so, we're producing high-quality And so, we're producing high-quality And so, we're producing high-quality genomes for these groups for their genomes for these groups for their genomes for these groups for their conservation projects. What a terrific conservation projects. What a terrific conservation projects. What a terrific and important initiative. And I think and important initiative. And I think and important initiative. And I think for those listening today, they now for those listening today, they now for those listening today, they now certainly understand the value of under certainly understand the value of under certainly understand the value of under of deeply understanding the brain deeply understanding the brain deeply understanding the brain structures and genomes of different structures and genomes of different structures and genomes of different species because species because species because I confess, even though I knew that a bit I confess, even though I knew that a bit I confess, even though I knew that a bit of the songbird literature, and I of the songbird literature, and I of the songbird literature, and I certainly understand that humans have certainly understand that humans have certainly understand that humans have speech and language, I had no idea that speech and language, I had no idea that speech and language, I had no idea that there was so much convergence of there was so much convergence of there was so much convergence of function, structure, and genomes. And to function, structure, and genomes. And to function, structure, and genomes. And to me, you know, I feel a lot more like a me, you know, I feel a lot more like a me, you know, I feel a lot more like a an ape than I do a songbird. And an ape than I do a songbird. And an ape than I do a songbird. And yet, here we are with the understanding yet, here we are with the understanding yet, here we are with the understanding that there's a lot more similarity that there's a lot more similarity that there's a lot more similarity between songbirds and humans than I between songbirds and humans than I between songbirds and humans than I certainly ever thought before. certainly ever thought before. certainly ever thought before. Yeah, something very close to home for Yeah, something very close to home for Yeah, something very close to home for us humans I can give you an example of us humans I can give you an example of us humans I can give you an example of is evolution of skin color. is evolution of skin color. is evolution of skin color. Uh in Uh in Uh in skin color, we use it unfortunately in skin color, we use it unfortunately in skin color, we use it unfortunately for racism and so forth. We use it also for racism and so forth. We use it also for racism and so forth. We use it also for good things to let in more light or for good things to let in more light or for good things to let in more light or let out less light, depending on the let out less light, depending on the let out less light, depending on the part of the planet, you know, our part of the planet, you know, our part of the planet, you know, our population evolved in. And most people population evolved in. And most people population evolved in. And most people think dark-skinned people all evolved think dark-skinned people all evolved think dark-skinned people all evolved from the same dark-skinned person, and from the same dark-skinned person, and from the same dark-skinned person, and light-skinned people all evolved from light-skinned people all evolved from light-skinned people all evolved from the same light-skinned person, but the same light-skinned person, but the same light-skinned person, but that's not the case. that's not the case. that's not the case. Dark skin and light skin amongst humans Dark skin and light skin amongst humans Dark skin and light skin amongst humans has evolved independently multiple has evolved independently multiple has evolved independently multiple times, like in, you know, the Pacific times, like in, you know, the Pacific times, like in, you know, the Pacific Islands versus Africa. And it And it Islands versus Africa. And it And it Islands versus Africa. And it And it It's just depending on the angle of It's just depending on the angle of It's just depending on the angle of light hitting the Earth as to whether light hitting the Earth as to whether light hitting the Earth as to whether you need more protection from the sun or you need more protection from the sun or you need more protection from the sun or less protection. less protection. less protection. To That's also associated with vitamin D To That's also associated with vitamin D To That's also associated with vitamin D synthesis uh, in the skin. And so, um, synthesis uh, in the skin. And so, um, synthesis uh, in the skin. And so, um, and each time, and each time, and each time, um, uh, where a darker or lighter skin uh, where a darker or lighter skin uh, where a darker or lighter skin evolved independently, it hit the same evolved independently, it hit the same evolved independently, it hit the same gene, you know, um, you know, the melat- gene, you know, um, you know, the melat- gene, you know, um, you know, the melat- um, Melanin? Melanin receptors, that's Melanin? Melanin receptors, that's Melanin? Melanin receptors, that's right. Yes, yeah. Uh, genes that are right. Yes, yeah. Uh, genes that are right. Yes, yeah. Uh, genes that are involved in melanin formation. Uh, and involved in melanin formation. Uh, and involved in melanin formation. Uh, and so, um, so, um, so, um, those genes evolved some of the same those genes evolved some of the same those genes evolved some of the same mutations, even in different species. mutations, even in different species. mutations, even in different species. It's not just humans. Uh, in equatorial It's not just humans. Uh, in equatorial It's not just humans. Uh, in equatorial regions, there are darker-skinned regions, there are darker-skinned regions, there are darker-skinned animals than going away from the equ- animals than going away from the equ- animals than going away from the equ- equator. All right, I think of Arctic foxes and All right, I think of Arctic foxes and All right, I think of Arctic foxes and things like that. things like that. things like that. Polar bears, you know. And so, uh, Polar bears, you know. And so, uh, Polar bears, you know. And so, uh, and so, some of the same genes are used and so, some of the same genes are used and so, some of the same genes are used in an evolutionary perspective to in an evolutionary perspective to in an evolutionary perspective to evolve in a similar way within and evolve in a similar way within and evolve in a similar way within and across species. Incredible. across species. Incredible. across species. Incredible. Yeah. And that's same thing happening in Yeah. And that's same thing happening in Yeah. And that's same thing happening in the brain, too. Language is no the brain, too. Language is no the brain, too. Language is no exception. Well, I have to say, as exception. Well, I have to say, as exception. Well, I have to say, as somebody who is a, you know, career somebody who is a, you know, career somebody who is a, you know, career neuroscientist, but as I mentioned neuroscientist, but as I mentioned neuroscientist, but as I mentioned several times now, who adores the animal several times now, who adores the animal several times now, who adores the animal kingdom, but is kingdom, but is kingdom, but is also obsessed with speech and language, also obsessed with speech and language, also obsessed with speech and language, and, um, at a distance, not as a as a and, um, at a distance, not as a as a and, um, at a distance, not as a as a practitioner of uh, music and dance, practitioner of uh, music and dance, practitioner of uh, music and dance, um, this has been an incredible um, this has been an incredible um, this has been an incredible conversation and opportunity for me to conversation and opportunity for me to conversation and opportunity for me to learn. I'm I know I speak for a learn. I'm I know I speak for a learn. I'm I know I speak for a tremendous number of people when I tremendous number of people when I tremendous number of people when I just really want to say thank you for just really want to say thank you for just really want to say thank you for joining us today. You are incredibly joining us today. You are incredibly joining us today. You are incredibly busy. It's clear from your description busy. It's clear from your description busy. It's clear from your description of your science and your knowledge base of your science and your knowledge base of your science and your knowledge base that you are involved in a huge number that you are involved in a huge number that you are involved in a huge number of things, um, very busy. So, thank you of things, um, very busy. So, thank you of things, um, very busy. So, thank you for taking the time to speak to all of for taking the time to speak to all of for taking the time to speak to all of us. Thank you for the work that you're doing Thank you for the work that you're doing Thank you for the work that you're doing both on speech and language, but also both on speech and language, but also both on speech and language, but also this important work on genomes and, um, this important work on genomes and, um, this important work on genomes and, um, conservation uh, of endangered species conservation uh, of endangered species conservation uh, of endangered species and far more. And I have to say, and far more. And I have to say, and far more. And I have to say, uh, if you would agree to come back and uh, if you would agree to come back and uh, if you would agree to come back and speak to us again sometime, I'm certain speak to us again sometime, I'm certain speak to us again sometime, I'm certain that if we were to sit down even 6 that if we were to sit down even 6 that if we were to sit down even 6 months or a year from now, there's going months or a year from now, there's going months or a year from now, there's going to be a lot more to come. to be a lot more to come. to be a lot more to come. have some things cooking, and, uh, and have some things cooking, and, uh, and have some things cooking, and, uh, and thank you for inviting me here to get thank you for inviting me here to get thank you for inviting me here to get the word out to the community the word out to the community the word out to the community of what's going on in the science world. of what's going on in the science world. of what's going on in the science world. Well, we're honored and very grateful to Well, we're honored and very grateful to Well, we're honored and very grateful to Eric. Thank you. You're welcome. Eric. Thank you. You're welcome. Eric. Thank you. You're welcome. Thank you for joining me today for my Thank you for joining me today for my Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. If discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. If discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. If you'd like to learn more about his you'd like to learn more about his you'd like to learn more about his laboratory's work, you can go to laboratory's work, you can go to laboratory's work, you can go to jarvislab spelled j a r v i s lab all jarvislab spelled j a r v i s lab all jarvislab spelled j a r v i s lab all one word jarvislab.net one word jarvislab.net one word jarvislab.net and there you can learn about all the and there you can learn about all the and there you can learn about all the various studies taking place in his various studies taking place in his various studies taking place in his laboratory as well as some of the large laboratory as well as some of the large laboratory as well as some of the large overarching themes that are driving overarching themes that are driving overarching themes that are driving those studies including studies on human those studies including studies on human those studies including studies on human genomics and animal genomics and animal genomics and animal genomics that surely are going to lead to the that surely are going to lead to the that surely are going to lead to the next stage discoveries of how we learn next stage discoveries of how we learn next stage discoveries of how we learn and think about and indeed use language. and think about and indeed use language. and think about and indeed use language. If you're learning from and or enjoying If you're learning from and or enjoying If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a simple zero YouTube channel. That's a simple zero YouTube channel. That's a simple zero cost way to support us. Please also cost way to support us. Please also cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple, you Apple and on both Spotify and Apple, you Apple and on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a have the opportunity to leave us up to a have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. five-star review. five-star review. If you have questions or comments or If you have questions or comments or If you have questions or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us suggestions about topics you'd like us suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab podcast, interview on the Huberman Lab podcast, interview on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section please put those in the comment section please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all those on YouTube. We do read all those on YouTube. We do read all those comments and we do take them to heart. comments and we do take them to heart. comments and we do take them to heart. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's mentioned at the beginning of today's mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast and check out Momentous podcast and check out Momentous podcast and check out Momentous Supplements our new partners in the Supplements our new partners in the Supplements our new partners in the supplement space and check out Athletic supplement space and check out Athletic supplement space and check out Athletic Greens. That's the best way to support Greens. That's the best way to support Greens. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already this podcast. If you're not already this podcast. If you're not already following us on social media, please do following us on social media, please do following us on social media, please do so. We are Huberman Lab on Twitter and so. We are Huberman Lab on Twitter and so. We are Huberman Lab on Twitter and we are also Huberman Lab on Instagram we are also Huberman Lab on Instagram we are also Huberman Lab on Instagram and both places I cover science and both places I cover science and both places I cover science and science-related tools some of which science-related tools some of which science-related tools some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman overlap with the content of the Huberman overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast but much of which is unique Lab podcast but much of which is unique Lab podcast but much of which is unique from the content covered on the Huberman from the content covered on the Huberman from the content covered on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab on Instagram and Huberman Lab on Instagram and Huberman Lab on Instagram and Huberman Lab on Twitter. Please also check out our Twitter. Please also check out our Twitter. Please also check out our Neural Network monthly newsletter. This Neural Network monthly newsletter. This Neural Network monthly newsletter. This is a newsletter that has summaries of is a newsletter that has summaries of is a newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes. It also includes a lot podcast episodes. It also includes a lot podcast episodes. It also includes a lot of actionable protocols. It's very easy of actionable protocols. It's very easy of actionable protocols. It's very easy to sign up for the newsletter. You go to sign up for the newsletter. You go to sign up for the newsletter. You go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go to newsletter. You supply your email, to newsletter. You supply your email, to newsletter. You supply your email, but we do not share your email with but we do not share your email with but we do not share your email with anybody. We have a very clear and anybody. We have a very clear and anybody. We have a very clear and rigorous privacy policy, which is we do rigorous privacy policy, which is we do rigorous privacy policy, which is we do not share your email with anybody. And not share your email with anybody. And not share your email with anybody. And the newsletter comes out once a month, the newsletter comes out once a month, the newsletter comes out once a month, and it is completely zero cost. Again, and it is completely zero cost. Again, and it is completely zero cost. Again, just go to hubermanlab.com and go to the just go to hubermanlab.com and go to the just go to hubermanlab.com and go to the Neural Network newsletter. I'd also like Neural Network newsletter. I'd also like Neural Network newsletter. I'd also like to point out that the Huberman Lab to point out that the Huberman Lab to point out that the Huberman Lab podcast has a clips channel. So, these podcast has a clips channel. So, these podcast has a clips channel. So, these are brief clips, anywhere from 3 to 10 are brief clips, anywhere from 3 to 10 are brief clips, anywhere from 3 to 10 minutes, that encompass single concepts minutes, that encompass single concepts minutes, that encompass single concepts and actionable protocols related to and actionable protocols related to and actionable protocols related to sleep, to focus, interviews with various sleep, to focus, interviews with various sleep, to focus, interviews with various guests. We talk about things like guests. We talk about things like guests. We talk about things like caffeine, when to drink caffeine caffeine, when to drink caffeine caffeine, when to drink caffeine relative to sleep, relative to sleep, relative to sleep, alcohol, when and how and if anyone alcohol, when and how and if anyone alcohol, when and how and if anyone should ingest it relative to sleep, should ingest it relative to sleep, should ingest it relative to sleep, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, physical health, and on and on. All the physical health, and on and on. All the physical health, and on and on. All the things that relate to the topics most of things that relate to the topics most of things that relate to the topics most of interest to you. You can find that interest to you. You can find that interest to you. You can find that easily by going to YouTube, look for easily by going to YouTube, look for easily by going to YouTube, look for Huberman Lab clips in the search area, Huberman Lab clips in the search area, Huberman Lab clips in the search area, and it will take you there. Subscribe, and it will take you there. Subscribe, and it will take you there. Subscribe, and we are constantly updating those and we are constantly updating those and we are constantly updating those with new clips. This is especially with new clips. This is especially with new clips. This is especially useful, I believe, for people that have useful, I believe, for people that have useful, I believe, for people that have missed some of the earlier episodes or missed some of the earlier episodes or missed some of the earlier episodes or you're still working through the back you're still working through the back you're still working through the back catalog of Huberman Lab podcast, which catalog of Huberman Lab podcast, which catalog of Huberman Lab podcast, which admittedly can be rather long. And last, admittedly can be rather long. And last, admittedly can be rather long. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for but certainly not least, thank you for but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.