Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. And now for my discussion with Dr. Anna And now for my discussion with Dr. Anna And now for my discussion with Dr. Anna Lembke. I and many listeners of this podcast are I and many listeners of this podcast are I and many listeners of this podcast are obsessed with dopamine. What is dopamine obsessed with dopamine. What is dopamine obsessed with dopamine. What is dopamine and what are maybe some things about and what are maybe some things about and what are maybe some things about dopamine that most people don't know and dopamine that most people don't know and dopamine that most people don't know and probably that I don't know either. probably that I don't know either. probably that I don't know either. So dopamine is a neurotransmitter and So dopamine is a neurotransmitter and So dopamine is a neurotransmitter and neurotransmitters are those molecules neurotransmitters are those molecules neurotransmitters are those molecules that bridge the gap between two neurons. that bridge the gap between two neurons. that bridge the gap between two neurons. So they essentially allow one neuron, So they essentially allow one neuron, So they essentially allow one neuron, the pre-synaptic neuron, to communicate the pre-synaptic neuron, to communicate the pre-synaptic neuron, to communicate with the post-synaptic neuron. Um with the post-synaptic neuron. Um with the post-synaptic neuron. Um dopamine is intimately uh associated dopamine is intimately uh associated dopamine is intimately uh associated with the experience of reward, but also with the experience of reward, but also with the experience of reward, but also with movement, which I think is really with movement, which I think is really with movement, which I think is really interesting because movement and reward interesting because movement and reward interesting because movement and reward are linked, right? If you think about, are linked, right? If you think about, are linked, right? If you think about, you know, um early humans, you had to you know, um early humans, you had to you know, um early humans, you had to move in order to go seek out the water move in order to go seek out the water move in order to go seek out the water or the meat or whatever it was. So or the meat or whatever it was. So or the meat or whatever it was. So um dopamine is this really um powerful, um dopamine is this really um powerful, um dopamine is this really um powerful, important molecule in the brain that important molecule in the brain that important molecule in the brain that helps us um experience pleasure. It's helps us um experience pleasure. It's helps us um experience pleasure. It's not the only neurotransmitter involved not the only neurotransmitter involved not the only neurotransmitter involved in pleasure, but it's a really, really in pleasure, but it's a really, really in pleasure, but it's a really, really important one. important one. important one. And if you want to think about And if you want to think about And if you want to think about something that most people don't know something that most people don't know something that most people don't know about dopamine, which I think is about dopamine, which I think is about dopamine, which I think is really interesting, is that we are really interesting, is that we are really interesting, is that we are always releasing dopamine at a kind of always releasing dopamine at a kind of always releasing dopamine at a kind of tonic baseline rate. And it's really the tonic baseline rate. And it's really the tonic baseline rate. And it's really the deviation from that baseline, rather deviation from that baseline, rather deviation from that baseline, rather than like hits of dopamine in a vacuum, than like hits of dopamine in a vacuum, than like hits of dopamine in a vacuum, that make a difference. So when we that make a difference. So when we that make a difference. So when we experience pleasure, our dopamine experience pleasure, our dopamine experience pleasure, our dopamine release goes above baseline and likewise release goes above baseline and likewise release goes above baseline and likewise dopamine can go below that tonic dopamine can go below that tonic dopamine can go below that tonic baseline and then we experience a kind baseline and then we experience a kind baseline and then we experience a kind of pain. Interesting. So is it fair to of pain. Interesting. So is it fair to of pain. Interesting. So is it fair to say that one's baseline levels of say that one's baseline levels of say that one's baseline levels of dopamine, how frequently we are dopamine, how frequently we are dopamine, how frequently we are releasing dopamine in the absence of releasing dopamine in the absence of releasing dopamine in the absence of some uh I don't know, drug or food or some uh I don't know, drug or food or some uh I don't know, drug or food or experience, just sitting, being, experience, just sitting, being, experience, just sitting, being, uh is that associated with how happy uh is that associated with how happy uh is that associated with how happy somebody is, their kind of baseline of somebody is, their kind of baseline of somebody is, their kind of baseline of happiness or level of depression? happiness or level of depression? happiness or level of depression? There is evidence that shows that people There is evidence that shows that people There is evidence that shows that people who are depressed men did have lower who are depressed men did have lower who are depressed men did have lower tonic levels of dopamine. So, that's a tonic levels of dopamine. So, that's a tonic levels of dopamine. So, that's a really reasonable thought and there's really reasonable thought and there's really reasonable thought and there's some evidence to suggest that may some evidence to suggest that may some evidence to suggest that may be true. be true. be true. The other thing that we know is that if The other thing that we know is that if The other thing that we know is that if we um expose ourselves chronically to we um expose ourselves chronically to we um expose ourselves chronically to substances or behaviors that repeatedly substances or behaviors that repeatedly substances or behaviors that repeatedly release large amounts of dopamine in our release large amounts of dopamine in our release large amounts of dopamine in our brain's reward pathway, that we can brain's reward pathway, that we can brain's reward pathway, that we can change our tonic baseline and actually change our tonic baseline and actually change our tonic baseline and actually lower it over time as our brain tries to lower it over time as our brain tries to lower it over time as our brain tries to compensate for all of that dopamine, compensate for all of that dopamine, compensate for all of that dopamine, which is more really than we were which is more really than we were which is more really than we were designed to experience. Interesting. designed to experience. Interesting. designed to experience. Interesting. And is it would is it um the case that And is it would is it um the case that And is it would is it um the case that our baseline levels of dopamine are set our baseline levels of dopamine are set our baseline levels of dopamine are set by our genetics, by our heredity? by our genetics, by our heredity? by our genetics, by our heredity? Well, I think, you know, if you think Well, I think, you know, if you think Well, I think, you know, if you think about sort of, you know, the early about sort of, you know, the early about sort of, you know, the early stages of development in infancy, stages of development in infancy, stages of development in infancy, certainly that is true. You're kind of certainly that is true. You're kind of certainly that is true. You're kind of you know, born with probably whatever is you know, born with probably whatever is you know, born with probably whatever is your baseline level, but obviously your baseline level, but obviously your baseline level, but obviously your experiences can have a huge impact on experiences can have a huge impact on experiences can have a huge impact on where your where your where your dopamine level ultimately settles your dopamine level ultimately settles your dopamine level ultimately settles out. Do you think that's uh set in terms out. Do you think that's uh set in terms out. Do you think that's uh set in terms of um our parents and obviously nature of um our parents and obviously nature of um our parents and obviously nature and nurture interact, but and nurture interact, but and nurture interact, but is that is dopamine at the core of our is that is dopamine at the core of our is that is dopamine at the core of our temperament? I don't really think we temperament? I don't really think we temperament? I don't really think we know the answer to that, but I will say know the answer to that, but I will say know the answer to that, but I will say that people are definitely born with that people are definitely born with that people are definitely born with different temperaments and those different temperaments and those different temperaments and those temperaments do affect their ability to temperaments do affect their ability to temperaments do affect their ability to experience joy. experience joy. experience joy. Um and you know, we've known that Um and you know, we've known that Um and you know, we've known that for a long time and we describe that in for a long time and we describe that in for a long time and we describe that in many different ways. One of the ways many different ways. One of the ways many different ways. One of the ways that we describe that in the modern era that we describe that in the modern era that we describe that in the modern era is to use psychiatric nomenclature like is to use psychiatric nomenclature like is to use psychiatric nomenclature like this person has a dysthymic temperament this person has a dysthymic temperament this person has a dysthymic temperament or you know, this person has chronic or you know, this person has chronic or you know, this person has chronic major depressive disorder. Um in terms major depressive disorder. Um in terms major depressive disorder. Um in terms of looking specifically at who's of looking specifically at who's of looking specifically at who's vulnerable to addiction, um that's an vulnerable to addiction, um that's an vulnerable to addiction, um that's an interesting sort of mixed bag because interesting sort of mixed bag because interesting sort of mixed bag because when you look at uh the research on risk when you look at uh the research on risk when you look at uh the research on risk factors for addictions or what kind of factors for addictions or what kind of factors for addictions or what kind of temperament uh of a person makes them temperament uh of a person makes them temperament uh of a person makes them more vulnerable to addiction, you see um more vulnerable to addiction, you see um more vulnerable to addiction, you see um some interesting findings. First, you some interesting findings. First, you some interesting findings. First, you see that people who are more impulsive, see that people who are more impulsive, see that people who are more impulsive, who have a thought to do something and who have a thought to do something and who have a thought to do something and just do it impulsively, just do it impulsively, just do it impulsively, Mhm. are people who are more vulnerable Mhm. are people who are more vulnerable Mhm. are people who are more vulnerable to addiction. What we now conceptualize to addiction. What we now conceptualize to addiction. What we now conceptualize in our current ecosystem as mental in our current ecosystem as mental in our current ecosystem as mental illness are actually traits that in another are actually traits that in another are actually traits that in another ecosystem might be very advantageous. ecosystem might be very advantageous. ecosystem might be very advantageous. They're just not advantageous right now They're just not advantageous right now They're just not advantageous right now because of the world that we live in. because of the world that we live in. because of the world that we live in. And and I think, you know, impulsivity And and I think, you know, impulsivity And and I think, you know, impulsivity is potentially one of those, right? is potentially one of those, right? is potentially one of those, right? Because we live in this world that's Because we live in this world that's Because we live in this world that's such a sensory rich environment, right? such a sensory rich environment, right? such a sensory rich environment, right? That we're being bombarded with all That we're being bombarded with all That we're being bombarded with all these opportunities, these sensory these opportunities, these sensory these opportunities, these sensory opportunities, and we have to constantly opportunities, and we have to constantly opportunities, and we have to constantly check ourselves. And so check ourselves. And so check ourselves. And so impulsivity is something that right now impulsivity is something that right now impulsivity is something that right now um can be a difficult trait, but isn't um can be a difficult trait, but isn't um can be a difficult trait, but isn't in and of itself a bad thing. In a in and of itself a bad thing. In a in and of itself a bad thing. In a previous conversation we had, you said previous conversation we had, you said previous conversation we had, you said something that really rung in my mind, something that really rung in my mind, something that really rung in my mind, which is that many people who become which is that many people who become which is that many people who become addicted to things have this feeling addicted to things have this feeling addicted to things have this feeling that normal life isn't interesting that normal life isn't interesting that normal life isn't interesting enough. Maybe you could just tell us a enough. Maybe you could just tell us a enough. Maybe you could just tell us a little bit about your experience with little bit about your experience with little bit about your experience with this association, if it really exists, association, if it really exists, association, if it really exists, between people's sense of the normal see between people's sense of the normal see between people's sense of the normal see or maybe even how boring life can be and or maybe even how boring life can be and or maybe even how boring life can be and their tendency to become addicts of some their tendency to become addicts of some their tendency to become addicts of some sort. I think that life for humans has sort. I think that life for humans has sort. I think that life for humans has always been hard, but I think that now always been hard, but I think that now always been hard, but I think that now it's harder in unprecedented ways. And I harder in unprecedented ways. And I harder in unprecedented ways. And I think that the way that life is think that the way that life is think that the way that life is really hard now is that it actually is really hard now is that it actually is really hard now is that it actually is really boring. All of our survival needs really boring. All of our survival needs really boring. All of our survival needs are met. We don't even have to leave our are met. We don't even have to leave our are met. We don't even have to leave our homes to meet every single physical homes to meet every single physical homes to meet every single physical need. You know, as long as you're of a need. You know, as long as you're of a need. You know, as long as you're of a certain level of financial well-being certain level of financial well-being certain level of financial well-being which frankly, um you know, which frankly, um you know, which frankly, um you know, we talk so much about, you know, the we talk so much about, you know, the we talk so much about, you know, the income gap and certainly there is this income gap and certainly there is this income gap and certainly there is this enormous gap between rich and poor, but enormous gap between rich and poor, but enormous gap between rich and poor, but that gap is smaller than it's ever been that gap is smaller than it's ever been that gap is smaller than it's ever been in like the history of humans. We don't in like the history of humans. We don't in like the history of humans. We don't really have anything that we have to do. really have anything that we have to do. really have anything that we have to do. So, we're all forced to make stuff up, So, we're all forced to make stuff up, So, we're all forced to make stuff up, you know, whether it's being a scientist you know, whether it's being a scientist you know, whether it's being a scientist or being a doctor or being an Olympic or being a doctor or being an Olympic or being a doctor or being an Olympic athlete or, you know, climbing Mount athlete or, you know, climbing Mount athlete or, you know, climbing Mount Everest. And people really vary in their need for And people really vary in their need for And people really vary in their need for friction. And some people need a lot friction. And some people need a lot friction. And some people need a lot more than others. And if they don't have more than others. And if they don't have more than others. And if they don't have it, they're really unhappy. And I it, they're really unhappy. And I it, they're really unhappy. And I do think that a lot of the people that I do think that a lot of the people that I do think that a lot of the people that I see with addiction and other forms of see with addiction and other forms of see with addiction and other forms of mental illness mental illness mental illness are people who are people who are people who need more friction. Like they're unhappy need more friction. Like they're unhappy need more friction. Like they're unhappy not necessarily because there's not necessarily because there's not necessarily because there's something wrong with their brain, but something wrong with their brain, but something wrong with their brain, but because their brain is not suited to because their brain is not suited to because their brain is not suited to this world. Let's talk about the this world. Let's talk about the this world. Let's talk about the pleasure-pain balance and addiction. And pleasure-pain balance and addiction. And pleasure-pain balance and addiction. And I've heard you use this uh seesaw or I've heard you use this uh seesaw or I've heard you use this uh seesaw or balance scale um balance scale um balance scale um analogy before. And I think it's a analogy before. And I think it's a analogy before. And I think it's a wonderful one. wonderful one. wonderful one. Yeah, so to me one of the most Yeah, so to me one of the most Yeah, so to me one of the most significant findings in neuroscience in significant findings in neuroscience in significant findings in neuroscience in the last 75 years is that pleasure and the last 75 years is that pleasure and the last 75 years is that pleasure and pain are co-located, which means the pain are co-located, which means the pain are co-located, which means the same parts of the brain that process same parts of the brain that process same parts of the brain that process pleasure also process pain. And they pleasure also process pain. And they pleasure also process pain. And they work like a balance. So, when we feel work like a balance. So, when we feel work like a balance. So, when we feel pleasure, our balance tips one way. When pleasure, our balance tips one way. When pleasure, our balance tips one way. When we feel pain, it tips in the opposite we feel pain, it tips in the opposite we feel pain, it tips in the opposite direction. And one of the overriding rules And one of the overriding rules And one of the overriding rules governing this balance is that it wants governing this balance is that it wants governing this balance is that it wants to stay level. So, it doesn't want to stay level. So, it doesn't want to stay level. So, it doesn't want to remain tipped very long to pleasure or remain tipped very long to pleasure or remain tipped very long to pleasure or to pain. And with any deviation from to pain. And with any deviation from to pain. And with any deviation from neutrality, the brain will work very neutrality, the brain will work very neutrality, the brain will work very hard to restore a level balance, or what hard to restore a level balance, or what hard to restore a level balance, or what scientists call homeostasis. And the way scientists call homeostasis. And the way scientists call homeostasis. And the way the brain does that is with any stimulus the brain does that is with any stimulus the brain does that is with any stimulus to one the side, there will be a tip an to one the side, there will be a tip an to one the side, there will be a tip an equal and opposite amount to the other equal and opposite amount to the other equal and opposite amount to the other side. It's like they have principle laws of It's like they have principle laws of It's like they have principle laws of physics. Yes, right. Right. So, like I like to Yes, right. Right. So, like I like to Yes, right. Right. So, like I like to watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos of American Idol, you YouTube videos of American Idol, you YouTube videos of American Idol, you know, it tips to the side of pleasure. know, it tips to the side of pleasure. know, it tips to the side of pleasure. And then when I stop watching it, um I And then when I stop watching it, um I And then when I stop watching it, um I have a come down, right? Which is a tip have a come down, right? Which is a tip have a come down, right? Which is a tip to the equal and opposite amount um on to the equal and opposite amount um on to the equal and opposite amount um on the other side. And that's that moment the other side. And that's that moment the other side. And that's that moment of wanting to watch one more YouTube of wanting to watch one more YouTube of wanting to watch one more YouTube video, right? It's not something that video, right? It's not something that video, right? It's not something that consciously happens, or that we're aware consciously happens, or that we're aware consciously happens, or that we're aware of, unless we really begin to pay of, unless we really begin to pay of, unless we really begin to pay attention. And of course, one way to attention. And of course, one way to attention. And of course, one way to combat that is to do it more, right? And combat that is to do it more, right? And combat that is to do it more, right? And more and more and more. So, I think I more and more and more. So, I think I more and more and more. So, I think I think that is really what I want people think that is really what I want people think that is really what I want people to tune into and get an awareness to tune into and get an awareness to tune into and get an awareness around. Because once you tune into it, around. Because once you tune into it, around. Because once you tune into it, you can see it a lot. And if you, you can see it a lot. And if you, you can see it a lot. And if you, you know, keep the model of the balance in know, keep the model of the balance in know, keep the model of the balance in mind, I think it gives people mind, I think it gives people mind, I think it gives people kind of a way to imagine what they're kind of a way to imagine what they're kind of a way to imagine what they're experiencing on a neurobiological level, experiencing on a neurobiological level, experiencing on a neurobiological level, and understand it, and in that and understand it, and in that and understand it, and in that understanding get some mastery over it, understanding get some mastery over it, understanding get some mastery over it, which is really what this is all about. which is really what this is all about. which is really what this is all about. Because ultimately, Because ultimately, Because ultimately, we do need to disengage, right? We can't we do need to disengage, right? We can't we do need to disengage, right? We can't live in that space all the time, right? live in that space all the time, right? live in that space all the time, right? We have other things we need to do. And We have other things we need to do. And We have other things we need to do. And there are also serious consequences that there are also serious consequences that there are also serious consequences that come with trying to repeat and continue come with trying to repeat and continue come with trying to repeat and continue that experience or that feeling. that experience or that feeling. that experience or that feeling. Yeah, so if I understand this correctly, Yeah, so if I understand this correctly, Yeah, so if I understand this correctly, uh when we find something that we enjoy, uh when we find something that we enjoy, uh when we find something that we enjoy, that feels pleasurable. that feels pleasurable. that feels pleasurable. Uh social media, food, sex, Uh social media, food, sex, Uh social media, food, sex, gambling, whatever happens to be. gambling, whatever happens to be. gambling, whatever happens to be. There's a some dopamine release when we There's a some dopamine release when we There's a some dopamine release when we engage in that behavior. engage in that behavior. engage in that behavior. And then, what you're telling me is that And then, what you're telling me is that And then, what you're telling me is that very quickly, very quickly, very quickly, and beneath my conscious awareness, and beneath my conscious awareness, and beneath my conscious awareness, there's a tilting back of the scale, there's a tilting back of the scale, there's a tilting back of the scale, where pleasure is reduced by way of where pleasure is reduced by way of where pleasure is reduced by way of increasing pain. increasing pain. increasing pain. And I've heard you say before that And I've heard you say before that And I've heard you say before that the pain mechanism the pain mechanism the pain mechanism has some competitive advantages over the has some competitive advantages over the has some competitive advantages over the pleasure mechanism, such that it doesn't pleasure mechanism, such that it doesn't pleasure mechanism, such that it doesn't just bring the scale back to level. It just bring the scale back to level. It just bring the scale back to level. It actually brings pain higher than actually brings pain higher than actually brings pain higher than pleasure. What happens right after I do something What happens right after I do something What happens right after I do something that is really pleasurable and releases that is really pleasurable and releases that is really pleasurable and releases a lot of dopamine, is again, my brain is a lot of dopamine, is again, my brain is a lot of dopamine, is again, my brain is going to immediately compensate by going to immediately compensate by going to immediately compensate by down-regulating my own dopamine down-regulating my own dopamine down-regulating my own dopamine receptors, my own dopamine transmission, receptors, my own dopamine transmission, receptors, my own dopamine transmission, to compensate for that, okay? And that's to compensate for that, okay? And that's to compensate for that, okay? And that's that come down, or the hangover, or that come down, or the hangover, or that come down, or the hangover, or that aftereffect, that moment of wanting to aftereffect, that moment of wanting to aftereffect, that moment of wanting to do it more. Now, if I just wait for that do it more. Now, if I just wait for that do it more. Now, if I just wait for that feeling to pass, then my dopamine will feeling to pass, then my dopamine will feeling to pass, then my dopamine will re-regulate itself, and I'll go back to re-regulate itself, and I'll go back to re-regulate itself, and I'll go back to whatever my chronic baseline is. But if whatever my chronic baseline is. But if whatever my chronic baseline is. But if I don't wait, and here's really the key, I don't wait, and here's really the key, I don't wait, and here's really the key, if I keep indulging again and again and if I keep indulging again and again and if I keep indulging again and again and again, ultimately, I have I have so much again, ultimately, I have I have so much again, ultimately, I have I have so much on the pain side, right, that I've on the pain side, right, that I've on the pain side, right, that I've essentially reset my brain to what we essentially reset my brain to what we essentially reset my brain to what we call like an anhedonic, or lacking in call like an anhedonic, or lacking in call like an anhedonic, or lacking in joy, type of state, which is a dopamine joy, type of state, which is a dopamine joy, type of state, which is a dopamine deficit state. So, that's really the deficit state. So, that's really the deficit state. So, that's really the way in which pain can become the way in which pain can become the way in which pain can become the main driver, is because I've indulged so main driver, is because I've indulged so main driver, is because I've indulged so much in these high-reward behaviors or much in these high-reward behaviors or much in these high-reward behaviors or substances, that my brain has had to substances, that my brain has had to substances, that my brain has had to compensate by way down-regulating my own compensate by way down-regulating my own compensate by way down-regulating my own dopamine, such that even when I'm not dopamine, such that even when I'm not dopamine, such that even when I'm not doing that drug, I'm in a dopamine doing that drug, I'm in a dopamine doing that drug, I'm in a dopamine deficit state, which is akin to a deficit state, which is akin to a deficit state, which is akin to a clinical depression. I have anxiety, clinical depression. I have anxiety, clinical depression. I have anxiety, irritability, insomnia, dysphoria, and a irritability, insomnia, dysphoria, and a irritability, insomnia, dysphoria, and a lot of mental preoccupation with using lot of mental preoccupation with using lot of mental preoccupation with using again or getting the drug. So, in again or getting the drug. So, in again or getting the drug. So, in general, what we want is some kind of general, what we want is some kind of general, what we want is some kind of flexibility in that balance and the flexibility in that balance and the flexibility in that balance and the ability to re- easily reassert ability to re- easily reassert ability to re- easily reassert homeostasis. We don't want to break our homeostasis. We don't want to break our homeostasis. We don't want to break our balance, which is possible if we balance, which is possible if we balance, which is possible if we overindulge for enough period of time overindulge for enough period of time overindulge for enough period of time and end up with a balance tipped to the and end up with a balance tipped to the and end up with a balance tipped to the side of pain, this dopamine deficit side of pain, this dopamine deficit side of pain, this dopamine deficit state we've been talking about. We want state we've been talking about. We want state we've been talking about. We want to We want a flexible, resilient to We want a flexible, resilient to We want a flexible, resilient balance, right? Which can be sensitive balance, right? Which can be sensitive balance, right? Which can be sensitive to things going on in the environment, to things going on in the environment, to things going on in the environment, which can experience pleasure and which can experience pleasure and which can experience pleasure and approach, which can experience pain and approach, which can experience pain and approach, which can experience pain and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and healthy and necessary and good. We would healthy and necessary and good. We would healthy and necessary and good. We would never want a balance that doesn't tilt. never want a balance that doesn't tilt. never want a balance that doesn't tilt. Right. That would be a disaster. Right. That would be a disaster. Right. That would be a disaster. We wouldn't be human. Um and we wouldn't We wouldn't be human. Um and we wouldn't We wouldn't be human. Um and we wouldn't want that. It'd be really, really want that. It'd be really, really want that. It'd be really, really boring. On the other hand, what people boring. On the other hand, what people boring. On the other hand, what people in recovery from addiction talk about in recovery from addiction talk about in recovery from addiction talk about is, to some extent, having to learn to is, to some extent, having to learn to is, to some extent, having to learn to live with live with live with things being a little boring a lot of things being a little boring a lot of things being a little boring a lot of the time, right? So, trying to avoid the time, right? So, trying to avoid the time, right? So, trying to avoid some of this intensity and some of this intensity and some of this intensity and thrill-seeking and escapism that really thrill-seeking and escapism that really thrill-seeking and escapism that really is at the core of addictive tendencies. is at the core of addictive tendencies. is at the core of addictive tendencies. So, along those lines, I've heard you So, along those lines, I've heard you So, along those lines, I've heard you say that in order to reset the dopamine say that in order to reset the dopamine say that in order to reset the dopamine system, essentially, in order to break an essentially, in order to break an essentially, in order to break an addictive pattern, addictive pattern, addictive pattern, 30 days 30 days 30 days of zero interaction with that substance, of zero interaction with that substance, of zero interaction with that substance, that person, etc. Right. that person, etc. Right. that person, etc. Right. Is that correct? Yeah. And 30 days Is that correct? Yeah. And 30 days Is that correct? Yeah. And 30 days is, in my clinical experience, the is, in my clinical experience, the is, in my clinical experience, the average amount of time it takes for the average amount of time it takes for the average amount of time it takes for the brain to reset reward pathways, for brain to reset reward pathways, for brain to reset reward pathways, for dopamine transmission to regenerate dopamine transmission to regenerate dopamine transmission to regenerate itself. By depriving ourselves of this itself. By depriving ourselves of this itself. By depriving ourselves of this high dopamine, high reward substance or high dopamine, high reward substance or high dopamine, high reward substance or behavior, we allow our brains to behavior, we allow our brains to behavior, we allow our brains to regenerate its own dopamine, to for the regenerate its own dopamine, to for the regenerate its own dopamine, to for the balance to re-equilibrate, and then balance to re-equilibrate, and then balance to re-equilibrate, and then we're in a place where we can sort of we're in a place where we can sort of we're in a place where we can sort of enjoy other things. So, I'd like to um enjoy other things. So, I'd like to um enjoy other things. So, I'd like to um dissect out that 30 days a little more dissect out that 30 days a little more dissect out that 30 days a little more finely. So, days 1 through 10, I would finely. So, days 1 through 10, I would finely. So, days 1 through 10, I would imagine will be very uncomfortable. imagine will be very uncomfortable. imagine will be very uncomfortable. Yes. Anxiety, trouble sleeping, Yes. Anxiety, trouble sleeping, Yes. Anxiety, trouble sleeping, physical agitation into the point where physical agitation into the point where physical agitation into the point where you know, maybe impulsive, angry. Should you know, maybe impulsive, angry. Should you know, maybe impulsive, angry. Should one expect all of that? Should the one expect all of that? Should the one expect all of that? Should the Yeah, so what I say to patients, and Yeah, so what I say to patients, and Yeah, so what I say to patients, and it's a really important piece of this it's a really important piece of this it's a really important piece of this intervention, is that you will feel intervention, is that you will feel intervention, is that you will feel worse before you feel better. I'm worse before you feel better. I'm worse before you feel better. I'm For how long? Is it probably the first For how long? Is it probably the first For how long? Is it probably the first question they ask, right? question they ask, right? question they ask, right? And I say usually, in my clinical And I say usually, in my clinical And I say usually, in my clinical experience, you'll feel worse for 2 experience, you'll feel worse for 2 experience, you'll feel worse for 2 weeks. But if you can make it through weeks. But if you can make it through weeks. But if you can make it through those first 2 weeks, the sun will start those first 2 weeks, the sun will start those first 2 weeks, the sun will start to come out in week 3. And by week 4, to come out in week 3. And by week 4, to come out in week 3. And by week 4, most people are feeling a whole lot most people are feeling a whole lot most people are feeling a whole lot better than they were before they better than they were before they better than they were before they stopped using their substance. So, it's stopped using their substance. So, it's stopped using their substance. So, it's a hard thing, like you have to sign up a hard thing, like you have to sign up a hard thing, like you have to sign up for it. Then days 21 through 30, for it. Then days 21 through 30, for it. Then days 21 through 30, dopamine is starting to be released in dopamine is starting to be released in dopamine is starting to be released in response to the taste of a really good response to the taste of a really good response to the taste of a really good cup of coffee, for instance. cup of coffee, for instance. cup of coffee, for instance. Whereas before it was only to Whereas before it was only to Whereas before it was only to insert, you know, addictive behavior. insert, you know, addictive behavior. insert, you know, addictive behavior. One thing I've seen over and over again, One thing I've seen over and over again, One thing I've seen over and over again, sadly, often in the same individuals, is sadly, often in the same individuals, is sadly, often in the same individuals, is they get sober they get sober they get sober from whatever. from whatever. from whatever. They're doing great. They're doing great. They're doing great. And then, all of a sudden, you get this And then, all of a sudden, you get this And then, all of a sudden, you get this call. So-and-so's call. So-and-so's call. So-and-so's back in jail. So-and-so's wife is going back in jail. So-and-so's wife is going back in jail. So-and-so's wife is going to leave him because he drank two to leave him because he drank two to leave him because he drank two bottles of wine and took a Xanax at bottles of wine and took a Xanax at bottles of wine and took a Xanax at 7:00 a.m. 7:00 a.m. 7:00 a.m. Crashed his truck into a pole. He's got Crashed his truck into a pole. He's got Crashed his truck into a pole. He's got two beautiful kids. Like, how did this two beautiful kids. Like, how did this two beautiful kids. Like, how did this happen again? To the point where by the happen again? To the point where by the happen again? To the point where by the fourth and fifth time, people are just fourth and fifth time, people are just fourth and fifth time, people are just done. And so, what I'd like to talk done. And so, what I'd like to talk done. And so, what I'd like to talk about in this context is what sorts of about in this context is what sorts of about in this context is what sorts of things help other people that we know things help other people that we know things help other people that we know that are addicted. What really helps? that are addicted. What really helps? that are addicted. What really helps? And are there certain people for whom And are there certain people for whom And are there certain people for whom it's hopeless? Yeah, so there are it's hopeless? Yeah, so there are it's hopeless? Yeah, so there are people who will die of their disease of people who will die of their disease of people who will die of their disease of addiction. You know, and I think addiction. You know, and I think addiction. You know, and I think conceptualizing it as a disease is a conceptualizing it as a disease is a conceptualizing it as a disease is a helpful frame. There are other frames helpful frame. There are other frames helpful frame. There are other frames that we could use, but I do think given that we could use, but I do think given that we could use, but I do think given the brain physiologic changes that occur the brain physiologic changes that occur the brain physiologic changes that occur with sustained heavy drug use and what with sustained heavy drug use and what with sustained heavy drug use and what we know happens to the brain, it is we know happens to the brain, it is we know happens to the brain, it is it is really reasonable to think of it is really reasonable to think of it is really reasonable to think of it as a brain disease. And and for me as a brain disease. And and for me as a brain disease. And and for me the real window of, let's say, being the real window of, let's say, being the real window of, let's say, being able to access my compassion around able to access my compassion around able to access my compassion around people who are repeat relapsers even people who are repeat relapsers even people who are repeat relapsers even when their life is so much better when their life is so much better when their life is so much better when they're in recovery. Yeah, it's like they're in recovery. Yeah, it's like they're in recovery. Yeah, it's like it's like a no-brainer, right? Um is it's like a no-brainer, right? Um is it's like a no-brainer, right? Um is to conceptualize this balance and the to conceptualize this balance and the to conceptualize this balance and the dopamine deficit state and a balance dopamine deficit state and a balance dopamine deficit state and a balance tilted to the side of pain. tilted to the side of pain. tilted to the side of pain. And to imagine that for some people And to imagine that for some people And to imagine that for some people after a month or 6 months or maybe even after a month or 6 months or maybe even after a month or 6 months or maybe even 6 years, their balance is still tipped 6 years, their balance is still tipped 6 years, their balance is still tipped to the side of pain. That on some level to the side of pain. That on some level to the side of pain. That on some level that balance has lost its resilience and that balance has lost its resilience and that balance has lost its resilience and its ability to restore homeostasis. its ability to restore homeostasis. its ability to restore homeostasis. like the hinge on that balance is messed like the hinge on that balance is messed like the hinge on that balance is messed up. Imagine that you had an itch somewhere Imagine that you had an itch somewhere Imagine that you had an itch somewhere on your body, okay? I mean, we've all on your body, okay? I mean, we've all on your body, okay? I mean, we've all had that like, you know, whatever the had that like, you know, whatever the had that like, you know, whatever the source. You know, if you really focus, source. You know, if you really focus, source. You know, if you really focus, you could go for a pretty good amount of you could go for a pretty good amount of you could go for a pretty good amount of time not scratching it. But the moment time not scratching it. But the moment time not scratching it. But the moment you stopped focusing on not scratching you stopped focusing on not scratching you stopped focusing on not scratching it, you would scratch it. And maybe it, you would scratch it. And maybe it, you would scratch it. And maybe you'd do it while you were asleep, you'd do it while you were asleep, you'd do it while you were asleep, right? That right? That right? That And that is what happens to people with And that is what happens to people with And that is what happens to people with severe addiction. That balance is severe addiction. That balance is severe addiction. That balance is essentially broken. Homeostasis does not essentially broken. Homeostasis does not essentially broken. Homeostasis does not get restored despite sustained get restored despite sustained get restored despite sustained abstinence. They're living with that abstinence. They're living with that abstinence. They're living with that constant specter of that pull. It never constant specter of that pull. It never constant specter of that pull. It never goes away. So, let me say there are lots goes away. So, let me say there are lots goes away. So, let me say there are lots of people with addiction for whom that of people with addiction for whom that of people with addiction for whom that does go away. And it goes away at 4 does go away. And it goes away at 4 does go away. And it goes away at 4 weeks for many of them. But in severe weeks for many of them. But in severe weeks for many of them. But in severe cases, that's always there and it's cases, that's always there and it's cases, that's always there and it's lingering. And it's the moment when lingering. And it's the moment when lingering. And it's the moment when they're not focusing on not using. It's they're not focusing on not using. It's they're not focusing on not using. It's like a reflex. They fall back into it. like a reflex. They fall back into it. like a reflex. They fall back into it. It's not purposeful. It's not because It's not purposeful. It's not because It's not purposeful. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they value using drugs more than they do they value using drugs more than they do they value using drugs more than they do their family. None of that. It's that their family. None of that. It's that their family. None of that. It's that really they really they really they cannot not do it when given the they cannot not do it when given the they cannot not do it when given the opportunity and that moment when they're opportunity and that moment when they're opportunity and that moment when they're not thinking about it. Does that make not thinking about it. Does that make not thinking about it. Does that make sense? description, and actually in that description, and actually in that description, and actually in that description I can feel a bit of empathy description I can feel a bit of empathy description I can feel a bit of empathy because the way you describe scratching because the way you describe scratching because the way you describe scratching an itch in your sleep. an itch in your sleep. an itch in your sleep. Yeah. You know, I've done that with Yeah. You know, I've done that with Yeah. You know, I've done that with mosquito bites in the summer. You're mosquito bites in the summer. You're mosquito bites in the summer. You're scratching and you're like, "Oh, you scratching and you're like, "Oh, you scratching and you're like, "Oh, you wake up scratching that wake up scratching that wake up scratching that mosquito bite." mosquito bite." mosquito bite." And I also have to admit that And I also have to admit that And I also have to admit that I've experienced not feeling like I want I've experienced not feeling like I want I've experienced not feeling like I want to pick up my phone because it's so to pick up my phone because it's so to pick up my phone because it's so rewarding, but just finding myself doing rewarding, but just finding myself doing rewarding, but just finding myself doing it. Yes, of course. Yeah. Yes, of course. Yeah. Yes, of course. Yeah. going to use this thing. I'm not going to use this thing. I'm not going to use this thing. I'm not going to use this thing. And then and then to use this thing. And then and then to use this thing. And then and then just finding myself doing it. Like, just finding myself doing it. Like, just finding myself doing it. Like, "What am I doing here?" "What am I doing here?" "What am I doing here?" Sort of the how did I get back here Sort of the how did I get back here Sort of the how did I get back here again? Right. And I know enough about brain function And I know enough about brain function And I know enough about brain function to understand that we have to understand that we have to understand that we have circuits that generate deliberate circuits that generate deliberate circuits that generate deliberate behavior, and we have circuits that behavior, and we have circuits that behavior, and we have circuits that generate reflexive behavior. And one of generate reflexive behavior. And one of generate reflexive behavior. And one of the goals of the nervous system is to the goals of the nervous system is to the goals of the nervous system is to make the deliberate stuff reflexive so make the deliberate stuff reflexive so make the deliberate stuff reflexive so you don't have to make the decision you don't have to make the decision you don't have to make the decision because decision-making is a very costly because decision-making is a very costly because decision-making is a very costly thing to do. Decision-making of any thing to do. Decision-making of any thing to do. Decision-making of any kind. Exactly. Why is it then that people will Exactly. Why is it then that people will Exactly. Why is it then that people will relapse not just after getting fired relapse not just after getting fired relapse not just after getting fired from a job or their spouse leaving, but from a job or their spouse leaving, but from a job or their spouse leaving, but when things are going really well? Is it when things are going really well? Is it when things are going really well? Is it this unconscious mechanism? Cuz I've this unconscious mechanism? Cuz I've this unconscious mechanism? Cuz I've seen this before. Is uh they have a seen this before. Is uh they have a seen this before. Is uh they have a great win. I have a friend who's a great win. I have a friend who's a great win. I have a friend who's a really impressive creative. Um I don't really impressive creative. Um I don't really impressive creative. Um I don't want to reveal any more than that. But want to reveal any more than that. But want to reveal any more than that. But uh and relapsed upon getting another uh and relapsed upon getting another uh and relapsed upon getting another really terrific opportunity to create really terrific opportunity to create really terrific opportunity to create for the entire world. And I was like, for the entire world. And I was like, for the entire world. And I was like, "How can that happen?" But now I'm "How can that happen?" But now I'm "How can that happen?" But now I'm beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine associated with that win that opened the associated with that win that opened the associated with that win that opened the spigot on this dopamine system. spigot on this dopamine system. spigot on this dopamine system. Because um it happened in a phase of Because um it happened in a phase of Because um it happened in a phase of a really great stretch of life. Yeah. a really great stretch of life. Yeah. a really great stretch of life. Yeah. Triggers are things that make us want to Triggers are things that make us want to Triggers are things that make us want to go back to using our drug. And the key go back to using our drug. And the key go back to using our drug. And the key thing about triggers, whatever they are, thing about triggers, whatever they are, thing about triggers, whatever they are, is they also release a little bit of is they also release a little bit of is they also release a little bit of dopamine, right? So, just thinking about dopamine, right? So, just thinking about dopamine, right? So, just thinking about um whatever the trigger is that we um whatever the trigger is that we um whatever the trigger is that we associate with drug use, or just associate with drug use, or just associate with drug use, or just thinking about drug use, can already thinking about drug use, can already thinking about drug use, can already release this anticipatory dopamine, this release this anticipatory dopamine, this release this anticipatory dopamine, this little mini spike. But here's the part little mini spike. But here's the part little mini spike. But here's the part that I think is really fascinating. That that I think is really fascinating. That that I think is really fascinating. That mini spike is followed by a mini deficit mini spike is followed by a mini deficit mini spike is followed by a mini deficit state. So, it goes up and then it state. So, it goes up and then it state. So, it goes up and then it doesn't go back down to baseline, it doesn't go back down to baseline, it doesn't go back down to baseline, it goes below baseline tonic levels. And goes below baseline tonic levels. And goes below baseline tonic levels. And that's craving, right? So, that that's craving, right? So, that that's craving, right? So, that anticipation is immediately followed by is immediately followed by is immediately followed by wanting the drug. And it's that dopamine wanting the drug. And it's that dopamine wanting the drug. And it's that dopamine deficit state that drives the motivation deficit state that drives the motivation deficit state that drives the motivation to go and get the drug. So, many people to go and get the drug. So, many people to go and get the drug. So, many people talk about dopamine, it's not really talk about dopamine, it's not really talk about dopamine, it's not really about pleasure, but about wanting and about pleasure, but about wanting and about pleasure, but about wanting and about motivation. And so, it is that about motivation. And so, it is that about motivation. And so, it is that deficit state that then drives the deficit state that then drives the deficit state that then drives the locomotion to get it. And earlier, your locomotion to get it. And earlier, your locomotion to get it. And earlier, your description of dopamine being involved description of dopamine being involved description of dopamine being involved in the desire for more, giving the sense in the desire for more, giving the sense in the desire for more, giving the sense of reward, but also movement. of reward, but also movement. of reward, but also movement. Right. to assume that those things are braided to assume that those things are braided to assume that those things are braided together in our nervous system for the together in our nervous system for the together in our nervous system for the specific intention of when you feel specific intention of when you feel specific intention of when you feel something good, then you feel the pain, or maybe good, then you feel the pain, or maybe good, then you feel the pain, or maybe you don't notice it, and then the next you don't notice it, and then the next you don't notice it, and then the next thing you know, you're pursuing more of thing you know, you're pursuing more of thing you know, you're pursuing more of the thing that And I love the way you the thing that And I love the way you the thing that And I love the way you use the word braided together, that's use the word braided together, that's use the word braided together, that's beautiful. There are people for whom bad beautiful. There are people for whom bad beautiful. There are people for whom bad life experiences, loss, you know, in any life experiences, loss, you know, in any life experiences, loss, you know, in any form, stress in many different forms, form, stress in many different forms, form, stress in many different forms, that's a trigger. But there are that's a trigger. But there are that's a trigger. But there are absolutely people for whom absolutely people for whom absolutely people for whom the trigger is things going well. And the trigger is things going well. And the trigger is things going well. And the things going well can be like the things going well can be like the things going well can be like the reward of the things going well, but reward of the things going well, but reward of the things going well, but very often what it is the removal of very often what it is the removal of very often what it is the removal of the hypervigilant state that's required the hypervigilant state that's required the hypervigilant state that's required to keep their use in check. So, it's to keep their use in check. So, it's to keep their use in check. So, it's this sense of this sense of this sense of I want to celebrate, you know, or I want I want to celebrate, you know, or I want I want to celebrate, you know, or I want to this reward happened. I want to put to this reward happened. I want to put to this reward happened. I want to put more reward on there. And it's really, more reward on there. And it's really, more reward on there. And it's really, really fascinating because when people really fascinating because when people really fascinating because when people come to that realization about come to that realization about come to that realization about themselves that they're most vulnerable themselves that they're most vulnerable themselves that they're most vulnerable when things are going well. Um, you when things are going well. Um, you when things are going well. Um, you know, that's really a valuable insight know, that's really a valuable insight know, that's really a valuable insight because then they can put some, you because then they can put some, you because then they can put some, you know, things in place or barriers in know, things in place or barriers in know, things in place or barriers in place or go to more meetings or whatever place or go to more meetings or whatever place or go to more meetings or whatever it is that they do, you know, to protect it is that they do, you know, to protect it is that they do, you know, to protect themselves. I wanted to just touch on something that I wanted to just touch on something that I wanted to just touch on something that you mentioned which is the shame. Yeah. you mentioned which is the shame. Yeah. you mentioned which is the shame. Yeah. I heard you say in an interview with I heard you say in an interview with I heard you say in an interview with somebody else recently that somebody else recently that somebody else recently that truth-telling and secrets truth-telling and secrets truth-telling and secrets are sort of at the core of recovery. are sort of at the core of recovery. are sort of at the core of recovery. And yeah, tell us more about that. yeah, tell us more about that. yeah, tell us more about that. Yeah, so one of the things that I found Yeah, so one of the things that I found Yeah, so one of the things that I found really fascinating about working with really fascinating about working with really fascinating about working with people in recovery was how people in recovery was how people in recovery was how telling the truth even about the merest telling the truth even about the merest telling the truth even about the merest detail of their lives was central to detail of their lives was central to detail of their lives was central to their recovery. It's not even just not their recovery. It's not even just not their recovery. It's not even just not lying about using drugs. I have to not lying about using drugs. I have to not lying about using drugs. I have to not lie about anything. I can't lie about lie about anything. I can't lie about lie about anything. I can't lie about why I was late to work this morning why I was late to work this morning why I was late to work this morning which we all do. Oh, I hit traffic. No, which we all do. Oh, I hit traffic. No, which we all do. Oh, I hit traffic. No, I didn't hit traffic. I wanted to spend I didn't hit traffic. I wanted to spend I didn't hit traffic. I wanted to spend two more minutes reading the paper and two more minutes reading the paper and two more minutes reading the paper and drinking my coffee, right? So, people drinking my coffee, right? So, people drinking my coffee, right? So, people with addiction will get into, you know, with addiction will get into, you know, with addiction will get into, you know, the lying habit where they're lying the lying habit where they're lying the lying habit where they're lying about random stuff because they're sort about random stuff because they're sort about random stuff because they're sort of in the habit of lying. of in the habit of lying. of in the habit of lying. And how recovery is really about telling And how recovery is really about telling And how recovery is really about telling the truth. And there's really the truth. And there's really the truth. And there's really interesting neural science behind it interesting neural science behind it interesting neural science behind it that suggests that when we tell the that suggests that when we tell the that suggests that when we tell the truth, we actually potentially truth, we actually potentially truth, we actually potentially strengthen our prefrontal cortical strengthen our prefrontal cortical strengthen our prefrontal cortical circuits and their connections to our circuits and their connections to our circuits and their connections to our limbic brain and our reward brain. And limbic brain and our reward brain. And limbic brain and our reward brain. And of course, these are the circuits that of course, these are the circuits that of course, these are the circuits that get disconnected when we're in our get disconnected when we're in our get disconnected when we're in our addiction, right? Our balance in our addiction, right? Our balance in our addiction, right? Our balance in our reward pathway or limbic brain or reward pathway or limbic brain or reward pathway or limbic brain or emotion brain is doing one thing and our emotion brain is doing one thing and our emotion brain is doing one thing and our cortical circuits are completely cortical circuits are completely cortical circuits are completely disengaged from that ignoring what's disengaged from that ignoring what's disengaged from that ignoring what's happening which is easy to do because happening which is easy to do because happening which is easy to do because it's reflexive. We don't need to think it's reflexive. We don't need to think it's reflexive. We don't need to think about that balance for the balance to be about that balance for the balance to be about that balance for the balance to be happening. But we have to re-engage those circuits, But we have to re-engage those circuits, But we have to re-engage those circuits, anticipate future consequences, think anticipate future consequences, think anticipate future consequences, think through the drink, you know, not just through the drink, you know, not just through the drink, you know, not just how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel tomorrow or 6 how am I going to feel tomorrow or 6 how am I going to feel tomorrow or 6 months from now. And that telling the months from now. And that telling the months from now. And that telling the truth is in fact a way to do that, to truth is in fact a way to do that, to truth is in fact a way to do that, to make these connections stronger in make these connections stronger in make these connections stronger in there. I talk about some studies in my there. I talk about some studies in my there. I talk about some studies in my book that kind of indirectly show book that kind of indirectly show book that kind of indirectly show that. So I find that really fascinating. that. So I find that really fascinating. that. So I find that really fascinating. Plus that just that like being open and that just that like being open and that just that like being open and honest with people really does create honest with people really does create honest with people really does create very intimate connections. And those very intimate connections. And those very intimate connections. And those intimate connections create dopamine. intimate connections create dopamine. intimate connections create dopamine. You think people are going to run away You think people are going to run away You think people are going to run away from you if you tell them about all like from you if you tell them about all like from you if you tell them about all like your weird neuroses, but really they your weird neuroses, but really they your weird neuroses, but really they don't. What they're like is, "Oh, thank don't. What they're like is, "Oh, thank don't. What they're like is, "Oh, thank God. I'm not the only one, right?" I God. I'm not the only one, right?" I God. I'm not the only one, right?" I love that there's neuroscience being love that there's neuroscience being love that there's neuroscience being done on truth-telling and the value of done on truth-telling and the value of done on truth-telling and the value of truth-telling. I think I hope they'll truth-telling. I think I hope they'll truth-telling. I think I hope they'll continue to do more work. continue to do more work. continue to do more work. Yeah. Um want to ask you about using Yeah. Um want to ask you about using Yeah. Um want to ask you about using drugs to treat drug addiction. drugs to treat drug addiction. drugs to treat drug addiction. This is a vast area, right? Different This is a vast area, right? Different This is a vast area, right? Different chemistries for different drugs and chemistries for different drugs and chemistries for different drugs and different purposes, but the different purposes, but the different purposes, but the rationale as I understand it is rationale as I understand it is rationale as I understand it is take people who are in a pattern of take people who are in a pattern of take people who are in a pattern of addiction launch them into a launch them into a launch them into a experience that's also chemical and experience that's also chemical and experience that's also chemical and extreme, often of the extreme serotonin extreme, often of the extreme serotonin extreme, often of the extreme serotonin and or extreme dopamine type. So MDMA, and or extreme dopamine type. So MDMA, and or extreme dopamine type. So MDMA, ecstasy for instance, tons of serotonin ecstasy for instance, tons of serotonin ecstasy for instance, tons of serotonin dumped, tons of dopamine dumped. How dumped, tons of dopamine dumped. How dumped, tons of dopamine dumped. How neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, debatable, neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, debatable, neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, debatable, etc., not a topic for now. etc., not a topic for now. etc., not a topic for now. But a lot. But a lot. But a lot. And then somehow that extreme experience And then somehow that extreme experience And then somehow that extreme experience wrapped inside of a wrapped inside of a wrapped inside of a supported network in there, whether or a supported network in there, whether or a supported network in there, whether or not there's just someone there or not there's just someone there or not there's just someone there or whether or not they're actively working whether or not they're actively working whether or not they're actively working through something with the patient is through something with the patient is through something with the patient is supposed to eject supposed to eject supposed to eject the person into a life where the person into a life where the person into a life where drug use isn't drug use isn't drug use isn't uh as much of interest. This violates uh as much of interest. This violates uh as much of interest. This violates everything that we've talked about in everything that we've talked about in everything that we've talked about in terms of dopamine biology. It would, if terms of dopamine biology. It would, if terms of dopamine biology. It would, if this arrangement is the way I described this arrangement is the way I described this arrangement is the way I described it, cause more addiction. It's anything but cause more addiction. It's anything but cause more addiction. It's anything but a dopamine fast, it's a dopamine feast. a dopamine fast, it's a dopamine feast. a dopamine fast, it's a dopamine feast. Mhm. So, we hear about successful transitions So, we hear about successful transitions So, we hear about successful transitions through this, at least anecdotally, and through this, at least anecdotally, and through this, at least anecdotally, and may um maybe some clinics say, "What is may um maybe some clinics say, "What is may um maybe some clinics say, "What is going on? going on? going on? What is going on?" Doesn't make any What is going on?" Doesn't make any What is going on?" Doesn't make any sense to me. Yeah. So, I think it's good sense to me. Yeah. So, I think it's good sense to me. Yeah. So, I think it's good that you're skeptical. Um I think we all that you're skeptical. Um I think we all that you're skeptical. Um I think we all should be skeptical. Having said that, should be skeptical. Having said that, should be skeptical. Having said that, um there are clinical studies showing, um there are clinical studies showing, um there are clinical studies showing, um you know, and these are small studies um you know, and these are small studies um you know, and these are small studies and they're short duration, small number and they're short duration, small number and they're short duration, small number of subjects, but, you know, taking of subjects, but, you know, taking of subjects, but, you know, taking people, for example, who are addicted to people, for example, who are addicted to people, for example, who are addicted to alcohol and then having them have this, alcohol and then having them have this, alcohol and then having them have this, let's say, psychedelic experience in a let's say, psychedelic experience in a let's say, psychedelic experience in a very controlled setting. very controlled setting. very controlled setting. Typically, it's a high-dose psilocybin Typically, it's a high-dose psilocybin Typically, it's a high-dose psilocybin or three-dose, as I sought it for the or three-dose, as I sought it for the or three-dose, as I sought it for the MAPS study of MDMA of ecstasy. Those MAPS study of MDMA of ecstasy. Those MAPS study of MDMA of ecstasy. Those are sort of the seem to be the kind of are sort of the seem to be the kind of are sort of the seem to be the kind of the kind of bread and butter of this the kind of bread and butter of this the kind of bread and butter of this kind of work. Yeah. kind of work. Yeah. kind of work. Yeah. But, the thing to really keep in mind is But, the thing to really keep in mind is But, the thing to really keep in mind is that this is completely interwoven with that this is completely interwoven with that this is completely interwoven with regular psychotherapy and that these are regular psychotherapy and that these are regular psychotherapy and that these are highly selected individuals. highly selected individuals. highly selected individuals. And clinical trials. We're we're from And clinical trials. We're we're from And clinical trials. We're we're from the legal clinical trials. the legal clinical trials. the legal clinical trials. When it works, it's a transformational When it works, it's a transformational When it works, it's a transformational experience because experience because experience because it gives the person another lens through it gives the person another lens through it gives the person another lens through which to view their life, their lives, which to view their life, their lives, which to view their life, their lives, which I think for some people is which I think for some people is which I think for some people is positive and powerful because they can positive and powerful because they can positive and powerful because they can come back from that and be like, "Oh my come back from that and be like, "Oh my come back from that and be like, "Oh my gosh, I care about my family and I don't gosh, I care about my family and I don't gosh, I care about my family and I don't I want X Y or Z for them and I realize I want X Y or Z for them and I realize I want X Y or Z for them and I realize that my continuing to drink is not going that my continuing to drink is not going that my continuing to drink is not going to, you know, achieve that." So, it's to, you know, achieve that." So, it's to, you know, achieve that." So, it's almost like a spiritual or it's almost like a spiritual or it's almost like a spiritual or values-based. So, I think it can be very powerful. But So, I think it can be very powerful. But So, I think it can be very powerful. But but having said that, I truly am quite but having said that, I truly am quite but having said that, I truly am quite skeptical because, skeptical because, skeptical because, you know, addiction is a chronic you know, addiction is a chronic you know, addiction is a chronic relapsing and remitting problem. It's relapsing and remitting problem. It's relapsing and remitting problem. It's hard for me to imagine that there's hard for me to imagine that there's hard for me to imagine that there's something that works very quickly something that works very quickly something that works very quickly short-term that's going to work for a short-term that's going to work for a short-term that's going to work for a disease that's really long-lasting. disease that's really long-lasting. disease that's really long-lasting. Yeah, the two addicts I know that Yeah, the two addicts I know that Yeah, the two addicts I know that did MDMA MDMA-assisted psychotherapy as did MDMA MDMA-assisted psychotherapy as did MDMA MDMA-assisted psychotherapy as part as part of this um thing, both got part as part of this um thing, both got part as part of this um thing, both got worse. Yeah. Um but the people I know worse. Yeah. Um but the people I know worse. Yeah. Um but the people I know who had severe trauma Uh-huh. who did who had severe trauma Uh-huh. who did who had severe trauma Uh-huh. who did this who took this approach seem to be this who took this approach seem to be this who took this approach seem to be doing better. doing better. doing better. Okay. Interesting. Okay. Interesting. Okay. Interesting. I um I think that the discussion as we I um I think that the discussion as we I um I think that the discussion as we hear it now is just sort of hear it now is just sort of hear it now is just sort of psychedelics, which is a huge category psychedelics, which is a huge category psychedelics, which is a huge category of that includes many different drugs of that includes many different drugs of that includes many different drugs and compounds of different effects. And and compounds of different effects. And and compounds of different effects. And we hear about trauma and addiction we hear about trauma and addiction we hear about trauma and addiction lumped together. lumped together. lumped together. Mhm. And I think it's going to be Mhm. And I think it's going to be Mhm. And I think it's going to be important for people to know that this important for people to know that this important for people to know that this is definitely not a one-size-fits-all is definitely not a one-size-fits-all is definitely not a one-size-fits-all kind of thing. But it sounds like it may kind of thing. But it sounds like it may kind of thing. But it sounds like it may have some utility under certain have some utility under certain have some utility under certain conditions. Yeah, I think so. I think conditions. Yeah, I think so. I think conditions. Yeah, I think so. I think we I'm trying to be very open-minded we I'm trying to be very open-minded we I'm trying to be very open-minded about its potential utility for certain about its potential utility for certain about its potential utility for certain individuals, but I can tell you in my individuals, but I can tell you in my individuals, but I can tell you in my clinical work what is very concerning clinical work what is very concerning clinical work what is very concerning unintended consequence of this narrative unintended consequence of this narrative unintended consequence of this narrative is I have a lot of people who are is I have a lot of people who are is I have a lot of people who are looking for some kind of spiritual looking for some kind of spiritual looking for some kind of spiritual awakening who on their own, not in the awakening who on their own, not in the awakening who on their own, not in the context of any kind of therapeutic context of any kind of therapeutic context of any kind of therapeutic psychological work, you know, microdose psychological work, you know, microdose psychological work, you know, microdose or want to try, you know, psilocybin or want to try, you know, psilocybin or want to try, you know, psilocybin or MDMA with a friend or wherever so they MDMA with a friend or wherever so they MDMA with a friend or wherever so they can have this, you know, spiritual can have this, you know, spiritual can have this, you know, spiritual experience so they can figure out their experience so they can figure out their experience so they can figure out their lives. That that's a disaster and lives. That that's a disaster and lives. That that's a disaster and almost never works out well. And I can almost never works out well. And I can almost never works out well. And I can just tell you that the downstream just tell you that the downstream just tell you that the downstream effect for the average person is that effect for the average person is that effect for the average person is that they've misconstrued the data on the use they've misconstrued the data on the use they've misconstrued the data on the use of psychedelics for mental health of psychedelics for mental health of psychedelics for mental health conditions um to this idea that they're safe or um to this idea that they're safe or um to this idea that they're safe or that anybody can take them in any that anybody can take them in any that anybody can take them in any circumstance and have this kind of circumstance and have this kind of circumstance and have this kind of awakening and it that that's not awakening and it that that's not awakening and it that that's not what the data show, right? The data are what the data show, right? The data are what the data show, right? The data are these highly controlled settings. There these highly controlled settings. There these highly controlled settings. There are a couple other things I just want to are a couple other things I just want to are a couple other things I just want to touch on um touch on um touch on um but they all relate to social media. but they all relate to social media. but they all relate to social media. Okay. I have to imagine that we need to Okay. I have to imagine that we need to Okay. I have to imagine that we need to regulate, not necessarily eliminate this regulate, not necessarily eliminate this regulate, not necessarily eliminate this behavior. How addicting is it and behavior. How addicting is it and behavior. How addicting is it and what is healthy social media behavior? what is healthy social media behavior? what is healthy social media behavior? The first The first The first message I would want to get across about message I would want to get across about message I would want to get across about social media is that it really is a drug social media is that it really is a drug social media is that it really is a drug and it's engineered to be a drug, which and it's engineered to be a drug, which and it's engineered to be a drug, which doesn't mean that we can't use it um but doesn't mean that we can't use it um but doesn't mean that we can't use it um but we need to be very thoughtful about the we need to be very thoughtful about the we need to be very thoughtful about the way you we use it. And so that means way you we use it. And so that means way you we use it. And so that means with intention and in advance planning with intention and in advance planning with intention and in advance planning our use, right? And trying to use it in our use, right? And trying to use it in our use, right? And trying to use it in as a as a as a really awesome tool to as a as a as a really awesome tool to as a as a as a really awesome tool to potentially connect with other people potentially connect with other people potentially connect with other people and not to be used by it um or get lost and not to be used by it um or get lost and not to be used by it um or get lost in it. We do need to figure out, you in it. We do need to figure out, you in it. We do need to figure out, you know, how to make this tool know, how to make this tool know, how to make this tool something that's, you know, going to be something that's, you know, going to be something that's, you know, going to be good for us and not ultimately good for us and not ultimately good for us and not ultimately harmful. As more and more of us are harmful. As more and more of us are harmful. As more and more of us are spending more and more time on social spending more and more time on social spending more and more time on social media, we're divesting our libidness media, we're divesting our libidness media, we're divesting our libidness energies, etc. from real life energies, etc. from real life energies, etc. from real life interactions. So I think our collective interactions. So I think our collective interactions. So I think our collective challenge and it should be our mission challenge and it should be our mission challenge and it should be our mission is to make sure that we are preserving is to make sure that we are preserving is to make sure that we are preserving and maintaining offline ways to connect and maintaining offline ways to connect and maintaining offline ways to connect with each other. So this is the key. You with each other. So this is the key. You with each other. So this is the key. You have to with intention, prior to being have to with intention, prior to being have to with intention, prior to being in that situation, think of literal in that situation, think of literal in that situation, think of literal physical and metacognitive barriers that physical and metacognitive barriers that physical and metacognitive barriers that you can put between yourself and your you can put between yourself and your you can put between yourself and your phone or whatever your drug is to phone or whatever your drug is to phone or whatever your drug is to create these intentional spaces where create these intentional spaces where create these intentional spaces where you're not constantly interrupting you're not constantly interrupting you're not constantly interrupting yourself essentially and distracting yourself essentially and distracting yourself essentially and distracting yourself because I really do think we're yourself because I really do think we're yourself because I really do think we're losing the ability to have a sustained losing the ability to have a sustained losing the ability to have a sustained thought, right? I mean we get so far thought, right? I mean we get so far thought, right? I mean we get so far and then and then and then you get to that point in the then you get to that point in the then you get to that point in the thought where thought where thought where it's a little bit hard to know what's it's a little bit hard to know what's it's a little bit hard to know what's coming next and it's very easy to coming next and it's very easy to coming next and it's very easy to check your phone or check your email or check your phone or check your email or check your phone or check your email or look something up on, you know, the look something up on, you know, the look something up on, you know, the internet. And then you never get that opportunity And then you never get that opportunity And then you never get that opportunity to finish that thought which is really to finish that thought which is really to finish that thought which is really the source of creative energy and an the source of creative energy and an the source of creative energy and an original thought, right? You're not just original thought, right? You're not just original thought, right? You're not just reacting to reacting to reacting to Right. And something that could Right. And something that could Right. And something that could contribute to the world. I know a number contribute to the world. I know a number contribute to the world. I know a number of people are going to have questions of people are going to have questions of people are going to have questions and want to get in contact with you. You and want to get in contact with you. You and want to get in contact with you. You are not on social media. That's correct. are not on social media. That's correct. are not on social media. That's correct. Yes. And you're true to your you're true to And you're true to your you're true to And you're true to your you're true to your ideology. That is that's great. your ideology. That is that's great. your ideology. That is that's great. Thank you so much for sharing this Thank you so much for sharing this Thank you so much for sharing this information and um I know I learned a information and um I know I learned a information and um I know I learned a ton and I know everyone else is going to ton and I know everyone else is going to ton and I know everyone else is going to learn a lot more about addiction and the learn a lot more about addiction and the learn a lot more about addiction and the good side of dopamine. That's right. good side of dopamine. That's right. good side of dopamine. That's right. Thank you for having me. It's been Thank you for having me. It's been Thank you for having me. It's been really great to talk with you.