Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Lori Medicine. My guest today is Lori Medicine. My guest today is Lori Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib is a Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib is a Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib is a psychotherapist and best-selling author psychotherapist and best-selling author psychotherapist and best-selling author and is considered one of the world's and is considered one of the world's and is considered one of the world's leading experts on relationships. how to leading experts on relationships. how to leading experts on relationships. how to find relationships, how to be in find relationships, how to be in find relationships, how to be in relationships effectively, how to leave relationships effectively, how to leave relationships effectively, how to leave relationships if necessary, how to relationships if necessary, how to relationships if necessary, how to grieve them after they're gone, and how grieve them after they're gone, and how grieve them after they're gone, and how to renew them. All from the perspective to renew them. All from the perspective to renew them. All from the perspective of looking inward at ourselves and the of looking inward at ourselves and the of looking inward at ourselves and the stories about ourselves and others that stories about ourselves and others that stories about ourselves and others that we tell ourselves that can lead us to we tell ourselves that can lead us to we tell ourselves that can lead us to what we want and what's best for us or what we want and what's best for us or what we want and what's best for us or that lead us away from those things. that lead us away from those things. that lead us away from those things. During today's episode, we discuss how During today's episode, we discuss how During today's episode, we discuss how the feelings we experience when we're the feelings we experience when we're the feelings we experience when we're with certain people are the absolute with certain people are the absolute with certain people are the absolute best guide of how poorly or how well best guide of how poorly or how well best guide of how poorly or how well those people are suited for us as those people are suited for us as those people are suited for us as partners and the ways in which we miss partners and the ways in which we miss partners and the ways in which we miss key signals, both good and bad, in key signals, both good and bad, in key signals, both good and bad, in relationships by not paying attention to relationships by not paying attention to relationships by not paying attention to how we feel. Lori explains how to better how we feel. Lori explains how to better how we feel. Lori explains how to better our communication skills, how to our communication skills, how to our communication skills, how to determine if somebody's critique of us determine if somebody's critique of us determine if somebody's critique of us is valid or not. that certainly is valid or not. that certainly is valid or not. that certainly is important for everybody. And how texting important for everybody. And how texting important for everybody. And how texting and technology has changed relationships and technology has changed relationships and technology has changed relationships and how to navigate all of that by and how to navigate all of that by and how to navigate all of that by leaning into our own sense of agency, leaning into our own sense of agency, leaning into our own sense of agency, the things that we can control. And last the things that we can control. And last the things that we can control. And last but not least, Lori explains how we can but not least, Lori explains how we can but not least, Lori explains how we can all access more vitality and enjoyment all access more vitality and enjoyment all access more vitality and enjoyment of life, and how so many people don't of life, and how so many people don't of life, and how so many people don't allow themselves to do that because the allow themselves to do that because the allow themselves to do that because the familiarity of their present familiarity of their present familiarity of their present circumstances overrides their circumstances overrides their circumstances overrides their willingness to move forward. This was a willingness to move forward. This was a willingness to move forward. This was a really eye- openening episode and one really eye- openening episode and one really eye- openening episode and one that I'm certain will help you better that I'm certain will help you better that I'm certain will help you better understand yourself and what your needs understand yourself and what your needs understand yourself and what your needs really are and how you can be happier in really are and how you can be happier in really are and how you can be happier in or out of a relationship. Before we or out of a relationship. Before we or out of a relationship. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include that theme, this episode does include that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Lori Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib, welcome. Lori Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib, welcome. Lori Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib, welcome. Thank you. Great to be here. What's the Thank you. Great to be here. What's the Thank you. Great to be here. What's the first thing you ask a patient when first thing you ask a patient when first thing you ask a patient when you're meeting them for the first time? you're meeting them for the first time? you're meeting them for the first time? Usually, it's something like, "Tell me Usually, it's something like, "Tell me Usually, it's something like, "Tell me what's going on. Tell me why you're what's going on. Tell me why you're what's going on. Tell me why you're here. Tell me what made you decide to here. Tell me what made you decide to here. Tell me what made you decide to come in." And are you listening both to come in." And are you listening both to come in." And are you listening both to the content of their words and their the content of their words and their the content of their words and their tone, their physicality, everything? tone, their physicality, everything? tone, their physicality, everything? Yeah. I think it's so interesting Yeah. I think it's so interesting Yeah. I think it's so interesting because sometimes people will say, "I'm because sometimes people will say, "I'm because sometimes people will say, "I'm here because of" and they'll talk about here because of" and they'll talk about here because of" and they'll talk about something very difficult, but they're something very difficult, but they're something very difficult, but they're smiling through it. Um, you know, I smiling through it. Um, you know, I smiling through it. Um, you know, I think it's very nerve-wracking to come think it's very nerve-wracking to come think it's very nerve-wracking to come in and see a therapist and you don't in and see a therapist and you don't in and see a therapist and you don't know this person and you're about to know this person and you're about to know this person and you're about to share some very personal information share some very personal information share some very personal information that maybe you haven't told anyone in that maybe you haven't told anyone in that maybe you haven't told anyone in this way. And so, you want to make this way. And so, you want to make this way. And so, you want to make somebody comfortable. you want to make somebody comfortable. you want to make somebody comfortable. you want to make sure that you know you feel like they sure that you know you feel like they sure that you know you feel like they are not being rushed to share something are not being rushed to share something are not being rushed to share something that they're not ready to share. So it's that they're not ready to share. So it's that they're not ready to share. So it's just the process. I think it's a very just the process. I think it's a very just the process. I think it's a very human interaction. Um you know therapy human interaction. Um you know therapy human interaction. Um you know therapy to me is not like expert and this other to me is not like expert and this other to me is not like expert and this other person and then it feels very person and then it feels very person and then it feels very asymmetrical. Of course we're using our asymmetrical. Of course we're using our asymmetrical. Of course we're using our training and that's why they're coming training and that's why they're coming training and that's why they're coming to us but I feel like it's very much a to us but I feel like it's very much a to us but I feel like it's very much a humanto human interchange. humanto human interchange. humanto human interchange. Do you think, because I've heard, but I Do you think, because I've heard, but I Do you think, because I've heard, but I don't know if it's true. Do you think don't know if it's true. Do you think don't know if it's true. Do you think that some people um tend to create a lot that some people um tend to create a lot that some people um tend to create a lot of internal and perhaps external of internal and perhaps external of internal and perhaps external narrative about what happened, who they narrative about what happened, who they narrative about what happened, who they are, um how people are in the world, how are, um how people are in the world, how are, um how people are in the world, how they're not in the world, you know, a they're not in the world, you know, a they're not in the world, you know, a lot of lot of words to their experience lot of lot of words to their experience lot of lot of words to their experience either spoken or internally either spoken or internally either spoken or internally versus people who um maybe experience versus people who um maybe experience versus people who um maybe experience life a little bit differently. Uh once life a little bit differently. Uh once life a little bit differently. Uh once somebody said in a comment on Instagram somebody said in a comment on Instagram somebody said in a comment on Instagram and I still think about this um they and I still think about this um they and I still think about this um they said I don't think in words I think in said I don't think in words I think in said I don't think in words I think in feels. And my first reaction was like feels. And my first reaction was like feels. And my first reaction was like yeah I'm from Northern California. yeah I'm from Northern California. yeah I'm from Northern California. People talk that way sometimes. So I People talk that way sometimes. So I People talk that way sometimes. So I thought that's interesting. Maybe there thought that's interesting. Maybe there thought that's interesting. Maybe there are a lot of people who um for whom are a lot of people who um for whom are a lot of people who um for whom language isn't the primary mode of language isn't the primary mode of language isn't the primary mode of understanding what's going on around understanding what's going on around understanding what's going on around them. I think that as humans, we try to them. I think that as humans, we try to them. I think that as humans, we try to make sense of our feelings through make sense of our feelings through make sense of our feelings through stories. That we tell oursel a story stories. That we tell oursel a story stories. That we tell oursel a story about why we're feeling a certain way. about why we're feeling a certain way. about why we're feeling a certain way. And sometimes we aren't that skilled And sometimes we aren't that skilled And sometimes we aren't that skilled because nobody taught us this to access because nobody taught us this to access because nobody taught us this to access our feelings. And that happens because our feelings. And that happens because our feelings. And that happens because kids are often talked out of their kids are often talked out of their kids are often talked out of their feelings. So when you're young, for feelings. So when you're young, for feelings. So when you're young, for example, and say you say to your parent, example, and say you say to your parent, example, and say you say to your parent, um, I'm really worried about this. And um, I'm really worried about this. And um, I'm really worried about this. And your parent will say, oh, don't worry your parent will say, oh, don't worry your parent will say, oh, don't worry about that. That's nothing to worry about that. That's nothing to worry about that. That's nothing to worry about. or I'm really mad about this. about. or I'm really mad about this. about. or I'm really mad about this. You're so sensitive, right? Or because You're so sensitive, right? Or because You're so sensitive, right? Or because parents are really uncomfortable when parents are really uncomfortable when parents are really uncomfortable when their kids are feeling sad because they their kids are feeling sad because they their kids are feeling sad because they feel like it's my responsibility to make feel like it's my responsibility to make feel like it's my responsibility to make sure they're not sad, which is not your sure they're not sad, which is not your sure they're not sad, which is not your responsibility as a parent, you're there responsibility as a parent, you're there responsibility as a parent, you're there to sit with your child and be present to sit with your child and be present to sit with your child and be present for them. So, if your child says, "I'm for them. So, if your child says, "I'm for them. So, if your child says, "I'm really sad that so- and so sat with so- really sad that so- and so sat with so- really sad that so- and so sat with so- and so at lunch today." And you know, and so at lunch today." And you know, and so at lunch today." And you know, the parent will say, "Well, here's what the parent will say, "Well, here's what the parent will say, "Well, here's what you can do." Or, "That's terrible." or you can do." Or, "That's terrible." or you can do." Or, "That's terrible." or right instead of like, "Oh, tell me right instead of like, "Oh, tell me right instead of like, "Oh, tell me more." And I think that as a parent or more." And I think that as a parent or more." And I think that as a parent or even as a partner, when your when your even as a partner, when your when your even as a partner, when your when your partner comes to you or your friend partner comes to you or your friend partner comes to you or your friend comes to you or a family member comes to comes to you or a family member comes to comes to you or a family member comes to you and tells you something, often what you and tells you something, often what you and tells you something, often what we do is we try to talk them out of the we do is we try to talk them out of the we do is we try to talk them out of the feeling that they're having or help them feeling that they're having or help them feeling that they're having or help them get rid of the feeling because we think get rid of the feeling because we think get rid of the feeling because we think it's a negative feeling when feelings it's a negative feeling when feelings it's a negative feeling when feelings are all positive because they're like a are all positive because they're like a are all positive because they're like a compass. They tell us what direction to compass. They tell us what direction to compass. They tell us what direction to go in if we can access them. So when you go in if we can access them. So when you go in if we can access them. So when you say to someone, tell me more. Then the say to someone, tell me more. Then the say to someone, tell me more. Then the kid might say, well, yeah, it was really kid might say, well, yeah, it was really kid might say, well, yeah, it was really hard. And then they'll talk about maybe hard. And then they'll talk about maybe hard. And then they'll talk about maybe like why the person might have sat at a like why the person might have sat at a like why the person might have sat at a different table or what might have different table or what might have different table or what might have happened. And we really do have a lot of happened. And we really do have a lot of happened. And we really do have a lot of answers inside if we listen to the answers inside if we listen to the answers inside if we listen to the feelings. But we're talked out of the feelings. But we're talked out of the feelings. But we're talked out of the feelings and then we grow up thinking if feelings and then we grow up thinking if feelings and then we grow up thinking if I'm feeling sad or angry or anxious, I'm feeling sad or angry or anxious, I'm feeling sad or angry or anxious, then you know, I need to get rid of the then you know, I need to get rid of the then you know, I need to get rid of the feeling as opposed to I need to use that feeling as opposed to I need to use that feeling as opposed to I need to use that feeling. And so instead, what we do is feeling. And so instead, what we do is feeling. And so instead, what we do is we come up with all these stories like we come up with all these stories like we come up with all these stories like the problem is out there as opposed to, the problem is out there as opposed to, the problem is out there as opposed to, oh, I have some really good information oh, I have some really good information oh, I have some really good information in here. I had a now ex-girlfriend, in here. I had a now ex-girlfriend, in here. I had a now ex-girlfriend, we're still on great terms, who uh we we're still on great terms, who uh we we're still on great terms, who uh we had an agreement that served us super had an agreement that served us super had an agreement that served us super well and uh that I try and apply going well and uh that I try and apply going well and uh that I try and apply going forward, which is um nobody tries to forward, which is um nobody tries to forward, which is um nobody tries to shift anyone else. shift anyone else. shift anyone else. In my mind, I was the one that came up In my mind, I was the one that came up In my mind, I was the one that came up with that, but I think in reality, she with that, but I think in reality, she with that, but I think in reality, she was the one that came up with it. cuz was the one that came up with it. cuz was the one that came up with it. cuz now I'm like there's no way I would have now I'm like there's no way I would have now I'm like there's no way I would have come up with that. But I think it come up with that. But I think it come up with that. But I think it came about through a couple different came about through a couple different came about through a couple different interactions where I would get off work interactions where I would get off work interactions where I would get off work and sometimes like the initial 20 and sometimes like the initial 20 and sometimes like the initial 20 minutes of interacting was much more minutes of interacting was much more minutes of interacting was much more difficult than it needed to be. And and difficult than it needed to be. And and difficult than it needed to be. And and then I remember we just came up with then I remember we just came up with then I remember we just came up with this plan where we just decide no one's this plan where we just decide no one's this plan where we just decide no one's going to shift the other person unless going to shift the other person unless going to shift the other person unless they're like shift me please you know they're like shift me please you know they're like shift me please you know like help me relax or help me uh get like help me relax or help me uh get like help me relax or help me uh get excited about this which we would never excited about this which we would never excited about this which we would never do right. So like when so a policy of do right. So like when so a policy of do right. So like when so a policy of not trying to shift anybody not trying to shift anybody not trying to shift anybody um or somebody trying to shift our um or somebody trying to shift our um or somebody trying to shift our emotions I think felt really liberating. emotions I think felt really liberating. emotions I think felt really liberating. Right. I think what you're talking about Right. I think what you're talking about Right. I think what you're talking about is self-regulation versus co-regulation. is self-regulation versus co-regulation. is self-regulation versus co-regulation. So self-regulation is when you're having So self-regulation is when you're having So self-regulation is when you're having some kind of internal experience. You some kind of internal experience. You some kind of internal experience. You have choices like I'm really angry about have choices like I'm really angry about have choices like I'm really angry about this. Okay. How do I self-regulate? not this. Okay. How do I self-regulate? not this. Okay. How do I self-regulate? not to ignore the anger because the anger is to ignore the anger because the anger is to ignore the anger because the anger is telling me that maybe a boundary was telling me that maybe a boundary was telling me that maybe a boundary was broken or maybe somebody's treating me broken or maybe somebody's treating me broken or maybe somebody's treating me in a way that I don't want to be treated in a way that I don't want to be treated in a way that I don't want to be treated or maybe I'm upset with myself for the or maybe I'm upset with myself for the or maybe I'm upset with myself for the way that I acted. So, it's good way that I acted. So, it's good way that I acted. So, it's good information, but then what do you do information, but then what do you do information, but then what do you do with it? Can you self-regulate? Can you with it? Can you self-regulate? Can you with it? Can you self-regulate? Can you find ways to look at the anger without find ways to look at the anger without find ways to look at the anger without screaming, yelling, um self-sabotaging, screaming, yelling, um self-sabotaging, screaming, yelling, um self-sabotaging, whatever people do that's not a whatever people do that's not a whatever people do that's not a productive use of their anger or your productive use of their anger or your productive use of their anger or your anxiety or your sadness. Um anxiety or your sadness. Um anxiety or your sadness. Um co-regulation is important though. Um co-regulation is important though. Um co-regulation is important though. Um and that's something that you see again and that's something that you see again and that's something that you see again you can see it with parent child where you can see it with parent child where you can see it with parent child where if the parent can stay calm when the if the parent can stay calm when the if the parent can stay calm when the child is not calm that helps the child is not calm that helps the child is not calm that helps the child to learn to self-regulate. And with a to learn to self-regulate. And with a to learn to self-regulate. And with a partner like say you had a really hard partner like say you had a really hard partner like say you had a really hard day at work and you come home and you're day at work and you come home and you're day at work and you come home and you're just not in a good mood. It's not your just not in a good mood. It's not your just not in a good mood. It's not your partner's responsibility to help you partner's responsibility to help you partner's responsibility to help you through that. You need to self-regulate. through that. You need to self-regulate. through that. You need to self-regulate. But it sure helps if your partner is But it sure helps if your partner is But it sure helps if your partner is regulated and they can help co-regulate regulated and they can help co-regulate regulated and they can help co-regulate you just because they happen to be you just because they happen to be you just because they happen to be regulated. You you want two adults in regulated. You you want two adults in regulated. You you want two adults in the room or at least one adult in the room or at least one adult in the room or at least one adult in the room. If you have two children in the room. If you have two children in the room. If you have two children in the room, like grown children, adults, um room, like grown children, adults, um room, like grown children, adults, um then everybody gets disregulated. So then everybody gets disregulated. So then everybody gets disregulated. So it's really important that at least one it's really important that at least one it's really important that at least one person is being the adult in the room person is being the adult in the room person is being the adult in the room and one person is regulated. If both and one person is regulated. If both and one person is regulated. If both people like you're in an argument, both people like you're in an argument, both people like you're in an argument, both people are dregulated, nothing good is people are dregulated, nothing good is people are dregulated, nothing good is going to come from that. in which case going to come from that. in which case going to come from that. in which case is the best option to just pause it is the best option to just pause it is the best option to just pause it until somebody returns to adulthood. until somebody returns to adulthood. until somebody returns to adulthood. Yes. And that happens so often. It's Yes. And that happens so often. It's Yes. And that happens so often. It's such an easy fix for couples because such an easy fix for couples because such an easy fix for couples because sometimes they think we have to sometimes they think we have to sometimes they think we have to deal with this right now and it feels deal with this right now and it feels deal with this right now and it feels urgent to deal with it right now because urgent to deal with it right now because urgent to deal with it right now because I feel hurt right now or I can't believe I feel hurt right now or I can't believe I feel hurt right now or I can't believe you said that or we need to, you know, you said that or we need to, you know, you said that or we need to, you know, resolve this right now. That can be the resolve this right now. That can be the resolve this right now. That can be the worst possible thing. So, it's not like worst possible thing. So, it's not like worst possible thing. So, it's not like let's forget about it. It's I'm going to let's forget about it. It's I'm going to let's forget about it. It's I'm going to go take a walk or I'm going to go to the go take a walk or I'm going to go to the go take a walk or I'm going to go to the gym or I'm going to go, you know, read gym or I'm going to go, you know, read gym or I'm going to go, you know, read for a few minutes or I'm going to go for a few minutes or I'm going to go for a few minutes or I'm going to go relax, whatever that is, and then let's relax, whatever that is, and then let's relax, whatever that is, and then let's talk in an hour about it or let's talk in an hour about it or let's talk in an hour about it or let's talk tonight, right? And you can stay tonight, right? And you can stay tonight, right? And you can stay connected during that time. So, what are connected during that time. So, what are connected during that time. So, what are you going to do in the intervening time? you going to do in the intervening time? you going to do in the intervening time? If you're just making up stories about If you're just making up stories about If you're just making up stories about the other person, they're insensitive. the other person, they're insensitive. the other person, they're insensitive. They don't care about me. They don't They don't care about me. They don't They don't care about me. They don't prioritize me. Then that's not helpful. prioritize me. Then that's not helpful. prioritize me. Then that's not helpful. But in that intervening time, if you can But in that intervening time, if you can But in that intervening time, if you can say, if I were telling this story from say, if I were telling this story from say, if I were telling this story from the other person's the other person's the other person's perspective, what would their version of perspective, what would their version of perspective, what would their version of this story be? And is there a nugget of this story be? And is there a nugget of this story be? And is there a nugget of overlap? And there is there a nugget of overlap? And there is there a nugget of overlap? And there is there a nugget of something that feels really genuine to something that feels really genuine to something that feels really genuine to me that I can understand and even have me that I can understand and even have me that I can understand and even have compassion for? And that's going to help compassion for? And that's going to help compassion for? And that's going to help you come back when you have the you come back when you have the you come back when you have the conversation. But you have to be conversation. But you have to be conversation. But you have to be regulated. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this and other podcasts about before on this and other podcasts about before on this and other podcasts about the fact that getting a great night's the fact that getting a great night's the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental sleep is the foundation of mental sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the on makes a huge difference in the on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is or how firm it is, night. How soft it is or how firm it is, night. How soft it is or how firm it is, how breathable it is, all play into your how breathable it is, all play into your how breathable it is, all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your comfort and need to be tailored to your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the unique sleep needs. If you go to the unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief Helix website, you can take a brief Helix website, you can take a brief two-minute quiz which will ask you two-minute quiz which will ask you two-minute quiz which will ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep on your questions such as, "Do you sleep on your questions such as, "Do you sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you back, your side, or your stomach? Do you back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the tend to run hot or cold during the tend to run hot or cold during the night?" Things of that sort. Now, maybe night?" Things of that sort. Now, maybe night?" Things of that sort. Now, maybe you know the answers to those questions, you know the answers to those questions, you know the answers to those questions, maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. match you to the ideal mattress for you. match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk For me, that turned out to be the Dusk For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress. I started sleeping on the Dusk mattress. I started sleeping on the Dusk mattress. I started sleeping on the Dusk mattress about three and a half years mattress about three and a half years mattress about three and a half years ago, and it's been far and away the best ago, and it's been far and away the best ago, and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. So much so sleep that I've ever had. So much so sleep that I've ever had. So much so that when I travel and I'm not on my that when I travel and I'm not on my that when I travel and I'm not on my Dusk mattress, I really miss it. And Dusk mattress, I really miss it. And Dusk mattress, I really miss it. And when I get home, I just find that I when I get home, I just find that I when I get home, I just find that I sleep so much better because of that sleep so much better because of that sleep so much better because of that mattress. If you'd like to try Helix, mattress. If you'd like to try Helix, mattress. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to you can go to you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. Take that helixleep.com/huberman. Take that helixleep.com/huberman. Take that 2-minut sleep quiz and Helix will match 2-minut sleep quiz and Helix will match 2-minut sleep quiz and Helix will match you to a mattress that's customized for you to a mattress that's customized for you to a mattress that's customized for you. Right now, Helix is giving up to you. Right now, Helix is giving up to you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 20% off on all mattress orders. Again, 20% off on all mattress orders. Again, 20% off on all mattress orders. Again, that's helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 20% helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 20% helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to off. Today's episode is also brought to off. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online therapist carried out entirely online therapist carried out entirely online now. I personally have been doing now. I personally have been doing now. I personally have been doing therapy weekly for well over 30 years. therapy weekly for well over 30 years. therapy weekly for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It Initially, I didn't have a choice. It Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay was a condition of being allowed to stay was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon, I realized in school. But pretty soon, I realized in school. But pretty soon, I realized that therapy is an extremely important that therapy is an extremely important that therapy is an extremely important component to one's overall health. There component to one's overall health. There component to one's overall health. There are essentially three things that great are essentially three things that great are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it provides a good rapport with somebody provides a good rapport with somebody provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about that you can trust and talk to about that you can trust and talk to about pretty much any issue with. Second of pretty much any issue with. Second of pretty much any issue with. Second of all, it can provide support in the form all, it can provide support in the form all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed of emotional support and directed of emotional support and directed guidance. And third, expert therapy can guidance. And third, expert therapy can guidance. And third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. Insights that provide useful insights. Insights that provide useful insights. Insights that allow you to better not just your allow you to better not just your allow you to better not just your emotional life and your relationship emotional life and your relationship emotional life and your relationship life, but of course also the life, but of course also the life, but of course also the relationship to yourself and your relationship to yourself and your relationship to yourself and your professional life and to all sorts of professional life and to all sorts of professional life and to all sorts of goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you find an expert therapist with whom you find an expert therapist with whom you resonate with and that can provide you resonate with and that can provide you resonate with and that can provide you those three benefits that come from those three benefits that come from those three benefits that come from effective therapy. Also, because effective therapy. Also, because effective therapy. Also, because BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's super entirely online, it's super entirely online, it's super timeefficient and easy to fit into a timeefficient and easy to fit into a timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like to try busy schedule. If you'd like to try busy schedule. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's your first month. Again, that's your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. One thing that I've observed, I don't One thing that I've observed, I don't One thing that I've observed, I don't have any formal data on this, is that have any formal data on this, is that have any formal data on this, is that some of the happiest couples I know are some of the happiest couples I know are some of the happiest couples I know are couples where I would refer to one couples where I would refer to one couples where I would refer to one person in the relationship as more person in the relationship as more person in the relationship as more emotive and expressive and the other emotive and expressive and the other emotive and expressive and the other person as a little bit on the spectrum. person as a little bit on the spectrum. person as a little bit on the spectrum. And my observation is that part of the And my observation is that part of the And my observation is that part of the reason those couples seem so harmonious reason those couples seem so harmonious reason those couples seem so harmonious is that the little things don't seem to is that the little things don't seem to is that the little things don't seem to bother the person on the spectrum cuz bother the person on the spectrum cuz bother the person on the spectrum cuz they don't register them. they don't get they don't register them. they don't get they don't register them. they don't get entangled in the other person's entangled in the other person's entangled in the other person's um downs or ups which I guess um downs or ups which I guess um downs or ups which I guess um could be problematic in theory but just could be problematic in theory but just could be problematic in theory but just seems like they get along really well seems like they get along really well seems like they get along really well because and I won't you know kind of because and I won't you know kind of because and I won't you know kind of stereotype the labels but these stereotype the labels but these stereotype the labels but these couples that I know it does happen to be couples that I know it does happen to be couples that I know it does happen to be the male who is the male who is the male who is um a little bit on the spectrum and the um a little bit on the spectrum and the um a little bit on the spectrum and the woman who's a little more emotive woman who's a little more emotive woman who's a little more emotive And it just seems like there's so much And it just seems like there's so much And it just seems like there's so much harmony there. And when I talk to him, harmony there. And when I talk to him, harmony there. And when I talk to him, I'm generally uh closer to the man I'm generally uh closer to the man I'm generally uh closer to the man in the relationship. Uh although not in the relationship. Uh although not in the relationship. Uh although not always. Um they say like, "Yeah, like always. Um they say like, "Yeah, like always. Um they say like, "Yeah, like you know, doesn't bother me. There's I you know, doesn't bother me. There's I you know, doesn't bother me. There's I just like will listen or if there's just like will listen or if there's just like will listen or if there's something to a request, I'll respond to something to a request, I'll respond to something to a request, I'll respond to the request." There there isn't this the request." There there isn't this the request." There there isn't this entanglement of she's upset so I like entanglement of she's upset so I like entanglement of she's upset so I like have to respond or this is really have to respond or this is really have to respond or this is really painful to listen to. It's more um of painful to listen to. It's more um of painful to listen to. It's more um of like a kind of matter of fact and um I like a kind of matter of fact and um I like a kind of matter of fact and um I just think it's an interesting dynamic. just think it's an interesting dynamic. just think it's an interesting dynamic. It's obviously not one that people can It's obviously not one that people can It's obviously not one that people can pre-program themselves for. Uh but I do pre-program themselves for. Uh but I do pre-program themselves for. Uh but I do think it's an interesting dynamic as think it's an interesting dynamic as think it's an interesting dynamic as opposed to what you're describing where opposed to what you're describing where opposed to what you're describing where um emotions can kind of ratchet together um emotions can kind of ratchet together um emotions can kind of ratchet together like gears and that can be wonderful like gears and that can be wonderful like gears and that can be wonderful when people are in you know ecstatic when people are in you know ecstatic when people are in you know ecstatic states or happy or that there's like the states or happy or that there's like the states or happy or that there's like the banter of certain couples that are seem banter of certain couples that are seem banter of certain couples that are seem pretty emotive is something I'm also pretty emotive is something I'm also pretty emotive is something I'm also familiar with observing. But those familiar with observing. But those familiar with observing. But those couples also seem like more volatile couples also seem like more volatile couples also seem like more volatile like when somebody's upset the like when somebody's upset the like when somebody's upset the other person gets upset that they're and other person gets upset that they're and other person gets upset that they're and it just starts to um deteriorate pretty it just starts to um deteriorate pretty it just starts to um deteriorate pretty quickly. Yeah. You don't want two highly quickly. Yeah. You don't want two highly quickly. Yeah. You don't want two highly reactive people to be together. Um, you reactive people to be together. Um, you reactive people to be together. Um, you also, I think, need to think about also, I think, need to think about also, I think, need to think about there's a saying, we marry our there's a saying, we marry our there's a saying, we marry our unfinished business, right? So, let's unfinished business, right? So, let's unfinished business, right? So, let's say that there's somebody who had a say that there's somebody who had a say that there's somebody who had a parent who was very kind of avoidant or parent who was very kind of avoidant or parent who was very kind of avoidant or withdrawn. That person, if they haven't withdrawn. That person, if they haven't withdrawn. That person, if they haven't processed that, will be drawn to the processed that, will be drawn to the processed that, will be drawn to the partner who is more avoidant, but not partner who is more avoidant, but not partner who is more avoidant, but not because it feels good, but because it's because it feels good, but because it's because it feels good, but because it's familiar. And so sometimes in the kind familiar. And so sometimes in the kind familiar. And so sometimes in the kind of couple that you're describing and I of couple that you're describing and I of couple that you're describing and I don't know the experience of your don't know the experience of your don't know the experience of your friends, but I've seen a lot of couples friends, but I've seen a lot of couples friends, but I've seen a lot of couples where it looks like that would be a good where it looks like that would be a good where it looks like that would be a good match because one person is, you know, match because one person is, you know, match because one person is, you know, sort of more in the emotional sphere and sort of more in the emotional sphere and sort of more in the emotional sphere and one person is less so. Um, but sometimes one person is less so. Um, but sometimes one person is less so. Um, but sometimes what that is one person gets very what that is one person gets very what that is one person gets very lonely because they're not really lonely because they're not really lonely because they're not really getting that kind of emotional getting that kind of emotional getting that kind of emotional interaction that they want. So, it can interaction that they want. So, it can interaction that they want. So, it can be a solution for some people because be a solution for some people because be a solution for some people because they don't know how to be with a they don't know how to be with a they don't know how to be with a different kind of person, but I also different kind of person, but I also different kind of person, but I also feel like um you want to make sure that feel like um you want to make sure that feel like um you want to make sure that you have figured out your unfinished you have figured out your unfinished you have figured out your unfinished business, that you're not just you don't business, that you're not just you don't business, that you're not just you don't just have radar for the kind of person just have radar for the kind of person just have radar for the kind of person who hurt you. So, what often happens is who hurt you. So, what often happens is who hurt you. So, what often happens is people haven't processed whatever it was people haven't processed whatever it was people haven't processed whatever it was that they wanted more of or less of when that they wanted more of or less of when that they wanted more of or less of when they were growing up. And then they go they were growing up. And then they go they were growing up. And then they go out into the world and they're looking out into the world and they're looking out into the world and they're looking for a partner and they literally have for a partner and they literally have for a partner and they literally have radar for a person who is exactly like radar for a person who is exactly like radar for a person who is exactly like the person who hurt them but doesn't the person who hurt them but doesn't the person who hurt them but doesn't look like that. So it's like I'm going look like that. So it's like I'm going look like that. So it's like I'm going to choose someone who is the opposite of to choose someone who is the opposite of to choose someone who is the opposite of the parent who hurt me and then you find the parent who hurt me and then you find the parent who hurt me and then you find this person and after you get to know this person and after you get to know this person and after you get to know them a little bit you're like wow that them a little bit you're like wow that them a little bit you're like wow that person drinks a lot too. I didn't person drinks a lot too. I didn't person drinks a lot too. I didn't realize that or that person is really realize that or that person is really realize that or that person is really withholding too. I didn't see that at withholding too. I didn't see that at withholding too. I didn't see that at first. Or that person yells a lot. I first. Or that person yells a lot. I first. Or that person yells a lot. I didn't notice that at first. And you're didn't notice that at first. And you're didn't notice that at first. And you're like, how did I get into this exact like, how did I get into this exact like, how did I get into this exact situation that hurt me as a child? And situation that hurt me as a child? And situation that hurt me as a child? And that's because your unconscious is that's because your unconscious is that's because your unconscious is saying, you look familiar. Come closer. saying, you look familiar. Come closer. saying, you look familiar. Come closer. Because what we're trying to do is we're Because what we're trying to do is we're Because what we're trying to do is we're trying to win. We're trying to master a trying to win. We're trying to master a trying to win. We're trying to master a situation where we felt helpless as a situation where we felt helpless as a situation where we felt helpless as a child. We couldn't control the situation child. We couldn't control the situation child. We couldn't control the situation with our parents when we were growing with our parents when we were growing with our parents when we were growing up. And now we think, again, this is up. And now we think, again, this is up. And now we think, again, this is completely outside of our awareness. I'm completely outside of our awareness. I'm completely outside of our awareness. I'm going to win this time. I'm going to going to win this time. I'm going to going to win this time. I'm going to master this. I'm going to get love from master this. I'm going to get love from master this. I'm going to get love from that kind of person and it doesn't work that kind of person and it doesn't work that kind of person and it doesn't work out. So, I think that you really want to out. So, I think that you really want to out. So, I think that you really want to make sure that you are choosing someone make sure that you are choosing someone make sure that you are choosing someone for healthy reasons and not because for healthy reasons and not because for healthy reasons and not because there's some unfinished business that there's some unfinished business that there's some unfinished business that you're trying to work out with this you're trying to work out with this you're trying to work out with this person who is not going to meet your person who is not going to meet your person who is not going to meet your needs. to go a little bit further into needs. to go a little bit further into needs. to go a little bit further into this idea, which by the way I fully this idea, which by the way I fully this idea, which by the way I fully subscribe to um based on your subscribe to um based on your subscribe to um based on your explanation of this and um my belief explanation of this and um my belief explanation of this and um my belief that our unconscious mind is driving a that our unconscious mind is driving a that our unconscious mind is driving a lot of our choices. My understanding is lot of our choices. My understanding is lot of our choices. My understanding is that what you just described that what you just described that what you just described doesn't adhere to mom, dad, male, female doesn't adhere to mom, dad, male, female doesn't adhere to mom, dad, male, female um compartmentalization. And what I mean by compartmentalization. And what I mean by compartmentalization. And what I mean by that is that I think a lot of people that is that I think a lot of people that is that I think a lot of people will hear what you just said and assume will hear what you just said and assume will hear what you just said and assume okay if my okay if my okay if my dad hurt me in the following ways then dad hurt me in the following ways then dad hurt me in the following ways then and let's say it's a woman and she said and let's say it's a woman and she said and let's say it's a woman and she said you know my dad hurt me in the following you know my dad hurt me in the following you know my dad hurt me in the following ways he was a drinker withdrawn or he ways he was a drinker withdrawn or he ways he was a drinker withdrawn or he was violent or whatever then uh that was violent or whatever then uh that was violent or whatever then uh that woman will seek out men that mimic woman will seek out men that mimic woman will seek out men that mimic that here I'm assuming a heterosexual that here I'm assuming a heterosexual that here I'm assuming a heterosexual relationship but if her mother was the one that was but if her mother was the one that was but if her mother was the one that was the drinker, violent andor withdrawn, the drinker, violent andor withdrawn, the drinker, violent andor withdrawn, and she's heterosexual. My understanding and she's heterosexual. My understanding and she's heterosexual. My understanding is based on the dynamics that you is based on the dynamics that you is based on the dynamics that you describe, if she will find those traits describe, if she will find those traits describe, if she will find those traits in a man, yes, because she's in a man, yes, because she's in a man, yes, because she's heterosexual, she's seeking men for heterosexual, she's seeking men for heterosexual, she's seeking men for romantic partners. And I think that's romantic partners. And I think that's romantic partners. And I think that's very important. I think that sometimes very important. I think that sometimes very important. I think that sometimes we put the mom dad um labels on top we put the mom dad um labels on top we put the mom dad um labels on top of the uh attraction to again of the uh attraction to again of the uh attraction to again staying in the heterosexual framework staying in the heterosexual framework staying in the heterosexual framework here um the opposite sex framework and here um the opposite sex framework and here um the opposite sex framework and then people say well why is it that this then people say well why is it that this then people say well why is it that this woman always seeks out these like what woman always seeks out these like what woman always seeks out these like what end up being really terrible guys like end up being really terrible guys like end up being really terrible guys like she had such a great dad but she had a she had such a great dad but she had a she had such a great dad but she had a dreadful mom. That is absolutely dreadful mom. That is absolutely dreadful mom. That is absolutely correct. And I think it's so interesting correct. And I think it's so interesting correct. And I think it's so interesting because I think that people think that because I think that people think that because I think that people think that having one parent that gave you what you having one parent that gave you what you having one parent that gave you what you needed is protective. And in some ways needed is protective. And in some ways needed is protective. And in some ways it is, but the thing that hurts is the it is, but the thing that hurts is the it is, but the thing that hurts is the thing that gets the most attention thing that gets the most attention thing that gets the most attention inside of our bodies. So we don't inside of our bodies. So we don't inside of our bodies. So we don't necessarily think it, but we felt it. We necessarily think it, but we felt it. We necessarily think it, but we felt it. We internalized it. It lives inside of us. internalized it. It lives inside of us. internalized it. It lives inside of us. And so yes, having a good parent, one of And so yes, having a good parent, one of And so yes, having a good parent, one of the two, if you have two parents, one of the two, if you have two parents, one of the two, if you have two parents, one of the two is important, but it's the two is important, but it's the two is important, but it's interesting that it's not like we seek interesting that it's not like we seek interesting that it's not like we seek out the person that like the good parent out the person that like the good parent out the person that like the good parent always sometimes again because we're always sometimes again because we're always sometimes again because we're trying to work something out. We seek trying to work something out. We seek trying to work something out. We seek out someone like the parent who really out someone like the parent who really out someone like the parent who really hurt us. So such a flaw in our wiring. hurt us. So such a flaw in our wiring. hurt us. So such a flaw in our wiring. Well, I mean, I think that's where Well, I mean, I think that's where Well, I mean, I think that's where therapy is really helpful. I think therapy is really helpful. I think therapy is really helpful. I think that's where, you know, people are like, that's where, you know, people are like, that's where, you know, people are like, well, what is therapy really for? And I well, what is therapy really for? And I well, what is therapy really for? And I think it's really about what are the think it's really about what are the think it's really about what are the things that are outside of your things that are outside of your things that are outside of your awareness but that are sort of driving awareness but that are sort of driving awareness but that are sort of driving the car. So, it's like we think we're the car. So, it's like we think we're the car. So, it's like we think we're the driver of our own car, but often the driver of our own car, but often the driver of our own car, but often like someone else is driving the car and like someone else is driving the car and like someone else is driving the car and we don't realize it and we think why we don't realize it and we think why we don't realize it and we think why does this keep happening or you know does this keep happening or you know does this keep happening or you know what is happening in my life that I'm what is happening in my life that I'm what is happening in my life that I'm not getting what I want in you know not getting what I want in you know not getting what I want in you know whatever dimension it is whether it's whatever dimension it is whether it's whatever dimension it is whether it's professionally or personally and so professionally or personally and so professionally or personally and so often it's because there's some force often it's because there's some force often it's because there's some force that you are acting out that you don't that you are acting out that you don't that you are acting out that you don't even realize and I think the role of even realize and I think the role of even realize and I think the role of therapy is to kind of hold up a mirror therapy is to kind of hold up a mirror therapy is to kind of hold up a mirror to people and help them to see something to people and help them to see something to people and help them to see something about themselves that they haven't been about themselves that they haven't been about themselves that they haven't been willing or able to see. You said that um willing or able to see. You said that um willing or able to see. You said that um people will pick um the person who's people will pick um the person who's people will pick um the person who's exactly wrong for them, who feels exactly wrong for them, who feels exactly wrong for them, who feels exactly right, at least at first. Um exactly right, at least at first. Um exactly right, at least at first. Um that it has this kind of um come here uh that it has this kind of um come here uh that it has this kind of um come here uh this summoning uh aspect to it like we this summoning uh aspect to it like we this summoning uh aspect to it like we feel drawn to it. It feels drawn to us. feel drawn to it. It feels drawn to us. feel drawn to it. It feels drawn to us. I mean, that's how relationships start I mean, that's how relationships start I mean, that's how relationships start after all, one would hope. Um but in after all, one would hope. Um but in after all, one would hope. Um but in this case um you said that people come this case um you said that people come this case um you said that people come to find that person is exact to find that person is exact to find that person is exact harbors some of the exact same traits. harbors some of the exact same traits. harbors some of the exact same traits. I'm calling them that behaviors traits. I'm calling them that behaviors traits. I'm calling them that behaviors traits. So you know whatever it is that hurt So you know whatever it is that hurt So you know whatever it is that hurt them in the context of their uh child them in the context of their uh child them in the context of their uh child parent relationship. Why do you think um relationship. Why do you think um relationship. Why do you think um initially it presents as the opposite? I initially it presents as the opposite? I initially it presents as the opposite? I think it's about the familiarity think it's about the familiarity think it's about the familiarity that there's something so visceral about that there's something so visceral about that there's something so visceral about this feels like childhood and even if this feels like childhood and even if this feels like childhood and even if childhood was not optimal or even childhood was not optimal or even childhood was not optimal or even miserable, it still feels familiar. And miserable, it still feels familiar. And miserable, it still feels familiar. And humans in general are very afraid of humans in general are very afraid of humans in general are very afraid of uncertainty. They're very afraid of the uncertainty. They're very afraid of the uncertainty. They're very afraid of the unfamiliar. I remember when I was unfamiliar. I remember when I was unfamiliar. I remember when I was in therapy, my therapist said to me, you in therapy, my therapist said to me, you in therapy, my therapist said to me, you know, you remind me of this cartoon and know, you remind me of this cartoon and know, you remind me of this cartoon and it's of a prisoner shaking the bars, it's of a prisoner shaking the bars, it's of a prisoner shaking the bars, desperately trying to get out. But on desperately trying to get out. But on desperately trying to get out. But on the right and the left, it's open. No the right and the left, it's open. No the right and the left, it's open. No bars, right? So, why do we stay in this bars, right? So, why do we stay in this bars, right? So, why do we stay in this prison? Why don't we walk? Why don't we prison? Why don't we walk? Why don't we prison? Why don't we walk? Why don't we even see that it's open? And why don't even see that it's open? And why don't even see that it's open? And why don't we walk around the bars? And it's we walk around the bars? And it's we walk around the bars? And it's because with freedom comes because with freedom comes because with freedom comes responsibility and uncertainty. We don't responsibility and uncertainty. We don't responsibility and uncertainty. We don't know what's We know what it's like to be know what's We know what it's like to be know what's We know what it's like to be in prison. That's that's been our in prison. That's that's been our in prison. That's that's been our experience. So that feels comfortable experience. So that feels comfortable experience. So that feels comfortable even though we say we desperately want even though we say we desperately want even though we say we desperately want to get out. And then if we choose the to get out. And then if we choose the to get out. And then if we choose the uncertain path, we're responsible for uncertain path, we're responsible for uncertain path, we're responsible for our lives now. We can't blame it on mom our lives now. We can't blame it on mom our lives now. We can't blame it on mom or dad or this situation or that or dad or this situation or that or dad or this situation or that situation. I'm not saying those situation. I'm not saying those situation. I'm not saying those situations weren't impactful. Of course situations weren't impactful. Of course situations weren't impactful. Of course they were. But we have choices as an they were. But we have choices as an they were. But we have choices as an adult. We have freedom as an adult that adult. We have freedom as an adult that adult. We have freedom as an adult that we didn't have as a child. And sometimes we didn't have as a child. And sometimes we didn't have as a child. And sometimes it's really hard for us to say, "I'm it's really hard for us to say, "I'm it's really hard for us to say, "I'm going to have to be responsible for my going to have to be responsible for my going to have to be responsible for my life." That's terrifying because we feel life." That's terrifying because we feel life." That's terrifying because we feel like we don't have the tools to do that. like we don't have the tools to do that. like we don't have the tools to do that. We feel like again the uncertainty. We'd We feel like again the uncertainty. We'd We feel like again the uncertainty. We'd rather have the certainty of like I know rather have the certainty of like I know rather have the certainty of like I know what it's like in prison. At least I'm I what it's like in prison. At least I'm I what it's like in prison. At least I'm I know what that's like and I know you know what that's like and I know you know what that's like and I know you know the devil you know and that's not know the devil you know and that's not know the devil you know and that's not again that's outside of our awareness. I again that's outside of our awareness. I again that's outside of our awareness. I think what you're describing is a um is think what you're describing is a um is think what you're describing is a um is a pervasive feature of like being human. a pervasive feature of like being human. a pervasive feature of like being human. If I may, uh there's this uh kid, he's If I may, uh there's this uh kid, he's If I may, uh there's this uh kid, he's now a young adult, but um I've watched now a young adult, but um I've watched now a young adult, but um I've watched grow up from a very young age who got grow up from a very young age who got grow up from a very young age who got into college. He was doing really well. into college. He was doing really well. into college. He was doing really well. Then he fell in love. He made the Then he fell in love. He made the Then he fell in love. He made the decision to leave school. The decision to leave school. The decision to leave school. The relationship ended and was talking to relationship ended and was talking to relationship ended and was talking to him recently and he's kind of in this him recently and he's kind of in this him recently and he's kind of in this kind of dizzying spin of like thinking kind of dizzying spin of like thinking kind of dizzying spin of like thinking about how great things were, how he blew about how great things were, how he blew about how great things were, how he blew it, and he's young. I'm like, "Listen, it, and he's young. I'm like, "Listen, it, and he's young. I'm like, "Listen, you're good. Like he didn't drop out. you're good. Like he didn't drop out. you're good. Like he didn't drop out. He just withdrew. he can go back and you He just withdrew. he can go back and you He just withdrew. he can go back and you know he'll find another relationship. know he'll find another relationship. know he'll find another relationship. But um you know and I empathize with him But um you know and I empathize with him But um you know and I empathize with him but um I passed something along to him but um I passed something along to him but um I passed something along to him that was actually discussed on a uh by a that was actually discussed on a uh by a that was actually discussed on a uh by a former guest on this podcast who was a former guest on this podcast who was a former guest on this podcast who was a former child chess prodigy has gone on former child chess prodigy has gone on former child chess prodigy has gone on to do a number of things and he said to do a number of things and he said to do a number of things and he said exactly what you're saying which is in a exactly what you're saying which is in a exactly what you're saying which is in a different context. He said, um, we get different context. He said, um, we get different context. He said, um, we get so attached to our current identity and so attached to our current identity and so attached to our current identity and our past identity and trying to resolve our past identity and trying to resolve our past identity and trying to resolve those that we're more willing to stay in those that we're more willing to stay in those that we're more willing to stay in that state of discomfort than we are that state of discomfort than we are that state of discomfort than we are to step into a path of potential to step into a path of potential to step into a path of potential success, right? It makes no sense, success, right? It makes no sense, success, right? It makes no sense, right? I mean, and so I pass this along. right? I mean, and so I pass this along. right? I mean, and so I pass this along. We'll see what he does with it with it We'll see what he does with it with it We'll see what he does with it with it with that knowledge. Yes. It's kind of with that knowledge. Yes. It's kind of with that knowledge. Yes. It's kind of like the misery of uncertainty. like the misery of uncertainty. like the misery of uncertainty. The certainty of misery is sometimes The certainty of misery is sometimes The certainty of misery is sometimes more palatable to people than the misery more palatable to people than the misery more palatable to people than the misery of uncertainty. So you can be certain of uncertainty. So you can be certain of uncertainty. So you can be certain that you're going to stay miserable if that you're going to stay miserable if that you're going to stay miserable if you stay in jail, but the misery of you stay in jail, but the misery of you stay in jail, but the misery of uncertainty is worse. So it's uncertainty is worse. So it's uncertainty is worse. So it's really interesting that people will make really interesting that people will make really interesting that people will make that tradeoff. And the other thing about that tradeoff. And the other thing about that tradeoff. And the other thing about this attraction question that you're this attraction question that you're this attraction question that you're asking about, it's like I had this asking about, it's like I had this asking about, it's like I had this therapy client and she would pick people therapy client and she would pick people therapy client and she would pick people who were exactly like one or both of her who were exactly like one or both of her who were exactly like one or both of her parents and she would be so attracted to parents and she would be so attracted to parents and she would be so attracted to those guys. She would always go for them those guys. She would always go for them those guys. She would always go for them and she's like, "Men are terrible. Guys and she's like, "Men are terrible. Guys and she's like, "Men are terrible. Guys are terrible." It's like, "No, no, no. are terrible." It's like, "No, no, no. are terrible." It's like, "No, no, no. The men you're choosing are terrible The men you're choosing are terrible The men you're choosing are terrible to you." But then you go out on dates to you." But then you go out on dates to you." But then you go out on dates with these like great guys and she's with these like great guys and she's with these like great guys and she's like, "Yeah, no chemistry. No like, "Yeah, no chemistry. No like, "Yeah, no chemistry. No chemistry." Yeah. Let's talk about that. chemistry." Yeah. Let's talk about that. chemistry." Yeah. Let's talk about that. What what is the flip side of What what is the flip side of What what is the flip side of this? The lack of interest in this? The lack of interest in this? The lack of interest in somebody that doesn't um overtly or uh somebody that doesn't um overtly or uh somebody that doesn't um overtly or uh covertly harbor the painful covertly harbor the painful covertly harbor the painful thing that you're so used to, right? So, thing that you're so used to, right? So, thing that you're so used to, right? So, so that's the thing. She was working out so that's the thing. She was working out so that's the thing. She was working out this way of she hadn't separated this way of she hadn't separated this way of she hadn't separated yet from her childhood. So, she was yet from her childhood. So, she was yet from her childhood. So, she was trying to kind of reenact her childhood, trying to kind of reenact her childhood, trying to kind of reenact her childhood, reenact her childhood with these men. reenact her childhood with these men. reenact her childhood with these men. And she didn't realize she was doing And she didn't realize she was doing And she didn't realize she was doing that. She'd just be like, "Oh, I'm so that. She'd just be like, "Oh, I'm so that. She'd just be like, "Oh, I'm so attracted to this person." or things attracted to this person." or things attracted to this person." or things like, you know, I just I like this guy like, you know, I just I like this guy like, you know, I just I like this guy so much. I don't know why he doesn't so much. I don't know why he doesn't so much. I don't know why he doesn't call when he says he call when he says he call when he says he will, right? And it's like, well, who is will, right? And it's like, well, who is will, right? And it's like, well, who is that like? Who does that remind you of? that like? Who does that remind you of? that like? Who does that remind you of? When have you felt that before that like When have you felt that before that like When have you felt that before that like I never know where I stand with this I never know where I stand with this I never know where I stand with this parent, with this boyfriend? And then parent, with this boyfriend? And then parent, with this boyfriend? And then the people who were really reliable, the people who were really reliable, the people who were really reliable, who, by the way, it wasn't about their who, by the way, it wasn't about their who, by the way, it wasn't about their physical traits, like these men were all physical traits, like these men were all physical traits, like these men were all physically attractive. It was she felt physically attractive. It was she felt physically attractive. It was she felt no sort of again that word chemistry no sort of again that word chemistry no sort of again that word chemistry because there's something very because there's something very because there's something very threatening about like oh there's no threatening about like oh there's no threatening about like oh there's no friction. It's a frictionless you know friction. It's a frictionless you know friction. It's a frictionless you know thing where he says he's going to call thing where he says he's going to call thing where he says he's going to call and he does. He's reliable. He does what and he does. He's reliable. He does what and he does. He's reliable. He does what he says he's going to do. I don't know he says he's going to do. I don't know he says he's going to do. I don't know what to do with that. It just it doesn't what to do with that. It just it doesn't what to do with that. It just it doesn't like light her up in that way because like light her up in that way because like light her up in that way because she's not having that big emotional she's not having that big emotional she's not having that big emotional reaction to it because it doesn't feel reaction to it because it doesn't feel reaction to it because it doesn't feel like the thing that would give her a big like the thing that would give her a big like the thing that would give her a big emotional reaction. And so once she sort emotional reaction. And so once she sort emotional reaction. And so once she sort of works that through, by the end of the of works that through, by the end of the of works that through, by the end of the therapy, she became very attracted to therapy, she became very attracted to therapy, she became very attracted to the kinds of guys who would treat her the kinds of guys who would treat her the kinds of guys who would treat her the way she wanted to be treated. And the way she wanted to be treated. And the way she wanted to be treated. And she was no longer attracted to the guys she was no longer attracted to the guys she was no longer attracted to the guys that she so she'd get that initial kind that she so she'd get that initial kind that she so she'd get that initial kind of like, oh, I feel something when I'm of like, oh, I feel something when I'm of like, oh, I feel something when I'm in the presence of a guy like that, but in the presence of a guy like that, but in the presence of a guy like that, but I'm not really interested in a I'm not really interested in a I'm not really interested in a relationship with that kind of guy. So relationship with that kind of guy. So relationship with that kind of guy. So that's I think what therapy can do for that's I think what therapy can do for that's I think what therapy can do for people. Yeah. One of the things that people. Yeah. One of the things that people. Yeah. One of the things that I've noticed in my own life is I've noticed in my own life is I've noticed in my own life is that as I've gotten older, I'll be 50 that as I've gotten older, I'll be 50 that as I've gotten older, I'll be 50 later this year. Um been looking forward later this year. Um been looking forward later this year. Um been looking forward to that. I feel great. But um some of to that. I feel great. But um some of to that. I feel great. But um some of the things that I assumed for so many the things that I assumed for so many the things that I assumed for so many years, like slow is low, like when years, like slow is low, like when years, like slow is low, like when things are really slow, like it for many things are really slow, like it for many things are really slow, like it for many years it felt kind of depressive. years it felt kind of depressive. years it felt kind of depressive. Now I love slow, mellow, like peace is Now I love slow, mellow, like peace is Now I love slow, mellow, like peace is the thing that I'm just I savor so much. the thing that I'm just I savor so much. the thing that I'm just I savor so much. But for so many years, I think what But for so many years, I think what But for so many years, I think what you're describing that sort of you're describing that sort of you're describing that sort of activation state of excitement. I was a activation state of excitement. I was a activation state of excitement. I was a pretty wild youth and then you know I pretty wild youth and then you know I pretty wild youth and then you know I mean I like adventure and I'd taken on mean I like adventure and I'd taken on mean I like adventure and I'd taken on at times dangerous adventures that I at times dangerous adventures that I at times dangerous adventures that I shouldn't have. Lived told myself I shouldn't have. Lived told myself I shouldn't have. Lived told myself I wouldn't do them again. Picked a wouldn't do them again. Picked a wouldn't do them again. Picked a different adventure. But even in like my different adventure. But even in like my different adventure. But even in like my scientific career or podcasting, things scientific career or podcasting, things scientific career or podcasting, things that feel at times like a bit of a that feel at times like a bit of a that feel at times like a bit of a tightroppe walk just given the number of tightroppe walk just given the number of tightroppe walk just given the number of variables that I can't control just by variables that I can't control just by variables that I can't control just by virtue of what they are and the virtue of what they are and the virtue of what they are and the challenge of like long cycles of trying challenge of like long cycles of trying challenge of like long cycles of trying to publish like the they they're kind of to publish like the they they're kind of to publish like the they they're kind of scary at some level. It's your scary at some level. It's your scary at some level. It's your profession after all. But I did the same profession after all. But I did the same profession after all. But I did the same thing in a lot of my thing in a lot of my thing in a lot of my relationships. Lovely people in some relationships. Lovely people in some relationships. Lovely people in some cases, some cases not, but in most cases, some cases not, but in most cases, some cases not, but in most cases, fortunately for me, um lovely cases, fortunately for me, um lovely cases, fortunately for me, um lovely people. But but there was this sense people. But but there was this sense people. But but there was this sense that like um if something felt like a that like um if something felt like a that like um if something felt like a little bit of an upstate kind of like a little bit of an upstate kind of like a little bit of an upstate kind of like a bit more of autonomic arousal or a lot bit more of autonomic arousal or a lot bit more of autonomic arousal or a lot more autonomic arousal that it had this more autonomic arousal that it had this more autonomic arousal that it had this um kind of magnetic quality to it. um kind of magnetic quality to it. um kind of magnetic quality to it. Whereas I think um and I'm not joking or Whereas I think um and I'm not joking or Whereas I think um and I'm not joking or lying here. I think owning a bulldog lying here. I think owning a bulldog lying here. I think owning a bulldog taught me how to really savor relaxing. taught me how to really savor relaxing. taught me how to really savor relaxing. I'm not saying this just to highlight I'm not saying this just to highlight I'm not saying this just to highlight Costello again. And I mean, I observed Costello again. And I mean, I observed Costello again. And I mean, I observed his relationship to the world, and that his relationship to the world, and that his relationship to the world, and that the bulldog's contract with its owner is the bulldog's contract with its owner is the bulldog's contract with its owner is an amazing one that I think I learned is an amazing one that I think I learned is an amazing one that I think I learned a lot from. The contract is, I will die a lot from. The contract is, I will die a lot from. The contract is, I will die for you. I will literally give up my for you. I will literally give up my for you. I will literally give up my life to protect you, Andrew. life to protect you, Andrew. life to protect you, Andrew. But if that's not on the But if that's not on the But if that's not on the line, I'm not going to do anything. line, I'm not going to do anything. line, I'm not going to do anything. We're just going to sit here and enjoy We're just going to sit here and enjoy We're just going to sit here and enjoy the sunshine, right? We're just going to the sunshine, right? We're just going to the sunshine, right? We're just going to breathe and we're going to eat food, breathe and we're going to eat food, breathe and we're going to eat food, right? Friends are coming over and I'll right? Friends are coming over and I'll right? Friends are coming over and I'll get excited. And you know, and I'm not get excited. And you know, and I'm not get excited. And you know, and I'm not I'm not trying to make too much of this. I'm not trying to make too much of this. I'm not trying to make too much of this. I really noticed I was like, "Wow, he I really noticed I was like, "Wow, he I really noticed I was like, "Wow, he needs so little to be blissful." And yet needs so little to be blissful." And yet needs so little to be blissful." And yet I know that if like push came to shove, I know that if like push came to shove, I know that if like push came to shove, like he's on my side, we've got each like he's on my side, we've got each like he's on my side, we've got each other's backs. Yeah. As opposed to, other's backs. Yeah. As opposed to, other's backs. Yeah. As opposed to, let's talk about a more human contract let's talk about a more human contract let's talk about a more human contract of like this picture or story of a of like this picture or story of a of like this picture or story of a couple that they have about themselves. couple that they have about themselves. couple that they have about themselves. Ride or die is something people say a Ride or die is something people say a Ride or die is something people say a lot nowadays. It's beautiful concept, lot nowadays. It's beautiful concept, lot nowadays. It's beautiful concept, right? loyalty, like you're in it right? loyalty, like you're in it right? loyalty, like you're in it together no matter what. But there's a together no matter what. But there's a together no matter what. But there's a calm version of that, like ride or die, calm version of that, like ride or die, calm version of that, like ride or die, and then there's like ride or die, like and then there's like ride or die, like and then there's like ride or die, like we'll take on anything. We'll we'll like we'll take on anything. We'll we'll like we'll take on anything. We'll we'll bring in chaos, we'll be the chaos, and bring in chaos, we'll be the chaos, and bring in chaos, we'll be the chaos, and we just don't quit. Mhm. Very different we just don't quit. Mhm. Very different we just don't quit. Mhm. Very different activation states. Oh, absolutely. And activation states. Oh, absolutely. And activation states. Oh, absolutely. And it took me 49 years to learn this. I see it took me 49 years to learn this. I see it took me 49 years to learn this. I see it in professional relationships, too. it in professional relationships, too. it in professional relationships, too. People want the exciting thing, the big People want the exciting thing, the big People want the exciting thing, the big build, and then they're like, it's the build, and then they're like, it's the build, and then they're like, it's the chaos of like, oh, this founder left and chaos of like, oh, this founder left and chaos of like, oh, this founder left and this person. And it's like well of this person. And it's like well of this person. And it's like well of course it started in drama it's going to course it started in drama it's going to course it started in drama it's going to end in drama. Does this some of this end in drama. Does this some of this end in drama. Does this some of this resonate? Yeah absolutely. I mean two resonate? Yeah absolutely. I mean two resonate? Yeah absolutely. I mean two things. One is that there's this concept things. One is that there's this concept things. One is that there's this concept of cherophobia which is um kind of fear of cherophobia which is um kind of fear of cherophobia which is um kind of fear of joy. And so many people um because of joy. And so many people um because of joy. And so many people um because they grew up in a way where whenever they grew up in a way where whenever they grew up in a way where whenever let's say the parent was reliable um in let's say the parent was reliable um in let's say the parent was reliable um in moments right like at certain times and moments right like at certain times and moments right like at certain times and then they were unreliable or they were then they were unreliable or they were then they were unreliable or they were really calm but then they would blow up really calm but then they would blow up really calm but then they would blow up and you never knew what was going to and you never knew what was going to and you never knew what was going to happen. It was like you were walking on happen. It was like you were walking on happen. It was like you were walking on eggshells the whole time, right? So eggshells the whole time, right? So eggshells the whole time, right? So you're very afraid of anything that goes you're very afraid of anything that goes you're very afraid of anything that goes well. You think the other shoe is going well. You think the other shoe is going well. You think the other shoe is going to drop like at any moment. So you're to drop like at any moment. So you're to drop like at any moment. So you're you don't want to pick something you're you don't want to pick something you're you don't want to pick something that and again outside of your that and again outside of your that and again outside of your awareness like you don't pick the calm awareness like you don't pick the calm awareness like you don't pick the calm partner because it feels too good like partner because it feels too good like partner because it feels too good like something's going to go wrong. So I'll something's going to go wrong. So I'll something's going to go wrong. So I'll pick the volatile partner because I'm pick the volatile partner because I'm pick the volatile partner because I'm prepared. I'm prepared for that I'm prepared. I'm prepared for that I'm prepared. I'm prepared for that level of volatility, right? And so level of volatility, right? And so level of volatility, right? And so people sabotage all the time whether people sabotage all the time whether people sabotage all the time whether it's about a job or a partner or you it's about a job or a partner or you it's about a job or a partner or you know whatever they want. They think I am know whatever they want. They think I am know whatever they want. They think I am not going to go there because it's not going to go there because it's not going to go there because it's not safe to feel joy because something will safe to feel joy because something will safe to feel joy because something will go wrong and I will be crushed and it go wrong and I will be crushed and it go wrong and I will be crushed and it will be harder to have the experience of will be harder to have the experience of will be harder to have the experience of joy and to have it crushed than to never joy and to have it crushed than to never joy and to have it crushed than to never feel the joy. So, there was a woman that feel the joy. So, there was a woman that feel the joy. So, there was a woman that I wrote about in my book who she just I wrote about in my book who she just I wrote about in my book who she just she wouldn't let herself feel any joy or she wouldn't let herself feel any joy or she wouldn't let herself feel any joy or get excited about a partner or excited get excited about a partner or excited get excited about a partner or excited about she wanted to be an artist and about she wanted to be an artist and about she wanted to be an artist and doing her art and things were going doing her art and things were going doing her art and things were going really well and then she she'd really well and then she she'd really well and then she she'd self-sabotage ra it's like I would you self-sabotage ra it's like I would you self-sabotage ra it's like I would you can't fire me I quit, right? It's like can't fire me I quit, right? It's like can't fire me I quit, right? It's like I'm going to create the bad thing to I'm going to create the bad thing to I'm going to create the bad thing to happen to myself because if it happens happen to myself because if it happens happen to myself because if it happens from the universe it's going to feel from the universe it's going to feel from the universe it's going to feel even worse. So, I think we need to kind even worse. So, I think we need to kind even worse. So, I think we need to kind of really be aware there are lots of really be aware there are lots of really be aware there are lots of people out there who are terrified of people out there who are terrified of people out there who are terrified of good things happening even though they good things happening even though they good things happening even though they say they desperately want good things to say they desperately want good things to say they desperately want good things to happen and so they make bad things happen and so they make bad things happen and so they make bad things happen or they make sure good things happen or they make sure good things happen or they make sure good things don't happen to them because it feels so don't happen to them because it feels so don't happen to them because it feels so uncomfortable to sit in that space of uncomfortable to sit in that space of uncomfortable to sit in that space of the other shoe's going to drop at any the other shoe's going to drop at any the other shoe's going to drop at any moment and I can't deal with that. But moment and I can't deal with that. But moment and I can't deal with that. But the other thing I want to say about this the other thing I want to say about this the other thing I want to say about this slow burn type of thing is there this slow burn type of thing is there this slow burn type of thing is there was a study that was done that I wrote was a study that was done that I wrote was a study that was done that I wrote about in one of my books where they did about in one of my books where they did about in one of my books where they did a longitudinal study and they looked at a longitudinal study and they looked at a longitudinal study and they looked at people over 20 years and they followed people over 20 years and they followed people over 20 years and they followed up with them every 5 years from the up with them every 5 years from the up with them every 5 years from the first date to where they are later and first date to where they are later and first date to where they are later and they had them instead of like they had them instead of like they had them instead of like historically saying you know when you historically saying you know when you historically saying you know when you ask people in relationships and you say ask people in relationships and you say ask people in relationships and you say what was it like when you first met and what was it like when you first met and what was it like when you first met and they'll tell you some story but it's they'll tell you some story but it's they'll tell you some story but it's retrospective. It's not like you weren't retrospective. It's not like you weren't retrospective. It's not like you weren't there at the time. you're sort of there at the time. you're sort of there at the time. you're sort of telling it through the lens of where you telling it through the lens of where you telling it through the lens of where you are now. What was great about this study are now. What was great about this study are now. What was great about this study was people wrote down at the time here's was people wrote down at the time here's was people wrote down at the time here's what here's how I feel. So people who what here's how I feel. So people who what here's how I feel. So people who were, let's say, got married and were were, let's say, got married and were were, let's say, got married and were happy would say almost unilaterally like happy would say almost unilaterally like happy would say almost unilaterally like there was so much chemistry. We had such there was so much chemistry. We had such there was so much chemistry. We had such a good time on the first date. It was a good time on the first date. It was a good time on the first date. It was amazing. Whereas at the time they might amazing. Whereas at the time they might amazing. Whereas at the time they might have said like, "Yeah, it was okay. have said like, "Yeah, it was okay. have said like, "Yeah, it was okay. Maybe I'll see this person again. Fine." Maybe I'll see this person again. Fine." Maybe I'll see this person again. Fine." Like no butterflies or you know, Like no butterflies or you know, Like no butterflies or you know, whatever. But that's not the story whatever. But that's not the story whatever. But that's not the story they're telling themselves about it. Now they're telling themselves about it. Now they're telling themselves about it. Now people who either are unhappily together people who either are unhappily together people who either are unhappily together or no longer together would say, "Yeah, or no longer together would say, "Yeah, or no longer together would say, "Yeah, there was nothing there. There was no there was nothing there. There was no there was nothing there. There was no chemistry. I didn't really like the chemistry. I didn't really like the chemistry. I didn't really like the person." By the time they might have person." By the time they might have person." By the time they might have said like, "Wow, I'm really interested said like, "Wow, I'm really interested said like, "Wow, I'm really interested in this person. It was like we had so in this person. It was like we had so in this person. It was like we had so much chemistry." So we change our much chemistry." So we change our much chemistry." So we change our stories based on our present experience. stories based on our present experience. stories based on our present experience. And we think we're telling an accurate And we think we're telling an accurate And we think we're telling an accurate version of what actually happened. And version of what actually happened. And version of what actually happened. And the reason I bring this up is because the reason I bring this up is because the reason I bring this up is because since people who are sort of happy since people who are sort of happy since people who are sort of happy couples tell these stories to other couples tell these stories to other couples tell these stories to other people, we think in our culture that if people, we think in our culture that if people, we think in our culture that if you go on a first date and you don't you go on a first date and you don't you go on a first date and you don't have that immediate spark that it's not have that immediate spark that it's not have that immediate spark that it's not worth it, like don't go on a second worth it, like don't go on a second worth it, like don't go on a second date. And what happens is sometimes a date. And what happens is sometimes a date. And what happens is sometimes a lot of the time when you have that lot of the time when you have that lot of the time when you have that immediate spark, it doesn't mean what immediate spark, it doesn't mean what immediate spark, it doesn't mean what you think it means. It's not that a you think it means. It's not that a you think it means. It's not that a spark is bad. It means that you really spark is bad. It means that you really spark is bad. It means that you really need to see what it means. And it's not need to see what it means. And it's not need to see what it means. And it's not that not having a spark is bad. If you that not having a spark is bad. If you that not having a spark is bad. If you go on a date and you feel like I it was go on a date and you feel like I it was go on a date and you feel like I it was a like nice conversation, I had a good a like nice conversation, I had a good a like nice conversation, I had a good enough time. Go spend another hour with enough time. Go spend another hour with enough time. Go spend another hour with this person. Just go on another date this person. Just go on another date this person. Just go on another date with them and see what happens. But we with them and see what happens. But we with them and see what happens. But we don't do that because we have this don't do that because we have this don't do that because we have this illusion that you can just go back on an illusion that you can just go back on an illusion that you can just go back on an app or there's so many people out there. app or there's so many people out there. app or there's so many people out there. And so we try to optimize as opposed to And so we try to optimize as opposed to And so we try to optimize as opposed to saying, "What would it be like? I had a saying, "What would it be like? I had a saying, "What would it be like? I had a I had I felt good when I was with this I had I felt good when I was with this I had I felt good when I was with this person. And I didn't feel that rush, but person. And I didn't feel that rush, but person. And I didn't feel that rush, but I felt pretty good. So, I think I'll go I felt pretty good. So, I think I'll go I felt pretty good. So, I think I'll go see what that's like again. And that see what that's like again. And that see what that's like again. And that should be our bar. Not like, do I feel should be our bar. Not like, do I feel should be our bar. Not like, do I feel this rush? Do I feel like this is this rush? Do I feel like this is this rush? Do I feel like this is amazing? But did I have a good enough amazing? But did I have a good enough amazing? But did I have a good enough time? Sure, let me go see what that's time? Sure, let me go see what that's time? Sure, let me go see what that's like. Yeah, one certainly wouldn't want to be Yeah, one certainly wouldn't want to be Yeah, one certainly wouldn't want to be bored in somebody else's presence. Um, bored in somebody else's presence. Um, bored in somebody else's presence. Um, but calm seems like a good uh touch but calm seems like a good uh touch but calm seems like a good uh touch point. Yes. to look for as opposed to point. Yes. to look for as opposed to point. Yes. to look for as opposed to this activation state. You know, I maybe this activation state. You know, I maybe this activation state. You know, I maybe it's the neurobiologist in me and I'm it's the neurobiologist in me and I'm it's the neurobiologist in me and I'm guilty of also working on this autonomic guilty of also working on this autonomic guilty of also working on this autonomic arousal thing for so many years. This arousal thing for so many years. This arousal thing for so many years. This seessaw in us of being like upstates seessaw in us of being like upstates seessaw in us of being like upstates that can either be stress or bliss and that can either be stress or bliss and that can either be stress or bliss and down states which can either be down states which can either be down states which can either be depression and fatigue or can just be depression and fatigue or can just be depression and fatigue or can just be like pleasant relaxation. Like the label like pleasant relaxation. Like the label like pleasant relaxation. Like the label becomes critical, right? Alert and becomes critical, right? Alert and becomes critical, right? Alert and stressed versus alert and elated is very stressed versus alert and elated is very stressed versus alert and elated is very different. Same level of alertness, two different. Same level of alertness, two different. Same level of alertness, two very different things. same, you know, very different things. same, you know, very different things. same, you know, depressed versus peaceful when relaxed, depressed versus peaceful when relaxed, depressed versus peaceful when relaxed, you know, um and looking for or you know, um and looking for or you know, um and looking for or trying to figure out what sorts of trying to figure out what sorts of trying to figure out what sorts of interactions um bring about that interactions um bring about that interactions um bring about that kind of even seesaw might be best. Not kind of even seesaw might be best. Not kind of even seesaw might be best. Not one or the other. Maybe a little airing one or the other. Maybe a little airing one or the other. Maybe a little airing even a little bit more towards peace. even a little bit more towards peace. even a little bit more towards peace. Yes. Um and when I see couples who come Yes. Um and when I see couples who come Yes. Um and when I see couples who come in and they've been married for a long in and they've been married for a long in and they've been married for a long time now and they say, you know, well, time now and they say, you know, well, time now and they say, you know, well, I'll say the what is the origin story? I'll say the what is the origin story? I'll say the what is the origin story? How did you meet? What was that like? How did you meet? What was that like? How did you meet? What was that like? what were you attracted to in the other what were you attracted to in the other what were you attracted to in the other person? And so often I'll hear words person? And so often I'll hear words person? And so often I'll hear words like it was so exciting. I found this like it was so exciting. I found this like it was so exciting. I found this person so exciting. Um and it's like person so exciting. Um and it's like person so exciting. Um and it's like that's the very thing that what you that's the very thing that what you that's the very thing that what you thought was excitement was actually thought was excitement was actually thought was excitement was actually volatility or was actually sort of volatility or was actually sort of volatility or was actually sort of anxiety as opposed to that sense of you anxiety as opposed to that sense of you anxiety as opposed to that sense of you can be calm and feel excited about the can be calm and feel excited about the can be calm and feel excited about the other person. So we're talking about a other person. So we're talking about a other person. So we're talking about a neurological state, right? your nervous neurological state, right? your nervous neurological state, right? your nervous system and then we're talking about your system and then we're talking about your system and then we're talking about your interpretation of what that means. So interpretation of what that means. So interpretation of what that means. So sometimes calmness is exciting. sometimes calmness is exciting. sometimes calmness is exciting. Sometimes excitement is Sometimes excitement is Sometimes excitement is anxietyprovoking. And so you have to be anxietyprovoking. And so you have to be anxietyprovoking. And so you have to be able to tell the difference between the able to tell the difference between the able to tell the difference between the two. Yeah. I'll just say yes and yes to two. Yeah. I'll just say yes and yes to two. Yeah. I'll just say yes and yes to both those statements. I think um I both those statements. I think um I both those statements. I think um I think peace is it's not everything but think peace is it's not everything but think peace is it's not everything but it's um it's necessary but not it's um it's necessary but not it's um it's necessary but not sufficient as we say. If I may, I'd like sufficient as we say. If I may, I'd like sufficient as we say. If I may, I'd like to get um kind of uh a little deep and to get um kind of uh a little deep and to get um kind of uh a little deep and abstract along this dimension of abstract along this dimension of abstract along this dimension of um why um why um why people are so much more willing to stay people are so much more willing to stay people are so much more willing to stay in a state that doesn't feel good versus in a state that doesn't feel good versus in a state that doesn't feel good versus risk um the unknown and the opportunity risk um the unknown and the opportunity risk um the unknown and the opportunity to win in relationship, in life, in to win in relationship, in life, in to win in relationship, in life, in career, etc. because I do I do believe career, etc. because I do I do believe career, etc. because I do I do believe that I happen to be reading it's a hard that I happen to be reading it's a hard that I happen to be reading it's a hard book a genuinely difficult book but I'm book a genuinely difficult book but I'm book a genuinely difficult book but I'm really enjoying it um I'm reading Erns really enjoying it um I'm reading Erns really enjoying it um I'm reading Erns Becker's the denial of death highly Becker's the denial of death highly Becker's the denial of death highly recommend it to everyone a Pulitzer recommend it to everyone a Pulitzer recommend it to everyone a Pulitzer after all you don't need my endorsement after all you don't need my endorsement after all you don't need my endorsement and you know I mean the central and you know I mean the central and you know I mean the central thesis of the book right is that we're a thesis of the book right is that we're a thesis of the book right is that we're a weird species because we understand that weird species because we understand that weird species because we understand that we're going to die at some point we're going to die at some point we're going to die at some point we're all going to die and that they that all going to die and that they that all going to die and that they that humans go through these very complicated humans go through these very complicated humans go through these very complicated gymnastics related the ego and symbols gymnastics related the ego and symbols gymnastics related the ego and symbols and we create notions of meaning and we create notions of meaning and we create notions of meaning and story to try and distract us basically story to try and distract us basically story to try and distract us basically from this really scary reality. It's from this really scary reality. It's from this really scary reality. It's terrifying, right? It's terrifying. terrifying, right? It's terrifying. terrifying, right? It's terrifying. Nobody really understands or knows what Nobody really understands or knows what Nobody really understands or knows what happens next. We can't be sure. happens next. We can't be sure. happens next. We can't be sure. And I have this idea in mind as you're And I have this idea in mind as you're And I have this idea in mind as you're telling me that indeed people are telling me that indeed people are telling me that indeed people are willing to stay in a set of willing to stay in a set of willing to stay in a set of circumstances that don't work for them, circumstances that don't work for them, circumstances that don't work for them, even ruminating on the mistakes that got even ruminating on the mistakes that got even ruminating on the mistakes that got them there for a very long time them there for a very long time them there for a very long time willingly when all they need to do is willingly when all they need to do is willingly when all they need to do is make some new choices that they're fully make some new choices that they're fully make some new choices that they're fully capable of making. And I wonder whether capable of making. And I wonder whether capable of making. And I wonder whether or not it's or not it's or not it's because they're alive now. They know because they're alive now. They know because they're alive now. They know they're quote unquote safe now. Like they're quote unquote safe now. Like they're quote unquote safe now. Like they're not dead. they're not dead. they're not dead. I mean, the number of people I know who I mean, the number of people I know who I mean, the number of people I know who stayed in circumstances that didn't work stayed in circumstances that didn't work stayed in circumstances that didn't work for them for so long professionally, for them for so long professionally, for them for so long professionally, relationally, it's like, how do they do relationally, it's like, how do they do relationally, it's like, how do they do that? And I understand sometimes there's that? And I understand sometimes there's that? And I understand sometimes there's kids, sometimes there's financial kids, sometimes there's financial kids, sometimes there's financial issues, but there's it's always the case issues, but there's it's always the case issues, but there's it's always the case that um they've eventually gotten out, that um they've eventually gotten out, that um they've eventually gotten out, thank goodness, and they always say, "I thank goodness, and they always say, "I thank goodness, and they always say, "I wish I' I had done it so much earlier." wish I' I had done it so much earlier." wish I' I had done it so much earlier." And I wonder whether or not as a And I wonder whether or not as a And I wonder whether or not as a biological and psychological being, we biological and psychological being, we biological and psychological being, we do this because we're thinking, we do this because we're thinking, we do this because we're thinking, "Well, I'm alive now. Oh, I'm breathing "Well, I'm alive now. Oh, I'm breathing "Well, I'm alive now. Oh, I'm breathing now. I'm quote unquote safe now, but I now. I'm quote unquote safe now, but I now. I'm quote unquote safe now, but I don't know what's going to happen if I don't know what's going to happen if I don't know what's going to happen if I make this other choice. Like, it defies make this other choice. Like, it defies make this other choice. Like, it defies logic. But at the at the same time, if logic. But at the at the same time, if logic. But at the at the same time, if one just assumes that our like our one just assumes that our like our one just assumes that our like our biggest fear deep down in our biggest fear deep down in our biggest fear deep down in our unconscious is fear of death, we'll unconscious is fear of death, we'll unconscious is fear of death, we'll pretty much stay anywhere where we're pretty much stay anywhere where we're pretty much stay anywhere where we're continuing to be alive and not like in continuing to be alive and not like in continuing to be alive and not like in the moment of fearing death. Sorry to the moment of fearing death. Sorry to the moment of fearing death. Sorry to get a little philosophical here, but get a little philosophical here, but get a little philosophical here, but I think this unconscious thing we make, I think this unconscious thing we make, I think this unconscious thing we make, a lot has been made of it. the word a lot has been made of it. the word a lot has been made of it. the word means okay well we don't it's happening means okay well we don't it's happening means okay well we don't it's happening but we don't know what's happening but we don't know what's happening but we don't know what's happening but like what are we really afraid of and I like what are we really afraid of and I like what are we really afraid of and I do think ultimately we're all just I do think ultimately we're all just I do think ultimately we're all just really afraid of death I don't think really afraid of death I don't think really afraid of death I don't think we're afraid of death I think we're afraid of death I think we're afraid of death I think we're afraid of not having lived so what I afraid of not having lived so what I afraid of not having lived so what I mean by that is I think we deny death mean by that is I think we deny death mean by that is I think we deny death we're all sort of death deniers like we we're all sort of death deniers like we we're all sort of death deniers like we know it's out there somewhere but we know it's out there somewhere but we know it's out there somewhere but we don't know when or how it's going to don't know when or how it's going to don't know when or how it's going to happen and so we just pretend because happen and so we just pretend because happen and so we just pretend because there's no real no pun intended but there's no real no pun intended but there's no real no pun intended but deadline right and so we just think sort deadline right and so we just think sort deadline right and so we just think sort of we know intellectually we don't have of we know intellectually we don't have of we know intellectually we don't have forever, but we kind of think we do. And forever, but we kind of think we do. And forever, but we kind of think we do. And so when you think about sort of the so when you think about sort of the so when you think about sort of the stages of psychosocial development, you stages of psychosocial development, you stages of psychosocial development, you know, you start with um you know, these know, you start with um you know, these know, you start with um you know, these conflicts that you have to work these conflicts that you have to work these conflicts that you have to work through at every stage of life. And sort through at every stage of life. And sort through at every stage of life. And sort of the one where you're sort of the of the one where you're sort of the of the one where you're sort of the last stage is integrity versus despair. last stage is integrity versus despair. last stage is integrity versus despair. So integrity is if you have lived a life So integrity is if you have lived a life So integrity is if you have lived a life where you don't have a lot of regret. where you don't have a lot of regret. where you don't have a lot of regret. You feel like you lived the kind of life You feel like you lived the kind of life You feel like you lived the kind of life that you wanted. You accomplished the that you wanted. You accomplished the that you wanted. You accomplished the things that you wanted to accomplish for things that you wanted to accomplish for things that you wanted to accomplish for the most part. Whether that's the most part. Whether that's the most part. Whether that's relationally, professionally, some relationally, professionally, some relationally, professionally, some combination there. Um you have a combination there. Um you have a combination there. Um you have a sense of integrity at the end of your sense of integrity at the end of your sense of integrity at the end of your life. If you didn't, you have this sense life. If you didn't, you have this sense life. If you didn't, you have this sense of despair. People who work through that of despair. People who work through that of despair. People who work through that and have integrity are not afraid of and have integrity are not afraid of and have integrity are not afraid of death. The people who are in despair are death. The people who are in despair are death. The people who are in despair are very afraid of death because they have very afraid of death because they have very afraid of death because they have so many regrets and they can't go back. so many regrets and they can't go back. so many regrets and they can't go back. You don't get a redo. And so I like to You don't get a redo. And so I like to You don't get a redo. And so I like to in psychotherapy really remind people in psychotherapy really remind people in psychotherapy really remind people that they need to keep death awareness that they need to keep death awareness that they need to keep death awareness sitting on one shoulder. Not to be sitting on one shoulder. Not to be sitting on one shoulder. Not to be morbid but to actually make you live morbid but to actually make you live morbid but to actually make you live more fully. If you are aware of death, more fully. If you are aware of death, more fully. If you are aware of death, if you really look death right in the if you really look death right in the if you really look death right in the eye, you have more intentionality. When eye, you have more intentionality. When eye, you have more intentionality. When you wake up every day, you say, "I don't you wake up every day, you say, "I don't you wake up every day, you say, "I don't have forever." So, it's not like have forever." So, it's not like have forever." So, it's not like sometime in the future I might die. It's sometime in the future I might die. It's sometime in the future I might die. It's like you could die today, tomorrow you, like you could die today, tomorrow you, like you could die today, tomorrow you, you know, anything could happen. Um and you know, anything could happen. Um and you know, anything could happen. Um and I think you know when I saw I write and I think you know when I saw I write and I think you know when I saw I write about this in my book where I was seeing about this in my book where I was seeing about this in my book where I was seeing this woman who was in her early 30s and this woman who was in her early 30s and this woman who was in her early 30s and she was diagnosed with cancer and she was diagnosed with cancer and she was diagnosed with cancer and everyone thought she was going to be everyone thought she was going to be everyone thought she was going to be fine and then there was this sort of fine and then there was this sort of fine and then there was this sort of rare recurrence and um and she was newly rare recurrence and um and she was newly rare recurrence and um and she was newly married and her whole life was like married and her whole life was like married and her whole life was like turned upside down and she really made turned upside down and she really made turned upside down and she really made me as the therapist look death in the me as the therapist look death in the me as the therapist look death in the eye in that way. You know how like you eye in that way. You know how like you eye in that way. You know how like you want to say something like, you know, want to say something like, you know, want to say something like, you know, she was talking about the things that she was talking about the things that she was talking about the things that people would say to her because we all people would say to her because we all people would say to her because we all have this death denial and they would have this death denial and they would have this death denial and they would say, "Did you get a second opinion?" as say, "Did you get a second opinion?" as say, "Did you get a second opinion?" as if no, she's not going to get a second if no, she's not going to get a second if no, she's not going to get a second opinion about whether she's going to opinion about whether she's going to opinion about whether she's going to die, right? Um, you know, they'll say die, right? Um, you know, they'll say die, right? Um, you know, they'll say things like, "Well, these experimental things like, "Well, these experimental things like, "Well, these experimental treatments might work." You know, treatments might work." You know, treatments might work." You know, anything to deny the reality that she anything to deny the reality that she anything to deny the reality that she was going to die and very soon. And was going to die and very soon. And was going to die and very soon. And nobody wanted to sit with her in that. nobody wanted to sit with her in that. nobody wanted to sit with her in that. And it was my job to do that. even her And it was my job to do that. even her And it was my job to do that. even her husband had trouble sort of sitting husband had trouble sort of sitting husband had trouble sort of sitting with her in that in the beginning, with her in that in the beginning, with her in that in the beginning, right? Um and there was this one right? Um and there was this one right? Um and there was this one moment, this beautiful moment between moment, this beautiful moment between moment, this beautiful moment between them that she came in and told me about them that she came in and told me about them that she came in and told me about where he was like, you know, uh doing where he was like, you know, uh doing where he was like, you know, uh doing something and trying to relax and he something and trying to relax and he something and trying to relax and he was a great like incredibly supportive was a great like incredibly supportive was a great like incredibly supportive of her. And she came in and said, "Hey, of her. And she came in and said, "Hey, of her. And she came in and said, "Hey, there's this thing and I read there's this thing and I read there's this thing and I read about this and I want to talk to you about this and I want to talk to you about this and I want to talk to you about this." and he said like, about this." and he said like, about this." and he said like, "Can't we just have one night off from "Can't we just have one night off from "Can't we just have one night off from cancer?" And she said, "I don't get any cancer?" And she said, "I don't get any cancer?" And she said, "I don't get any nights off from cancer. There's no nights off from cancer. There's no nights off from cancer. There's no nights off." Right? And I understand nights off." Right? And I understand nights off." Right? And I understand both perspectives on that. But it both perspectives on that. But it both perspectives on that. But it brought up this beautiful conversation brought up this beautiful conversation brought up this beautiful conversation between them that really helped them to between them that really helped them to between them that really helped them to think about how much do we let death in think about how much do we let death in think about how much do we let death in and how much do we let sort of life or and how much do we let sort of life or and how much do we let sort of life or what whatever's left in and how do we what whatever's left in and how do we what whatever's left in and how do we let death inform the aliveness that we let death inform the aliveness that we let death inform the aliveness that we still have. So I think it's really still have. So I think it's really still have. So I think it's really important that you know when why do important that you know when why do important that you know when why do people stay in relationships too long? people stay in relationships too long? people stay in relationships too long? Why did they stay in jobs too long? Why did they stay in jobs too long? Why did they stay in jobs too long? Why do they make choices that are not do they make choices that are not do they make choices that are not serving them and that they will later serving them and that they will later serving them and that they will later regret? It's because they are in regret? It's because they are in regret? It's because they are in full-blown death denial. And I think full-blown death denial. And I think full-blown death denial. And I think when people really acknowledge their when people really acknowledge their when people really acknowledge their mortality, um it's one of the most mortality, um it's one of the most mortality, um it's one of the most healthy, invigorating things that they healthy, invigorating things that they healthy, invigorating things that they can bring into their lives. When people can bring into their lives. When people can bring into their lives. When people say, "What is the opposite of say, "What is the opposite of say, "What is the opposite of depression?" It's not happiness. It's depression?" It's not happiness. It's depression?" It's not happiness. It's vitality. And where do we get vitality? from And where do we get vitality? from And where do we get vitality? from knowing that we have a limited time here knowing that we have a limited time here knowing that we have a limited time here and we get to choose how we spend it. I and we get to choose how we spend it. I and we get to choose how we spend it. I agree 100%. Um this is something I think agree 100%. Um this is something I think agree 100%. Um this is something I think about constantly although I've never about constantly although I've never about constantly although I've never looked at it through the lens that you looked at it through the lens that you looked at it through the lens that you just presented it and I love uh what I just presented it and I love uh what I just presented it and I love uh what I just learned from you which is just learned from you which is just learned from you which is um that vitality is the is the state um that vitality is the is the state um that vitality is the is the state the state of being vitality is so the state of being vitality is so the state of being vitality is so key. I um I think about death um key. I um I think about death um key. I um I think about death um probably more than I should um because probably more than I should um because probably more than I should um because for a kid who wasn't from the inner city for a kid who wasn't from the inner city for a kid who wasn't from the inner city or in the military, I've just had a lot or in the military, I've just had a lot or in the military, I've just had a lot of friends die, a lot of suicides, a lot of friends die, a lot of suicides, a lot of friends die, a lot of suicides, a lot of drug stuff unfortunately and all of drug stuff unfortunately and all of drug stuff unfortunately and all three of my scientific adviserss, three of my scientific adviserss, three of my scientific adviserss, suicide, cancer, cancer. I was very suicide, cancer, cancer. I was very suicide, cancer, cancer. I was very close with all of them and uh only I got close with all of them and uh only I got close with all of them and uh only I got to say goodbye to the second one. That to say goodbye to the second one. That to say goodbye to the second one. That was a rough conversation. anyone that's was a rough conversation. anyone that's was a rough conversation. anyone that's ever had a conversation with somebody ever had a conversation with somebody ever had a conversation with somebody where it's a goodbye conversation. I had where it's a goodbye conversation. I had where it's a goodbye conversation. I had to do the like this is it and that you to do the like this is it and that you to do the like this is it and that you know and it was brutal but I'm you know and it was brutal but I'm you know and it was brutal but I'm you know I don't want to well up I've cried I don't want to well up I've cried I don't want to well up I've cried before on this podcast. I don't feel before on this podcast. I don't feel before on this podcast. I don't feel like doing it today. I don't have like doing it today. I don't have like doing it today. I don't have problem crying in uh from time to time problem crying in uh from time to time problem crying in uh from time to time on camera but I don't want the this the on camera but I don't want the this the on camera but I don't want the this the uh plotline here to shift too much. But uh plotline here to shift too much. But uh plotline here to shift too much. But I started after that conversation to I started after that conversation to I started after that conversation to adopt a practice. I do this yoga nidra adopt a practice. I do this yoga nidra adopt a practice. I do this yoga nidra non-sleep deep breath thing every day uh non-sleep deep breath thing every day uh non-sleep deep breath thing every day uh for about 10 to 30 minutes and there's for about 10 to 30 minutes and there's for about 10 to 30 minutes and there's this moment right at the beginning this moment right at the beginning this moment right at the beginning you're supposed to take a deep breath you're supposed to take a deep breath you're supposed to take a deep breath and then a long exhale to relax your and then a long exhale to relax your and then a long exhale to relax your body and then you go into listening to body and then you go into listening to body and then you go into listening to the script and um ever since that the script and um ever since that the script and um ever since that conversation I've insisted on uh doing conversation I've insisted on uh doing conversation I've insisted on uh doing that and as I do it I remind myself this that and as I do it I remind myself this that and as I do it I remind myself this is if I'm awake or if it's not an is if I'm awake or if it's not an is if I'm awake or if it's not an accident that happens very fast this is accident that happens very fast this is accident that happens very fast this is probably what it's going to feel like to probably what it's going to feel like to probably what it's going to feel like to like die. And so just trying to like I'm like die. And so just trying to like I'm like die. And so just trying to like I'm so I like this idea of readying myself so I like this idea of readying myself so I like this idea of readying myself for death every day. Um as a means to for death every day. Um as a means to for death every day. Um as a means to access what you're talking about, which access what you're talking about, which access what you're talking about, which is a trying to live better, right? is a trying to live better, right? is a trying to live better, right? Again, not to be morbid, just try to Again, not to be morbid, just try to Again, not to be morbid, just try to like, yes, I'm like a biological vessel. like, yes, I'm like a biological vessel. like, yes, I'm like a biological vessel. At some point, my body, my brain, or At some point, my body, my brain, or At some point, my body, my brain, or both will just give out or I'll bullet both will just give out or I'll bullet both will just give out or I'll bullet buster cancer is kind of what I always buster cancer is kind of what I always buster cancer is kind of what I always say. Something will take me out and say. Something will take me out and say. Something will take me out and there'll be this final there'll be this final there'll be this final and that's it. And the closer that I and that's it. And the closer that I and that's it. And the closer that I feel like that we can get to that feel like that we can get to that feel like that we can get to that understanding and be like, "Okay, super understanding and be like, "Okay, super understanding and be like, "Okay, super scary and I'm not there now, so I'm scary and I'm not there now, so I'm scary and I'm not there now, so I'm going to go back into the world and do going to go back into the world and do going to go back into the world and do the best I can." And it doesn't have to the best I can." And it doesn't have to the best I can." And it doesn't have to be scary. It sounds like you're aiming be scary. It sounds like you're aiming be scary. It sounds like you're aiming toward an acceptance of death, which is toward an acceptance of death, which is toward an acceptance of death, which is I think the way that we get I think the way that we get I think the way that we get motivated to live. So it's not fear of motivated to live. So it's not fear of motivated to live. So it's not fear of death. That's not what I'm suggesting at death. That's not what I'm suggesting at death. That's not what I'm suggesting at all. I don't think we should be afraid all. I don't think we should be afraid all. I don't think we should be afraid of death. I think we should say we get of death. I think we should say we get of death. I think we should say we get this precious time however long we get this precious time however long we get this precious time however long we get everybody gets their own amount of time everybody gets their own amount of time everybody gets their own amount of time on you know in this life and so it's an on you know in this life and so it's an on you know in this life and so it's an acceptance of that it's not a fear of acceptance of that it's not a fear of acceptance of that it's not a fear of that and I think about how when that and I think about how when that and I think about how when people are afraid of death they do people are afraid of death they do people are afraid of death they do things that are counterproductive like a things that are counterproductive like a things that are counterproductive like a lot of affairs happen in the wake of a lot of affairs happen in the wake of a lot of affairs happen in the wake of a death so a parent dies and somebody then death so a parent dies and somebody then death so a parent dies and somebody then feels like oh I don't have a lot of time feels like oh I don't have a lot of time feels like oh I don't have a lot of time left am I really happy in this left am I really happy in this left am I really happy in this relationship am I really alive am I relationship am I really alive am I relationship am I really alive am I really living and then they go and do really living and then they go and do really living and then they go and do something like have an affair because something like have an affair because something like have an affair because they want that sense of vitality because they want that sense of vitality because they want that sense of vitality because they're doing it out of fear not out of they're doing it out of fear not out of they're doing it out of fear not out of oh I accept that death is a part of our oh I accept that death is a part of our oh I accept that death is a part of our existence and if I'm not feeling alive existence and if I'm not feeling alive existence and if I'm not feeling alive is it because of my relationship or my is it because of my relationship or my is it because of my relationship or my marriage or is it because I am not marriage or is it because I am not marriage or is it because I am not actively doing things in my life to actively doing things in my life to actively doing things in my life to create that sense of vitality. create that sense of vitality. create that sense of vitality. So very often in the wake of some kind So very often in the wake of some kind So very often in the wake of some kind of brush with death, like some kind of brush with death, like some kind of brush with death, like some kind of closeness, like maybe you had a brush closeness, like maybe you had a brush closeness, like maybe you had a brush with death or maybe a parent died or with death or maybe a parent died or with death or maybe a parent died or someone close to you died or a friend or someone close to you died or a friend or someone close to you died or a friend or a sibling. So often people act out and a sibling. So often people act out and a sibling. So often people act out and they do these things to create this they do these things to create this they do these things to create this sense of I'm sense of I'm sense of I'm alive. Um as opposed to saying, wait, alive. Um as opposed to saying, wait, alive. Um as opposed to saying, wait, what do I need to look at in my life what do I need to look at in my life what do I need to look at in my life that will make me feel more alive that will make me feel more alive that will make me feel more alive that is not self-sabotaging? is not self-sabotaging? is not self-sabotaging? I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also contains adaptogens. I started also contains adaptogens. I started also contains adaptogens. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I even knew what a podcast was. I even knew what a podcast was. I even knew what a podcast was. I started taking it and I still take it started taking it and I still take it started taking it and I still take it every single day because it ensures that every single day because it ensures that every single day because it ensures that I meet my quota for daily vitamins and I meet my quota for daily vitamins and I meet my quota for daily vitamins and minerals and it helps make sure that I minerals and it helps make sure that I minerals and it helps make sure that I get enough prebiotics and probiotics to get enough prebiotics and probiotics to get enough prebiotics and probiotics to support my gut health. Over the past 10 support my gut health. Over the past 10 support my gut health. Over the past 10 years, gut health has emerged as years, gut health has emerged as years, gut health has emerged as something that we realize is important something that we realize is important something that we realize is important not only for the health of our not only for the health of our not only for the health of our digestion, but also for our immune digestion, but also for our immune digestion, but also for our immune system and for the production of system and for the production of system and for the production of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, things like dopamine and serotonin. In things like dopamine and serotonin. In things like dopamine and serotonin. In other words, gut health is critical for other words, gut health is critical for other words, gut health is critical for proper brain function. Now, of course, I proper brain function. Now, of course, I proper brain function. Now, of course, I strive to eat healthy whole foods from strive to eat healthy whole foods from strive to eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed sources for the majority of unprocessed sources for the majority of unprocessed sources for the majority of my nutritional intake, but there are a my nutritional intake, but there are a my nutritional intake, but there are a number of things in AG1, including number of things in AG1, including number of things in AG1, including specific micronutrients that are hard or specific micronutrients that are hard or specific micronutrients that are hard or impossible to get from whole foods. So impossible to get from whole foods. So impossible to get from whole foods. So by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins and minerals that I need along with the and minerals that I need along with the and minerals that I need along with the probiotics and prebiotics for gut health probiotics and prebiotics for gut health probiotics and prebiotics for gut health and in turn brain and immune system and in turn brain and immune system and in turn brain and immune system health and the adaptogens and critical health and the adaptogens and critical health and the adaptogens and critical micronutrients that are essential for micronutrients that are essential for micronutrients that are essential for all organs and tissues of the body. So all organs and tissues of the body. So all organs and tissues of the body. So anytime somebody asks me if they were to anytime somebody asks me if they were to anytime somebody asks me if they were to only take one supplement what that only take one supplement what that only take one supplement what that supplement should be, I always say AG1 supplement should be, I always say AG1 supplement should be, I always say AG1 because AG1 supports so many different because AG1 supports so many different because AG1 supports so many different systems in the brain and body that systems in the brain and body that systems in the brain and body that relate to our mental health, physical relate to our mental health, physical relate to our mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to drinka1.com/huberman. For this month drinka1.com/huberman. For this month drinka1.com/huberman. For this month only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before in this K2. As I've highlighted before in this K2. As I've highlighted before in this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 have been shown to help with plus K2 have been shown to help with plus K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to heart health and healthy hormone heart health and healthy hormone heart health and healthy hormone production, and much more. Again, that's production, and much more. Again, that's production, and much more. Again, that's drinkaga1.com/huberman to get the free 1 drinkaga1.com/huberman to get the free 1 drinkaga1.com/huberman to get the free 1 month supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a month supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a month supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also subscription. Today's episode is also subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a brought to us by David. David makes a brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from and 75% of its calories come from and 75% of its calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the protein. This is 50% higher than the protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein next closest protein bar. David protein next closest protein bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the bars also taste amazing. Even the bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is texture is amazing. My favorite bar is texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough. But the chocolate chip cookie dough. But the chocolate chip cookie dough. But then again, I also like the new then again, I also like the new then again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all like all the flavors a lot. They're all like all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per day. And it allows me to do so without day. And it allows me to do so without day. And it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious, and given They're incredibly delicious, and given They're incredibly delicious, and given that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Gosh, so much davidprotein.com/huberman. Gosh, so much davidprotein.com/huberman. Gosh, so much to go into here. Um, this thing about to go into here. Um, this thing about to go into here. Um, this thing about vitality is so key. A friend recently vitality is so key. A friend recently vitality is so key. A friend recently said to me something. He I was talking said to me something. He I was talking said to me something. He I was talking about how gosh, there's like these about how gosh, there's like these about how gosh, there's like these certain interactions in life that are certain interactions in life that are certain interactions in life that are like uh I feel like they like pull me like uh I feel like they like pull me like uh I feel like they like pull me in. I don't like them and then it just in. I don't like them and then it just in. I don't like them and then it just like really takes away from what I know like really takes away from what I know like really takes away from what I know I should be doing. And but um and he I should be doing. And but um and he I should be doing. And but um and he said, "You know, you have to do things said, "You know, you have to do things said, "You know, you have to do things that energize you." Mhm. And immediately that energize you." Mhm. And immediately that energize you." Mhm. And immediately I thought, "Yes, and be very careful I thought, "Yes, and be very careful I thought, "Yes, and be very careful about the things that activate us." Like about the things that activate us." Like about the things that activate us." Like there's this difference between there's this difference between there's this difference between activation and being activated activation and being activated activation and being activated versus being energized. I mean, it's a versus being energized. I mean, it's a versus being energized. I mean, it's a little bit semantic, right? But I feel little bit semantic, right? But I feel little bit semantic, right? But I feel like something that energizes me is like something that energizes me is like something that energizes me is like I love seeopods. I used to have I love seeopods. I used to have I love seeopods. I used to have cuttlefish in my lab. I love cuttlefish in my lab. I love cuttlefish in my lab. I love octopuses. And by the way, it's octopuses. And by the way, it's octopuses. And by the way, it's octopuses is the plural, folks. Not octopuses is the plural, folks. Not octopuses is the plural, folks. Not octopi. We'd go into a whole thing here, octopi. We'd go into a whole thing here, octopi. We'd go into a whole thing here, but I won't. Um, and you know, looking but I won't. Um, and you know, looking but I won't. Um, and you know, looking at a one of those guys or gals solving at a one of those guys or gals solving at a one of those guys or gals solving a puzzle like just energizes me in a puzzle like just energizes me in a puzzle like just energizes me in a way. I feel it in my body. It's energy way. I feel it in my body. It's energy way. I feel it in my body. It's energy that I can use for other things. It's, that I can use for other things. It's, that I can use for other things. It's, you know, it's like an inspiration for you know, it's like an inspiration for you know, it's like an inspiration for me. Um, and there are many other things me. Um, and there are many other things me. Um, and there are many other things that do that. Uh, and then there are that do that. Uh, and then there are that do that. Uh, and then there are things that activate us like where we things that activate us like where we things that activate us like where we it's a it's like a stress response. It's it's a it's like a stress response. It's it's a it's like a stress response. It's arousal, but it's negative veilance, arousal, but it's negative veilance, arousal, but it's negative veilance, right? It's draining. It's like pulling right? It's draining. It's like pulling right? It's draining. It's like pulling and it's and it's taking from these and it's and it's taking from these and it's and it's taking from these things that energize us. And I feel like things that energize us. And I feel like things that energize us. And I feel like it's being able to notice those it's being able to notice those it's being able to notice those subtleties is hard in real time. And um subtleties is hard in real time. And um subtleties is hard in real time. And um but I feel like vitality is about the but I feel like vitality is about the but I feel like vitality is about the things that energize us, right? And so things that energize us, right? And so things that energize us, right? And so when you talk about that draining kind when you talk about that draining kind when you talk about that draining kind of activation, sometimes what we do when of activation, sometimes what we do when of activation, sometimes what we do when that happens is we go numb, right? So we that happens is we go numb, right? So we that happens is we go numb, right? So we don't want to feel anything. So, you don't want to feel anything. So, you don't want to feel anything. So, you know, there's this great expression that know, there's this great expression that know, there's this great expression that the like scrolling through the internet the like scrolling through the internet the like scrolling through the internet when people mindlessly do that, it's a when people mindlessly do that, it's a when people mindlessly do that, it's a colleague of mine said it's the most colleague of mine said it's the most colleague of mine said it's the most effective non-prescription painkiller effective non-prescription painkiller effective non-prescription painkiller out there. Can you repeat that because I out there. Can you repeat that because I out there. Can you repeat that because I want people to understand this. So, want people to understand this. So, want people to understand this. So, yeah. So, it's the most effective yeah. So, it's the most effective yeah. So, it's the most effective non-prescription painkiller out there, non-prescription painkiller out there, non-prescription painkiller out there, right? And so, it's interesting when you right? And so, it's interesting when you right? And so, it's interesting when you think about numbness because people think about numbness because people think about numbness because people think that numbness is the absence of think that numbness is the absence of think that numbness is the absence of feelings, but actually numbness is the feelings, but actually numbness is the feelings, but actually numbness is the sense of being overwhelmed by too many sense of being overwhelmed by too many sense of being overwhelmed by too many feelings. And so you're shutting down. feelings. And so you're shutting down. feelings. And so you're shutting down. So when people say, "Oh, I'm numb. I'm So when people say, "Oh, I'm numb. I'm So when people say, "Oh, I'm numb. I'm not feeling anything." Actually, you're not feeling anything." Actually, you're not feeling anything." Actually, you're feeling so much and you're feeling so much and you're feeling so much and you're feeling flooded. You're feeling overwhelmed. And flooded. You're feeling overwhelmed. And flooded. You're feeling overwhelmed. And so we need to figure out what are you so we need to figure out what are you so we need to figure out what are you feeling. So it's actually a state feeling. So it's actually a state feeling. So it's actually a state of arousal that you you're you can't of arousal that you you're you can't of arousal that you you're you can't handle. And so then you're shutting handle. And so then you're shutting handle. And so then you're shutting down. But it's not that you're not down. But it's not that you're not down. But it's not that you're not having feelings. You're having so many having feelings. You're having so many having feelings. You're having so many feelings that you can't tolerate it. And feelings that you can't tolerate it. And feelings that you can't tolerate it. And that is not, you know, that is not the, that is not, you know, that is not the, that is not, you know, that is not the, you know, people say, "Oh, I'm you know, people say, "Oh, I'm you know, people say, "Oh, I'm feeling numb. I'm feeling nothing." No, feeling numb. I'm feeling nothing." No, feeling numb. I'm feeling nothing." No, we need to figure out what is so we need to figure out what is so we need to figure out what is so overwhelming to your nervous system overwhelming to your nervous system overwhelming to your nervous system right now. Gosh, that's so important. I right now. Gosh, that's so important. I right now. Gosh, that's so important. I hope people will listen to that hundred hope people will listen to that hundred hope people will listen to that hundred times. Um because, you know, we've heard times. Um because, you know, we've heard times. Um because, you know, we've heard so much about dopamine hits that I think so much about dopamine hits that I think so much about dopamine hits that I think people have lost sight of the fact that people have lost sight of the fact that people have lost sight of the fact that when you're online and you're just a when you're online and you're just a when you're online and you're just a wash in all this information and videos, wash in all this information and videos, wash in all this information and videos, you're not getting those hits. you're not getting those hits. you're not getting those hits. you're in the postdopamine hit trough you're in the postdopamine hit trough you're in the postdopamine hit trough and we've been there for a long period and we've been there for a long period and we've been there for a long period of time unless we you know unless we're of time unless we you know unless we're of time unless we you know unless we're uh judicious about our use of social uh judicious about our use of social uh judicious about our use of social media an hour or 3 minutes or 15 minutes media an hour or 3 minutes or 15 minutes media an hour or 3 minutes or 15 minutes whatever it is but hours upon hours whatever it is but hours upon hours whatever it is but hours upon hours there's no dopamine hit anymore there's no dopamine hit anymore there's no dopamine hit anymore the peak is gone you're in the trough the peak is gone you're in the trough the peak is gone you're in the trough and that's why it feels kind of like how and that's why it feels kind of like how and that's why it feels kind of like how did all that time go by the importance did all that time go by the importance did all that time go by the importance of this really can't be overstated I of this really can't be overstated I of this really can't be overstated I think that we hear so much about fight think that we hear so much about fight think that we hear so much about fight or flight and the stress response that I or flight and the stress response that I or flight and the stress response that I think people forget Yet that another think people forget Yet that another think people forget Yet that another component of the stress response of component of the stress response of component of the stress response of drama of you know being a wash in all drama of you know being a wash in all drama of you know being a wash in all this information and like movies and this information and like movies and this information and like movies and politics and violence and sex and all politics and violence and sex and all politics and violence and sex and all that stuff coming at us at once as we that stuff coming at us at once as we that stuff coming at us at once as we just scroll our thumbs is this thing of just scroll our thumbs is this thing of just scroll our thumbs is this thing of brachiardia. you know, there's this brachiardia. you know, there's this brachiardia. you know, there's this phenomenon where when we're stressed, phenomenon where when we're stressed, phenomenon where when we're stressed, our heart rate actually slows down. And our heart rate actually slows down. And our heart rate actually slows down. And that's the kind of the kind of numbing that's the kind of the kind of numbing that's the kind of the kind of numbing and you just kind of you're just kind of and you just kind of you're just kind of and you just kind of you're just kind of blanking out. And um I think that's a lot of what out. And um I think that's a lot of what out. And um I think that's a lot of what people are starting to experience with a people are starting to experience with a people are starting to experience with a lot of high drama input. Yeah, I see lot of high drama input. Yeah, I see lot of high drama input. Yeah, I see that in couples a lot where they come in that in couples a lot where they come in that in couples a lot where they come in and one person is saying, you know, and one person is saying, you know, and one person is saying, you know, like, I feel nothing. I don't know what like, I feel nothing. I don't know what like, I feel nothing. I don't know what this other person's so upset about. this other person's so upset about. this other person's so upset about. Right. And then when you really get into Right. And then when you really get into Right. And then when you really get into it, it's like this person's feeling all it, it's like this person's feeling all it, it's like this person's feeling all kinds of kinds of kinds of things. And it's really important that things. And it's really important that things. And it's really important that we understand, you know, when we are we understand, you know, when we are we understand, you know, when we are shut down versus when we are calm. Those shut down versus when we are calm. Those shut down versus when we are calm. Those are two very different states. Could you are two very different states. Could you are two very different states. Could you um go into that a little bit further? um go into that a little bit further? um go into that a little bit further? Yeah. Well, here's an example. So, a Yeah. Well, here's an example. So, a Yeah. Well, here's an example. So, a couple comes in. Let's say it's a couple comes in. Let's say it's a couple comes in. Let's say it's a heterosexual couple, but it could be any heterosexual couple, but it could be any heterosexual couple, but it could be any couple. Often it is the woman in the couple. Often it is the woman in the couple. Often it is the woman in the couple who will say something to her couple who will say something to her couple who will say something to her partner like, "I just feel like I can't partner like, "I just feel like I can't partner like, "I just feel like I can't reach you. I feel like we're very reach you. I feel like we're very reach you. I feel like we're very disconnected. I want you to tell me how disconnected. I want you to tell me how disconnected. I want you to tell me how you feel." And because of our cultural you feel." And because of our cultural you feel." And because of our cultural stigma around men showing stigma around men showing stigma around men showing emotion, he has told himself like, emotion, he has told himself like, emotion, he has told himself like, "Yeah, this bothers me or that bothers "Yeah, this bothers me or that bothers "Yeah, this bothers me or that bothers me or I'm unhappy in this way, but I me or I'm unhappy in this way, but I me or I'm unhappy in this way, but I don't feel anything. I'm fine. Our don't feel anything. I'm fine. Our don't feel anything. I'm fine. Our marriage is good." So, he doesn't even marriage is good." So, he doesn't even marriage is good." So, he doesn't even understand why he's there. um and he understand why he's there. um and he understand why he's there. um and he thinks he's there for her because she thinks he's there for her because she thinks he's there for her because she insisted on it. And so when we finally insisted on it. And so when we finally insisted on it. And so when we finally get to maybe something that he's feeling get to maybe something that he's feeling get to maybe something that he's feeling and he finally does open up, it's so and he finally does open up, it's so and he finally does open up, it's so interesting because maybe he's sharing interesting because maybe he's sharing interesting because maybe he's sharing something very vulnerable or maybe he something very vulnerable or maybe he something very vulnerable or maybe he tears up a little bit. So there you can tears up a little bit. So there you can tears up a little bit. So there you can tell like your body will tell you what tell like your body will tell you what tell like your body will tell you what you're feeling even if you aren't aware you're feeling even if you aren't aware you're feeling even if you aren't aware of it. You see, okay, there's some of it. You see, okay, there's some of it. You see, okay, there's some moisture there in his eyes or maybe a moisture there in his eyes or maybe a moisture there in his eyes or maybe a tear falls or maybe he actually starts tear falls or maybe he actually starts tear falls or maybe he actually starts crying. And her reaction and her whole crying. And her reaction and her whole crying. And her reaction and her whole reason for bringing him in was, you reason for bringing him in was, you reason for bringing him in was, you know, I need you to open up to me. I know, I need you to open up to me. I know, I need you to open up to me. I want to feel connected to you. I want to want to feel connected to you. I want to want to feel connected to you. I want to understand your inner life more. Well, understand your inner life more. Well, understand your inner life more. Well, he does it. And she then looks at me he does it. And she then looks at me he does it. And she then looks at me like a deer in headlights, like, "Oh, like a deer in headlights, like, "Oh, like a deer in headlights, like, "Oh, wow. I don't feel safe when he doesn't wow. I don't feel safe when he doesn't wow. I don't feel safe when he doesn't open up to me, but I also don't feel open up to me, but I also don't feel open up to me, but I also don't feel safe when he's being vulnerable in this safe when he's being vulnerable in this safe when he's being vulnerable in this way." And these are sort of gender way." And these are sort of gender way." And these are sort of gender stereotypes that we think we might not stereotypes that we think we might not stereotypes that we think we might not fall prey to, but we do. And so it's so fall prey to, but we do. And so it's so fall prey to, but we do. And so it's so interesting that often men are the ones interesting that often men are the ones interesting that often men are the ones who seem sort of numb or calm, right? who seem sort of numb or calm, right? who seem sort of numb or calm, right? Which are two again very different Which are two again very different Which are two again very different things in the relationship. But that's things in the relationship. But that's things in the relationship. But that's not really the case. It's that there's not really the case. It's that there's not really the case. It's that there's no room for him to express anything. So no room for him to express anything. So no room for him to express anything. So he has to kind of push everything down he has to kind of push everything down he has to kind of push everything down probably again outside of his awareness. probably again outside of his awareness. probably again outside of his awareness. And then the couple feels disconnected And then the couple feels disconnected And then the couple feels disconnected and both of them are unhappy. and both of them are unhappy. and both of them are unhappy. this idea that more this idea that more this idea that more words means more emotional. I don't buy words means more emotional. I don't buy words means more emotional. I don't buy it. Yeah, exactly. Um, you know, it's it. Yeah, exactly. Um, you know, it's it. Yeah, exactly. Um, you know, it's interesting because men will come in if interesting because men will come in if interesting because men will come in if I'm seeing them alone and they'll often I'm seeing them alone and they'll often I'm seeing them alone and they'll often say something like, "I've never told say something like, "I've never told say something like, "I've never told anyone this before." And they literally anyone this before." And they literally anyone this before." And they literally mean, "I've never told anyone this mean, "I've never told anyone this mean, "I've never told anyone this before." Because when men hang out, before." Because when men hang out, before." Because when men hang out, they're not it's not the same sort of they're not it's not the same sort of they're not it's not the same sort of level of let's talk talk, right? level of let's talk talk, right? level of let's talk talk, right? Um, women will come in and say something Um, women will come in and say something Um, women will come in and say something like, "I've never told anyone this like, "I've never told anyone this like, "I've never told anyone this before except for my mother, my sister, before except for my mother, my sister, before except for my mother, my sister, my best friend." Right? So, they've told my best friend." Right? So, they've told my best friend." Right? So, they've told maybe one, two, or three people, but maybe one, two, or three people, but maybe one, two, or three people, but they feel like they haven't told anyone they feel like they haven't told anyone they feel like they haven't told anyone because for women, that's kind of not because for women, that's kind of not because for women, that's kind of not telling anyone. Well, now you have telling anyone. Well, now you have telling anyone. Well, now you have people concerned. So, if somebody, if a people concerned. So, if somebody, if a people concerned. So, if somebody, if a woman says, uh, to me, um, I didn't tell woman says, uh, to me, um, I didn't tell woman says, uh, to me, um, I didn't tell anyone, that means she only told four anyone, that means she only told four anyone, that means she only told four people. I don't mean secrets. I don't people. I don't mean secrets. I don't people. I don't mean secrets. I don't mean secrets. I mean like something mean secrets. I mean like something mean secrets. I mean like something about themselves where they feel maybe about themselves where they feel maybe about themselves where they feel maybe hesitant to share that or they feel hesitant to share that or they feel hesitant to share that or they feel ashamed about that um or they're not ashamed about that um or they're not ashamed about that um or they're not sure about something. So you can see sure about something. So you can see sure about something. So you can see that difference. But I also think it that difference. But I also think it that difference. But I also think it happens very early. So I'm the mom of it happens very early. So I'm the mom of it happens very early. So I'm the mom of a boy. I mean he's now a teenager. But a boy. I mean he's now a teenager. But a boy. I mean he's now a teenager. But it's interesting cuz when I didn't it's interesting cuz when I didn't it's interesting cuz when I didn't notice this till I was raising a boy and notice this till I was raising a boy and notice this till I was raising a boy and I grew up with a brother but I didn't I grew up with a brother but I didn't I grew up with a brother but I didn't notice it that um when he let's say he notice it that um when he let's say he notice it that um when he let's say he would like fall on the playground, would like fall on the playground, would like fall on the playground, right? And like at like 2 or 3 years old right? And like at like 2 or 3 years old right? And like at like 2 or 3 years old um everybody would say to him or the um everybody would say to him or the um everybody would say to him or the boys around him like, "Oh, it's fine. boys around him like, "Oh, it's fine. boys around him like, "Oh, it's fine. Brush it off. You're good. You're good." Brush it off. You're good. You're good." Brush it off. You're good. You're good." Right? Even if he was like in pain. And Right? Even if he was like in pain. And Right? Even if he was like in pain. And if a girl falls and she's in pain at if a girl falls and she's in pain at if a girl falls and she's in pain at that age, they're like, "Oh, honey, come that age, they're like, "Oh, honey, come that age, they're like, "Oh, honey, come here. How are you? Let's see how are you here. How are you? Let's see how are you here. How are you? Let's see how are you feeling about this. Are you hurt? Are feeling about this. Are you hurt? Are feeling about this. Are you hurt? Are you okay? So very early on they get you okay? So very early on they get you okay? So very early on they get these messages like girls can talk about these messages like girls can talk about these messages like girls can talk about it, boys can't talk about it. I remember it, boys can't talk about it. I remember it, boys can't talk about it. I remember when my son was he was a basketball when my son was he was a basketball when my son was he was a basketball player and um in high school and um player and um in high school and um player and um in high school and um he had or this was in actually middle he had or this was in actually middle he had or this was in actually middle school and in a practice he got you know school and in a practice he got you know school and in a practice he got you know pushed down and his arm was kind of like pushed down and his arm was kind of like pushed down and his arm was kind of like not right and you know everyone was like not right and you know everyone was like not right and you know everyone was like get back up just get it's fine. Well, get back up just get it's fine. Well, get back up just get it's fine. Well, his arm is like hanging off, right? And his arm is like hanging off, right? And his arm is like hanging off, right? And so, you know, I was like, "No, I think so, you know, I was like, "No, I think so, you know, I was like, "No, I think he know needs to go to the ER." And of he know needs to go to the ER." And of he know needs to go to the ER." And of course, he was mortified that I said course, he was mortified that I said course, he was mortified that I said that, but in fact, he had broken his that, but in fact, he had broken his that, but in fact, he had broken his arm. So, that's the difference. If a arm. So, that's the difference. If a arm. So, that's the difference. If a girl had fallen down and her arm was girl had fallen down and her arm was girl had fallen down and her arm was like that, people would say like, "Oh, like that, people would say like, "Oh, like that, people would say like, "Oh, why don't you get it checked out?" So, why don't you get it checked out?" So, why don't you get it checked out?" So, what happens when these people get into what happens when these people get into what happens when these people get into adult relationships and this was what they relationships and this was what they relationships and this was what they were told about words and talking about were told about words and talking about were told about words and talking about things? um you really see those things? um you really see those things? um you really see those differences. But the other thing I want differences. But the other thing I want differences. But the other thing I want to say about words is women are brought to say about words is women are brought to say about words is women are brought up to think that whenever you have a up to think that whenever you have a up to think that whenever you have a feeling you should share it. And my feeling you should share it. And my feeling you should share it. And my response to that is no. So, and people response to that is no. So, and people response to that is no. So, and people say, "What do you mean you're a say, "What do you mean you're a say, "What do you mean you're a therapist? What do you mean don't share therapist? What do you mean don't share therapist? What do you mean don't share your feelings?" You don't need to share your feelings?" You don't need to share your feelings?" You don't need to share every thought or feeling that crosses every thought or feeling that crosses every thought or feeling that crosses your mind unfiltered with your partner. your mind unfiltered with your partner. your mind unfiltered with your partner. That is not healthy communication. That is not healthy communication. That is not healthy communication. Healthy communication means we have Healthy communication means we have Healthy communication means we have filters and we get to think about and we filters and we get to think about and we filters and we get to think about and we call it mentalizing how will what I'm call it mentalizing how will what I'm call it mentalizing how will what I'm about to say land on the other person. about to say land on the other person. about to say land on the other person. It's not like you're regurgitating all It's not like you're regurgitating all It's not like you're regurgitating all of your thoughts onto the other person. of your thoughts onto the other person. of your thoughts onto the other person. They're just supposed to deal with them. They're just supposed to deal with them. They're just supposed to deal with them. It's about relationally thinking how It's about relationally thinking how It's about relationally thinking how will this person respond to that? Not will this person respond to that? Not will this person respond to that? Not like you have to take care of their like you have to take care of their like you have to take care of their feelings, but is it kind? Is it true? Is feelings, but is it kind? Is it true? Is feelings, but is it kind? Is it true? Is it useful? Does it meet those three it useful? Does it meet those three it useful? Does it meet those three criteria? And if it doesn't, why am I criteria? And if it doesn't, why am I criteria? And if it doesn't, why am I talking? Why am I sharing this? You said talking? Why am I sharing this? You said talking? Why am I sharing this? You said it, not me. it, not me. it, not me. Um, but I'll wager a theory. Mhm. That I Um, but I'll wager a theory. Mhm. That I Um, but I'll wager a theory. Mhm. That I think that some people when they feel think that some people when they feel think that some people when they feel something, um, it the kind of, uh, relief that um, it the kind of, uh, relief that um, it the kind of, uh, relief that comes from evacuating Yeah. that feeling comes from evacuating Yeah. that feeling comes from evacuating Yeah. that feeling or trying to evacuate it with words or trying to evacuate it with words or trying to evacuate it with words feels reflexively better to them than feels reflexively better to them than feels reflexively better to them than sitting with it internally. Right? So I sitting with it internally. Right? So I sitting with it internally. Right? So I think people when they feel an think people when they feel an think people when they feel an emotion I think sometimes they feel emotion I think sometimes they feel emotion I think sometimes they feel like if they just talk about it or like if they just talk about it or like if they just talk about it or evacuate it then it's like get they get evacuate it then it's like get they get evacuate it then it's like get they get rid of it but they forget that it has an rid of it but they forget that it has an rid of it but they forget that it has an impact. Yes. And and what you're impact. Yes. And and what you're impact. Yes. And and what you're talking about is projective talking about is projective talking about is projective identification. So a projection, right, identification. So a projection, right, identification. So a projection, right, is when um you like you're feeling angry is when um you like you're feeling angry is when um you like you're feeling angry about something. Say you had like your about something. Say you had like your about something. Say you had like your boss did something to you at work and boss did something to you at work and boss did something to you at work and you know they upset you in you know they upset you in you know they upset you in some way or they were you know unkind some way or they were you know unkind some way or they were you know unkind and you're angry about or they going to and you're angry about or they going to and you're angry about or they going to make you work all night and you're make you work all night and you're make you work all night and you're really pissed about that, right? So really pissed about that, right? So really pissed about that, right? So you're angry so you come home and you you're angry so you come home and you you're angry so you come home and you end up um you know yelling at your end up um you know yelling at your end up um you know yelling at your partner, right? So, you're projecting, partner, right? So, you're projecting, partner, right? So, you're projecting, you're really mad at your boss, but all you're really mad at your boss, but all you're really mad at your boss, but all of a sudden you're like yelling at your of a sudden you're like yelling at your of a sudden you're like yelling at your partner, you're angry at your partner. partner, you're angry at your partner. partner, you're angry at your partner. That's projection. You're projecting one That's projection. You're projecting one That's projection. You're projecting one feeling about someone onto a different feeling about someone onto a different feeling about someone onto a different person that had nothing to do with the person that had nothing to do with the person that had nothing to do with the situation. Projective identification is situation. Projective identification is situation. Projective identification is a psychological process where you a psychological process where you a psychological process where you actually insert your feeling into the actually insert your feeling into the actually insert your feeling into the other person. So, you're angry about other person. So, you're angry about other person. So, you're angry about something that happened at work. It's something that happened at work. It's something that happened at work. It's not that you are now angry at your not that you are now angry at your not that you are now angry at your partner. It's that you make your partner partner. It's that you make your partner partner. It's that you make your partner angry. It's like a hot potato. Like you angry. It's like a hot potato. Like you angry. It's like a hot potato. Like you take your feelings and you toss them to take your feelings and you toss them to take your feelings and you toss them to someone else because you can't tolerate someone else because you can't tolerate someone else because you can't tolerate the discomfort of that feeling. So I the discomfort of that feeling. So I the discomfort of that feeling. So I don't want to deal with the feeling. So don't want to deal with the feeling. So don't want to deal with the feeling. So I'm going to say something to you that's I'm going to say something to you that's I'm going to say something to you that's going to make you angry, right? And now going to make you angry, right? And now going to make you angry, right? And now they have to hold all the anger. You they have to hold all the anger. You they have to hold all the anger. You feel great. You're fine because you're feel great. You're fine because you're feel great. You're fine because you're not holding the anger anymore. And now not holding the anger anymore. And now not holding the anger anymore. And now they're the ones who can't sleep. they're the ones who can't sleep. they're the ones who can't sleep. They're the ones who are upset. They're the ones who are upset. They're the ones who are upset. They're the ones who have to deal with what you the ones who have to deal with what you the ones who have to deal with what you couldn't tolerate. So it again we have couldn't tolerate. So it again we have couldn't tolerate. So it again we have to think about you know do we need to think about you know do we need to think about you know do we need to like why are we saying what we're like why are we saying what we're like why are we saying what we're saying? Can we be more intentional about saying? Can we be more intentional about saying? Can we be more intentional about how we communicate? Which doesn't mean how we communicate? Which doesn't mean how we communicate? Which doesn't mean you have to walk through a minefield. It you have to walk through a minefield. It you have to walk through a minefield. It just means that you have to be more just means that you have to be more just means that you have to be more aware of your feeling state and owning aware of your feeling state and owning aware of your feeling state and owning your feeling state and making sure that your feeling state and making sure that your feeling state and making sure that you aren't using other people in your you aren't using other people in your you aren't using other people in your environment to release your feeling environment to release your feeling environment to release your feeling state to something else. that you need state to something else. that you need state to something else. that you need to learn how you can shift your own to learn how you can shift your own to learn how you can shift your own feeling state to one that feels better feeling state to one that feels better feeling state to one that feels better for you. I love that. I for you. I love that. I for you. I love that. I um I realized um I realized um I realized recently that thinking is something that we can that thinking is something that we can that thinking is something that we can practice. M I for all the tools and practice. M I for all the tools and practice. M I for all the tools and protocols that you know talked about on protocols that you know talked about on protocols that you know talked about on this podcast and elsewhere, you know, this podcast and elsewhere, you know, this podcast and elsewhere, you know, like physiological size and morning like physiological size and morning like physiological size and morning sunlight and working out and zone 2 cardio and working out and zone 2 cardio and working out and zone 2 cardio and cold and you know, all the things I cold and you know, all the things I cold and you know, all the things I realized um recently like spending five realized um recently like spending five realized um recently like spending five minutes just thinking about something minutes just thinking about something minutes just thinking about something and really trying to work through it and really trying to work through it and really trying to work through it linearly um like a like a challenge, like a life um like a like a challenge, like a life um like a like a challenge, like a life challenge is so valuable. challenge is so valuable. challenge is so valuable. Um, and I didn't come up with this on my Um, and I didn't come up with this on my Um, and I didn't come up with this on my own. I now have a practice of like own. I now have a practice of like own. I now have a practice of like when something feels irritating or when something feels irritating or when something feels irritating or activating, I'll just like stop, put activating, I'll just like stop, put activating, I'll just like stop, put everything away, and I just sit and everything away, and I just sit and everything away, and I just sit and think like what's going on here? And um, think like what's going on here? And um, think like what's going on here? And um, inevitably there's inevitably there's inevitably there's some like some growth in understanding some like some growth in understanding some like some growth in understanding at the end of that. But it's hard work at the end of that. But it's hard work at the end of that. But it's hard work like to think like what's going on here? like to think like what's going on here? like to think like what's going on here? Am I activated because it's like true? Am I activated because it's like true? Am I activated because it's like true? Am I activated because it's false? Am I Am I activated because it's false? Am I Am I activated because it's false? Am I you know like having a sort all that you know like having a sort all that you know like having a sort all that you might think well who has the time for might think well who has the time for might think well who has the time for this but actually I would argue you this but actually I would argue you this but actually I would argue you don't have the time to not do it. I don't have the time to not do it. I don't have the time to not do it. I think that's the difference between think that's the difference between think that's the difference between reacting and responding. So often what reacting and responding. So often what reacting and responding. So often what we do is we react to something and we do is we react to something and we do is we react to something and that's not processed not thought that's not processed not thought that's not processed not thought through. And again it doesn't have to through. And again it doesn't have to through. And again it doesn't have to take like you're saying it doesn't have take like you're saying it doesn't have take like you're saying it doesn't have to take a long time to just even count to take a long time to just even count to take a long time to just even count to five and breathe and see you know cuz to five and breathe and see you know cuz to five and breathe and see you know cuz reacting means acting again. So reacting means acting again. So reacting means acting again. So you are normally when you're reacting you are normally when you're reacting you are normally when you're reacting and it's like that 0 to 60 you're acting and it's like that 0 to 60 you're acting and it's like that 0 to 60 you're acting on something that happened in the past on something that happened in the past on something that happened in the past and you're layering it on to whatever's and you're layering it on to whatever's and you're layering it on to whatever's happening in the present. So, you're happening in the present. So, you're happening in the present. So, you're having a big reaction to something. We having a big reaction to something. We having a big reaction to something. We like to say if it's historical, it's if like to say if it's historical, it's if like to say if it's historical, it's if it's hysterical, it's historical. it's hysterical, it's historical. it's hysterical, it's historical. Meaning, if you're, and by hysterical, I Meaning, if you're, and by hysterical, I Meaning, if you're, and by hysterical, I mean, if you're having a big reaction, mean, if you're having a big reaction, mean, if you're having a big reaction, there's probably something from your there's probably something from your there's probably something from your past, some reaction that is visceral to past, some reaction that is visceral to past, some reaction that is visceral to you that you're having that is getting you that you're having that is getting you that you're having that is getting layered on to this current situation, layered on to this current situation, layered on to this current situation, experience, problem, and you don't experience, problem, and you don't experience, problem, and you don't realize it. So, that's reacting. You're realize it. So, that's reacting. You're realize it. So, that's reacting. You're acting again. You're acting on something acting again. You're acting on something acting again. You're acting on something that happened in the past. If it's that happened in the past. If it's that happened in the past. If it's hysterical, it's historical. responding hysterical, it's historical. responding hysterical, it's historical. responding is I'm going to take a breath. I'm is I'm going to take a breath. I'm is I'm going to take a breath. I'm having a big reaction. I'm going to sit having a big reaction. I'm going to sit having a big reaction. I'm going to sit for a minute. Again, regulating your for a minute. Again, regulating your for a minute. Again, regulating your nervous system. And now I can kind of nervous system. And now I can kind of nervous system. And now I can kind of think about this differently. So, we think about this differently. So, we think about this differently. So, we need space between, you know, there's need space between, you know, there's need space between, you know, there's that famous Victor Frankle quote of, you that famous Victor Frankle quote of, you that famous Victor Frankle quote of, you know, between stimulus and response know, between stimulus and response know, between stimulus and response there is a space and in that space lies there is a space and in that space lies there is a space and in that space lies our choice and our freedom. Um, that's a our choice and our freedom. Um, that's a our choice and our freedom. Um, that's a paraphrase of it. But you need that paraphrase of it. But you need that paraphrase of it. But you need that space between the stimulus, whatever the space between the stimulus, whatever the space between the stimulus, whatever the thing is that activated you and your thing is that activated you and your thing is that activated you and your response. So that's the difference response. So that's the difference response. So that's the difference between reacting and responding. I between reacting and responding. I between reacting and responding. I totally agree. And yet life happens in totally agree. And yet life happens in totally agree. And yet life happens in real time. I mean, parents with kids, real time. I mean, parents with kids, real time. I mean, parents with kids, they got to pick them up and they're they got to pick them up and they're they got to pick them up and they're working and there's stuff coming through working and there's stuff coming through working and there's stuff coming through on the phone. My question is, do you on the phone. My question is, do you on the phone. My question is, do you think nowadays there's too much um nowadays there's too much um nowadays there's too much um communication bombardment through text, communication bombardment through text, communication bombardment through text, social media, um phone, and real life social media, um phone, and real life social media, um phone, and real life that we we've eliminated all the space. that we we've eliminated all the space. that we we've eliminated all the space. I think what we've eliminated is there's I think what we've eliminated is there's I think what we've eliminated is there's so much more space in a face-to-face so much more space in a face-to-face so much more space in a face-to-face conversation. So, when I have young conversation. So, when I have young conversation. So, when I have young therapy clients who are, you know, maybe therapy clients who are, you know, maybe therapy clients who are, you know, maybe in their early 20s, and I had one in their early 20s, and I had one in their early 20s, and I had one client who was telling me this story in client who was telling me this story in client who was telling me this story in therapy a while ago, and now I therapy a while ago, and now I therapy a while ago, and now I understand what this means, but this was understand what this means, but this was understand what this means, but this was several years ago. And she was telling several years ago. And she was telling several years ago. And she was telling it like this. She had her thumbs in the it like this. She had her thumbs in the it like this. She had her thumbs in the air and she said, "And then I said, and air and she said, "And then I said, and air and she said, "And then I said, and then he said, and then I said, and I'm then he said, and then I said, and I'm then he said, and then I said, and I'm thinking, what is she doing?" And then I thinking, what is she doing?" And then I thinking, what is she doing?" And then I realized I said, "Wait, you had this I realized I said, "Wait, you had this I realized I said, "Wait, you had this conversation on text?" And she said, conversation on text?" And she said, conversation on text?" And she said, "Yes." Yes. And it was really important "Yes." Yes. And it was really important "Yes." Yes. And it was really important conversation. And I said I was trying to conversation. And I said I was trying to conversation. And I said I was trying to explain to her why they were missing explain to her why they were missing explain to her why they were missing certain cues. They were missing what it certain cues. They were missing what it certain cues. They were missing what it feels like to be in the space together. feels like to be in the space together. feels like to be in the space together. They were missing the experience of They were missing the experience of They were missing the experience of looking in each other's eyes, of seeing looking in each other's eyes, of seeing looking in each other's eyes, of seeing facial expressions and body language. facial expressions and body language. facial expressions and body language. And she said, "Oh no, but we also used And she said, "Oh no, but we also used And she said, "Oh no, but we also used emojis." And I had to explain to her why emojis." And I had to explain to her why emojis." And I had to explain to her why an emoji does not replace face-toface an emoji does not replace face-toface an emoji does not replace face-toface interaction. Face to face interaction interaction. Face to face interaction interaction. Face to face interaction slows you down, right? you can just text slows you down, right? you can just text slows you down, right? you can just text anything and you don't realize there's anything and you don't realize there's anything and you don't realize there's another person at the other side of this another person at the other side of this another person at the other side of this on their phone who is reacting to your on their phone who is reacting to your on their phone who is reacting to your reaction. And I think that you know this reaction. And I think that you know this reaction. And I think that you know this is when we go back to comment sections. is when we go back to comment sections. is when we go back to comment sections. We don't realize like there's another We don't realize like there's another We don't realize like there's another person out there. We know that. But when person out there. We know that. But when person out there. We know that. But when there are so many times that we would there are so many times that we would there are so many times that we would have a very different kind of have a very different kind of have a very different kind of conversation with our partner, with conversation with our partner, with conversation with our partner, with family members, with friends, in our family members, with friends, in our family members, with friends, in our workplace, um, in comment sections, if workplace, um, in comment sections, if workplace, um, in comment sections, if we could remember that there's a human we could remember that there's a human we could remember that there's a human there, and the easiest way to do that is there, and the easiest way to do that is there, and the easiest way to do that is to see someone like this looking across to see someone like this looking across to see someone like this looking across the table at you. We can't always do the table at you. We can't always do the table at you. We can't always do that. But I think when there you're that. But I think when there you're that. But I think when there you're having important conversations that we having important conversations that we having important conversations that we should remember, wait, this probably should remember, wait, this probably should remember, wait, this probably isn't appropriate to talk about on text. isn't appropriate to talk about on text. isn't appropriate to talk about on text. Even though people think that, well, of Even though people think that, well, of Even though people think that, well, of course, it's so much more efficient. course, it's so much more efficient. course, it's so much more efficient. Actually, it's not because now you're Actually, it's not because now you're Actually, it's not because now you're going to have conflict. Now you're going to have conflict. Now you're going to have conflict. Now you're going to have misunderstandings and now you're to have misunderstandings and now you're to have misunderstandings and now you're going to spend all this time trying to going to spend all this time trying to going to spend all this time trying to repair the rupture that just happened repair the rupture that just happened repair the rupture that just happened because you had the conversation on because you had the conversation on because you had the conversation on text. I refuse to argue over text. Yes. text. I refuse to argue over text. Yes. text. I refuse to argue over text. Yes. I just won't have an argument over text. I just won't have an argument over text. I just won't have an argument over text. And I'll say to people, you know, And I'll say to people, you know, And I'll say to people, you know, because like I have a client and because like I have a client and because like I have a client and he's always sort of he says, "Well, I he's always sort of he says, "Well, I he's always sort of he says, "Well, I just get pulled into it with my just get pulled into it with my just get pulled into it with my girlfriend." And I'm like, "Really? Does girlfriend." And I'm like, "Really? Does girlfriend." And I'm like, "Really? Does somebody have a gun to your head?" somebody have a gun to your head?" somebody have a gun to your head?" Right? And and this is where I think Right? And and this is where I think Right? And and this is where I think change. You know, we talk about what we change. You know, we talk about what we change. You know, we talk about what we want to accomplish in therapy. And it's want to accomplish in therapy. And it's want to accomplish in therapy. And it's change. It's not just coming in and change. It's not just coming in and change. It's not just coming in and downloading the problem of the week and downloading the problem of the week and downloading the problem of the week and leaving and downloading the problem of leaving and downloading the problem of leaving and downloading the problem of the week again and leaving. I like to the week again and leaving. I like to the week again and leaving. I like to say that insight is the booby prize of say that insight is the booby prize of say that insight is the booby prize of therapy. that you can have all the therapy. that you can have all the therapy. that you can have all the insight in the world, but if you don't insight in the world, but if you don't insight in the world, but if you don't make change out in the world, the make change out in the world, the make change out in the world, the insight is useless. So, someone will insight is useless. So, someone will insight is useless. So, someone will say, "Oh, I got into that argument with say, "Oh, I got into that argument with say, "Oh, I got into that argument with my, you know, whoever, my partner over my, you know, whoever, my partner over my, you know, whoever, my partner over the weekend, and I'll say, "Well, did the weekend, and I'll say, "Well, did the weekend, and I'll say, "Well, did you do something different?" They'll you do something different?" They'll you do something different?" They'll say, "Well, no, but I understand why." say, "Well, no, but I understand why." say, "Well, no, but I understand why." Great. That's good that you understand Great. That's good that you understand Great. That's good that you understand why, but you need to do something why, but you need to do something why, but you need to do something different because we're all doing this different because we're all doing this different because we're all doing this dance with someone else, right? And if dance with someone else, right? And if dance with someone else, right? And if you change your dance steps, so people you change your dance steps, so people you change your dance steps, so people say, "I want the other person to say, "I want the other person to say, "I want the other person to change." And I said, "Well, you can't change." And I said, "Well, you can't change." And I said, "Well, you can't change the other person, but you can change the other person, but you can change the other person, but you can influence the other person by making influence the other person by making influence the other person by making changes yourself." So, if you change changes yourself." So, if you change changes yourself." So, if you change your dance steps, the other person will your dance steps, the other person will your dance steps, the other person will either have to change their dance steps, either have to change their dance steps, either have to change their dance steps, too, because you're not doing that old too, because you're not doing that old too, because you're not doing that old dance with them anymore, or they'll dance with them anymore, or they'll dance with them anymore, or they'll leave the dance floor. And people are so leave the dance floor. And people are so leave the dance floor. And people are so afraid the person will leave the dance afraid the person will leave the dance afraid the person will leave the dance floor. And it's like, well, if they're floor. And it's like, well, if they're floor. And it's like, well, if they're not going to dance with you in a way not going to dance with you in a way not going to dance with you in a way that is the kind of relationship that is the kind of relationship that is the kind of relationship that you want, it's okay that they leave the you want, it's okay that they leave the you want, it's okay that they leave the dance floor. Go find someone who will dance floor. Go find someone who will dance floor. Go find someone who will dance with you in the way you want to dance with you in the way you want to dance with you in the way you want to dance. When it comes to behavioral dance. When it comes to behavioral dance. When it comes to behavioral change, are you a fan of small onederee turns or are you a fan of small onederee turns or are you a fan of small onederee turns or um I'll propose an alternative, not as a um I'll propose an alternative, not as a um I'll propose an alternative, not as a counter, but just to explore next. But counter, but just to explore next. But counter, but just to explore next. But do you like um do you encourage your do you like um do you encourage your do you like um do you encourage your clients? Do you call them patients or clients? Do you call them patients or clients? Do you call them patients or clients, by the way? Either. I don't clients, by the way? Either. I don't clients, by the way? Either. I don't think either is a good word. I think either is a good word. I think either is a good word. I think it's so interesting because I think that it's so interesting because I think that it's so interesting because I think that it's just we're just humans. And I don't it's just we're just humans. And I don't it's just we're just humans. And I don't mean to sound all woo about this, mean to sound all woo about this, mean to sound all woo about this, but I really feel like the relationship but I really feel like the relationship but I really feel like the relationship that you have in that room, it's so that you have in that room, it's so that you have in that room, it's so unique. And I have not figured out a way unique. And I have not figured out a way unique. And I have not figured out a way to describe it. And I don't think client to describe it. And I don't think client to describe it. And I don't think client or patient quite does it. But for or patient quite does it. But for or patient quite does it. But for simplicity sake, we use either. Okay. simplicity sake, we use either. Okay. simplicity sake, we use either. Okay. Um, thank you. I've always wondered Um, thank you. I've always wondered Um, thank you. I've always wondered about that. Um, do you recommend that about that. Um, do you recommend that about that. Um, do you recommend that your clients um make specific subtle your clients um make specific subtle your clients um make specific subtle changes, behavioral changes when they're changes, behavioral changes when they're changes, behavioral changes when they're after they have an insight or maybe even after they have an insight or maybe even after they have an insight or maybe even before they have an insight? I think the before they have an insight? I think the before they have an insight? I think the reason that people have so much trouble reason that people have so much trouble reason that people have so much trouble changing is because the step that changing is because the step that changing is because the step that they've chosen is too big of a step to they've chosen is too big of a step to they've chosen is too big of a step to take at once. That you need small, take at once. That you need small, take at once. That you need small, manageable steps. And I think people manageable steps. And I think people manageable steps. And I think people also forget this is why New Year's also forget this is why New Year's also forget this is why New Year's resolutions tend not to last very long resolutions tend not to last very long resolutions tend not to last very long because change is a process. And there's because change is a process. And there's because change is a process. And there's a there's a chapter in my book called a there's a chapter in my book called a there's a chapter in my book called How Humans Change. And I think it's so How Humans Change. And I think it's so How Humans Change. And I think it's so important for people to understand that important for people to understand that important for people to understand that there are stages of change. And it there are stages of change. And it there are stages of change. And it starts with pre-contemplation where you starts with pre-contemplation where you starts with pre-contemplation where you don't even realize that you're thinking don't even realize that you're thinking don't even realize that you're thinking about making a change. You think like about making a change. You think like about making a change. You think like something's not right, but I don't something's not right, but I don't something's not right, but I don't really need to change. Like something's really need to change. Like something's really need to change. Like something's just not right in the world. Um you just not right in the world. Um you just not right in the world. Um you know, it's my partner, it's my, you know, it's my partner, it's my, you know, it's my partner, it's my, you know, it's my child. it's my whoever, know, it's my child. it's my whoever, know, it's my child. it's my whoever, right? Um there's then there's right? Um there's then there's right? Um there's then there's contemplation, which is, oh, maybe I contemplation, which is, oh, maybe I contemplation, which is, oh, maybe I could make a change, but I'm not quite could make a change, but I'm not quite could make a change, but I'm not quite ready to do it. And that's when people ready to do it. And that's when people ready to do it. And that's when people usually they come to therapy somewhere usually they come to therapy somewhere usually they come to therapy somewhere around pre-contemplation and contemplation. pre-contemplation and contemplation. pre-contemplation and contemplation. Like something's not right, they come to Like something's not right, they come to Like something's not right, they come to therapy, we get them to contemplation, therapy, we get them to contemplation, therapy, we get them to contemplation, which is like, oh, maybe I'm which is like, oh, maybe I'm which is like, oh, maybe I'm contemplating making some changes. Um, contemplating making some changes. Um, contemplating making some changes. Um, and then there's preparation, which is and then there's preparation, which is and then there's preparation, which is you're taking some steps to prepare for you're taking some steps to prepare for you're taking some steps to prepare for the change. So, it's not like I'm going the change. So, it's not like I'm going the change. So, it's not like I'm going to dive into the deep end of the pool. to dive into the deep end of the pool. to dive into the deep end of the pool. It's like, oh, maybe I need to take some It's like, oh, maybe I need to take some It's like, oh, maybe I need to take some swimming lessons or maybe I need to get swimming lessons or maybe I need to get swimming lessons or maybe I need to get a swimsuit or maybe I need, you know, a swimsuit or maybe I need, you know, a swimsuit or maybe I need, you know, whatever it is. Like, I need to prepare whatever it is. Like, I need to prepare whatever it is. Like, I need to prepare to make this change. And then there's to make this change. And then there's to make this change. And then there's action where you actually make the action where you actually make the action where you actually make the change. And people think that's the last change. And people think that's the last change. And people think that's the last step, that's action. No, the last stage step, that's action. No, the last stage step, that's action. No, the last stage is maintenance. And maintenance is how is maintenance. And maintenance is how is maintenance. And maintenance is how do you maintain the change? And do you maintain the change? And do you maintain the change? And maintenance does not mean that you are maintenance does not mean that you are maintenance does not mean that you are perfectly maintaining the change. It's perfectly maintaining the change. It's perfectly maintaining the change. It's more like shoots and ladders if you more like shoots and ladders if you more like shoots and ladders if you remember that game where like kind of remember that game where like kind of remember that game where like kind of you go up and then you go down if you go up and then you go down if you go up and then you go down if you can make mistakes during this time you can make mistakes during this time you can make mistakes during this time because you're forming a new habit. because you're forming a new habit. because you're forming a new habit. You're forming a new way of being and You're forming a new way of being and You're forming a new way of being and until it becomes familiar. Going back to until it becomes familiar. Going back to until it becomes familiar. Going back to our discussion about how the familiar our discussion about how the familiar our discussion about how the familiar feels really good to us and the feels really good to us and the feels really good to us and the unfamiliar feels really scary. The new unfamiliar feels really scary. The new unfamiliar feels really scary. The new thing will take a while to feel thing will take a while to feel thing will take a while to feel familiar. So, let's say that you say familiar. So, let's say that you say familiar. So, let's say that you say like, I'm going to eat healthy and that like, I'm going to eat healthy and that like, I'm going to eat healthy and that means that I'm not going to, you know, means that I'm not going to, you know, means that I'm not going to, you know, like eat an entire hogen or something like eat an entire hogen or something like eat an entire hogen or something when I'm sad that I'm going to do when I'm sad that I'm going to do when I'm sad that I'm going to do something different. Well, sometimes something different. Well, sometimes something different. Well, sometimes when you're sad, you might do that when you're sad, you might do that when you're sad, you might do that again, but then you don't self again, but then you don't self again, but then you don't self flagagillate. So, it's not like, oh, it flagagillate. So, it's not like, oh, it flagagillate. So, it's not like, oh, it failed, so forget it. I'm not going to failed, so forget it. I'm not going to failed, so forget it. I'm not going to like I failed and I'm not able to make like I failed and I'm not able to make like I failed and I'm not able to make this change. No. Or you don't say like, this change. No. Or you don't say like, this change. No. Or you don't say like, oh, I'm so terrible and that was awful oh, I'm so terrible and that was awful oh, I'm so terrible and that was awful and I'm so weak. Self flagagillation is and I'm so weak. Self flagagillation is and I'm so weak. Self flagagillation is not helpful. Imagine if your kid came to not helpful. Imagine if your kid came to not helpful. Imagine if your kid came to you and they said like, "I did really you and they said like, "I did really you and they said like, "I did really poorly on this test." Are you going to poorly on this test." Are you going to poorly on this test." Are you going to say, "You're so stupid." You know, like, say, "You're so stupid." You know, like, say, "You're so stupid." You know, like, "What's wrong with you?" No, you're "What's wrong with you?" No, you're "What's wrong with you?" No, you're going to say, "Well, let's talk about going to say, "Well, let's talk about going to say, "Well, let's talk about what happened." And they might say, "I what happened." And they might say, "I what happened." And they might say, "I needed help and I was embarrassed to needed help and I was embarrassed to needed help and I was embarrassed to ask." Or, "I didn't understand it." And ask." Or, "I didn't understand it." And ask." Or, "I didn't understand it." And or, "I didn't study. I messed up. I or, "I didn't study. I messed up. I or, "I didn't study. I messed up. I should have studied and I didn't study." should have studied and I didn't study." should have studied and I didn't study." Okay. Well, what are you going to do Okay. Well, what are you going to do Okay. Well, what are you going to do differently next time? Let's come up differently next time? Let's come up differently next time? Let's come up with a plan. So you need to have just with a plan. So you need to have just with a plan. So you need to have just like you'd have some compassion for your like you'd have some compassion for your like you'd have some compassion for your child and hold them accountable both. child and hold them accountable both. child and hold them accountable both. It's hard to hold yourself accountable It's hard to hold yourself accountable It's hard to hold yourself accountable when you self flagagillate. In the short when you self flagagillate. In the short when you self flagagillate. In the short term you can but it doesn't last because term you can but it doesn't last because term you can but it doesn't last because it feels so unpleasant. You're just sort it feels so unpleasant. You're just sort it feels so unpleasant. You're just sort of bathing in shame. What you need is of bathing in shame. What you need is of bathing in shame. What you need is self-compassion. And actually if you self-compassion. And actually if you self-compassion. And actually if you have more compassion for yourself you're have more compassion for yourself you're have more compassion for yourself you're more able to hold yourself accountable. more able to hold yourself accountable. more able to hold yourself accountable. So you can say oh you know what So you can say oh you know what So you can say oh you know what happened? I was feeling really sad. I happened? I was feeling really sad. I happened? I was feeling really sad. I had this whole pint of hog had this whole pint of hog had this whole pint of hog and I it's okay that I was sad and I it's okay that I was sad and I it's okay that I was sad and there's another way to do this. So next there's another way to do this. So next there's another way to do this. So next time when I'm sad I didn't have enough time when I'm sad I didn't have enough time when I'm sad I didn't have enough support so I'm going to call a friend support so I'm going to call a friend support so I'm going to call a friend next time. Oh self-compassion with next time. Oh self-compassion with next time. Oh self-compassion with accountability or I'm not going to keep accountability or I'm not going to keep accountability or I'm not going to keep the hogands in the house because I know the hogands in the house because I know the hogands in the house because I know that when I'm sad I'm susceptible to that when I'm sad I'm susceptible to that when I'm sad I'm susceptible to that. Maybe one day I'll be able to do that. Maybe one day I'll be able to do that. Maybe one day I'll be able to do it but right now I'm not going to keep it but right now I'm not going to keep it but right now I'm not going to keep that. But there's something else I can that. But there's something else I can that. But there's something else I can do, which is I really feel like I want do, which is I really feel like I want do, which is I really feel like I want for me self-compassion is related to I'm for me self-compassion is related to I'm for me self-compassion is related to I'm going to give myself a treat. So maybe going to give myself a treat. So maybe going to give myself a treat. So maybe my treat is I'm going to um you know uh my treat is I'm going to um you know uh my treat is I'm going to um you know uh I'm going to have like a healthy snack I'm going to have like a healthy snack I'm going to have like a healthy snack that I like or maybe my treat is I'm that I like or maybe my treat is I'm that I like or maybe my treat is I'm going to go to a movie or you know going to go to a movie or you know going to go to a movie or you know whatever it is. But you have to figure whatever it is. But you have to figure whatever it is. But you have to figure out what works for you and what works out what works for you and what works out what works for you and what works for other people might not work for you. for other people might not work for you. for other people might not work for you. So it takes a little bit of So it takes a little bit of So it takes a little bit of experimenting. So maintenance is this experimenting. So maintenance is this experimenting. So maintenance is this kind of experimentation but having kind of experimentation but having kind of experimentation but having self-compassion with accountability self-compassion with accountability self-compassion with accountability until you find a system that works for until you find a system that works for until you find a system that works for you and the new thing becomes a habit. you and the new thing becomes a habit. you and the new thing becomes a habit. It becomes familiar and the thing that It becomes familiar and the thing that It becomes familiar and the thing that you used to do becomes unfamiliar and you used to do becomes unfamiliar and you used to do becomes unfamiliar and doesn't feel good anymore. doesn't feel good anymore. doesn't feel good anymore. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing that has everything you need but nothing that has everything you need but nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your the functioning of all the cells in your the functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to in water makes it extremely easy to in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate ensure that you're getting adequate ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To hydration and adequate electrolytes. To hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper make sure that I'm getting proper make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about dissolve one packet of element in about dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning. And I drink that in the morning. And I drink that in the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I basically first thing in the morning. I basically first thing in the morning. I also drink element dissolved in water also drink element dissolved in water also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise during any kind of physical exercise during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days that I'm doing, especially on hot days that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore when I'm sweating a lot and therefore when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes. losing a lot of water and electrolytes. losing a lot of water and electrolytes. They have a bunch of different great They have a bunch of different great They have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of Element. They have tasting flavors of Element. They have tasting flavors of Element. They have watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, them all. If you'd like to try Element, them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to you can go to you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the free element sample pack with the free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix. purchase of any element drink mix. purchase of any element drink mix. Again, that's Again, that's Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Yeah. For so many free sample pack. Yeah. For so many free sample pack. Yeah. For so many years, the field of psych popular years, the field of psych popular years, the field of psych popular psychology um was obsessed with, you psychology um was obsessed with, you psychology um was obsessed with, you know, how long does it take to make a know, how long does it take to make a know, how long does it take to make a change? It was like 28 days and it was change? It was like 28 days and it was change? It was like 28 days and it was like 90. as like as somebody who studies like 90. as like as somebody who studies like 90. as like as somebody who studies neuroplasticity um I can tell you that there's one trial um I can tell you that there's one trial um I can tell you that there's one trial learning you'll never go back and learning you'll never go back and learning you'll never go back and there's stuff that takes years um it's there's stuff that takes years um it's there's stuff that takes years um it's just depends on the intensity and the just depends on the intensity and the just depends on the intensity and the consequences right and even with consequences right and even with consequences right and even with consequences I mean anyone that's seen consequences I mean anyone that's seen consequences I mean anyone that's seen somebody relapse from drugs so many somebody relapse from drugs so many somebody relapse from drugs so many times over it's you clearly they're times over it's you clearly they're times over it's you clearly they're working with more complicated dynamics working with more complicated dynamics working with more complicated dynamics there I think that um this notion of there I think that um this notion of there I think that um this notion of reinforcing change is super key I'm reinforcing change is super key I'm reinforcing change is super key I'm really glad you raised Uh, I want to really glad you raised Uh, I want to really glad you raised Uh, I want to ask um as a I don't know how to phrase ask um as a I don't know how to phrase ask um as a I don't know how to phrase this. As a counterpoint or as an this. As a counterpoint or as an this. As a counterpoint or as an alternative There we go. Uh, as an alternative There we go. Uh, as an alternative There we go. Uh, as an alternative to alternative to alternative to uh onederee shifts or um I'm somebody uh onederee shifts or um I'm somebody uh onederee shifts or um I'm somebody that I've always benefited from that I've always benefited from that I've always benefited from deadlines. I love deadlines. Like a deadlines. I love deadlines. Like a deadlines. I love deadlines. Like a deadline is how I get things done. and deadline is how I get things done. and deadline is how I get things done. and I just if there's a grant deadline and I just if there's a grant deadline and I just if there's a grant deadline and a paper deadline, you know, and a paper deadline, you know, and a paper deadline, you know, deadlines work. Mhm. And even if you deadlines work. Mhm. And even if you deadlines work. Mhm. And even if you don't meet them, um it's great to see don't meet them, um it's great to see don't meet them, um it's great to see how far off you were, you know, if you how far off you were, you know, if you how far off you were, you know, if you did your absolute best and how the did your absolute best and how the did your absolute best and how the mistakes you made to lead to the place mistakes you made to lead to the place mistakes you made to lead to the place where you didn't complete things in where you didn't complete things in where you didn't complete things in time. It's just I love deadlines and I time. It's just I love deadlines and I time. It's just I love deadlines and I love rules. And so, um I've become a love rules. And so, um I've become a love rules. And so, um I've become a pretty strict rule enforcer for myself pretty strict rule enforcer for myself pretty strict rule enforcer for myself in my life. in my life. in my life. And I think one of the rules that's And I think one of the rules that's And I think one of the rules that's really helped me in recent times uh with really helped me in recent times uh with really helped me in recent times uh with visav relationships has been visav relationships has been visav relationships has been um no drama. Just none. Like none. I um no drama. Just none. Like none. I um no drama. Just none. Like none. I don't tolerate any drama. But that's don't tolerate any drama. But that's don't tolerate any drama. But that's rigid I realize. But it's helpful. I'm rigid I realize. But it's helpful. I'm rigid I realize. But it's helpful. I'm far happier than I've ever been truly um far happier than I've ever been truly um far happier than I've ever been truly um in large part because of that. Like no in large part because of that. Like no in large part because of that. Like no drama. But the thing that I had to drama. But the thing that I had to drama. But the thing that I had to accept with a with a hard rule like that accept with a with a hard rule like that accept with a with a hard rule like that is that I'm going to lose people. Mhm. is that I'm going to lose people. Mhm. is that I'm going to lose people. Mhm. Like that. So earlier you said, you Like that. So earlier you said, you Like that. So earlier you said, you know, that this uh patient client, know, that this uh patient client, know, that this uh patient client, you know, maybe he doesn't have to put you know, maybe he doesn't have to put you know, maybe he doesn't have to put up maybe there's somebody better for up maybe there's somebody better for up maybe there's somebody better for him. There's someone else out there that him. There's someone else out there that him. There's someone else out there that you don't that they don't have to deal you don't that they don't have to deal you don't that they don't have to deal with. I think that one of the things with. I think that one of the things with. I think that one of the things that I notice in my own past and um with that I notice in my own past and um with that I notice in my own past and um with others that I know struggling with others that I know struggling with others that I know struggling with a dynamic with people typically it's a dynamic with people typically it's a dynamic with people typically it's romantic relationships but could be romantic relationships but could be romantic relationships but could be anything is you have to be willing to anything is you have to be willing to anything is you have to be willing to let go. You you can't like always let go. You you can't like always let go. You you can't like always resolve the conflict. And I find that a resolve the conflict. And I find that a resolve the conflict. And I find that a lot of people maybe it's this childhood lot of people maybe it's this childhood lot of people maybe it's this childhood thing. They they feel like they have to thing. They they feel like they have to thing. They they feel like they have to like remain on great terms or they have like remain on great terms or they have like remain on great terms or they have to stay friends or they have to put a to stay friends or they have to put a to stay friends or they have to put a bow on it. And I so admire the people bow on it. And I so admire the people bow on it. And I so admire the people in life that are like, "Yeah, that in life that are like, "Yeah, that in life that are like, "Yeah, that didn't work. Done." Because I look at didn't work. Done." Because I look at didn't work. Done." Because I look at the time wasted. Yes. And I think that the time wasted. Yes. And I think that the time wasted. Yes. And I think that in our desire to make everything kind of in our desire to make everything kind of in our desire to make everything kind of okay in the end, we burn valuable life okay in the end, we burn valuable life okay in the end, we burn valuable life energy and incredibly valuable time. And energy and incredibly valuable time. And energy and incredibly valuable time. And so some people might hear like no drama so some people might hear like no drama so some people might hear like no drama and think, well, you're going to lose a and think, well, you're going to lose a and think, well, you're going to lose a bunch of people. And I will. Um, I bunch of people. And I will. Um, I bunch of people. And I will. Um, I certainly will. Um, or they'll rise to certainly will. Um, or they'll rise to certainly will. Um, or they'll rise to the occasion or whatever you want to the occasion or whatever you want to the occasion or whatever you want to call it. Um, but I have a full life of call it. Um, but I have a full life of call it. Um, but I have a full life of many people with whom I have zero drama many people with whom I have zero drama many people with whom I have zero drama and wonderful relationships. So, I'm and wonderful relationships. So, I'm and wonderful relationships. So, I'm full. My dance card's full, right? But full. My dance card's full, right? But full. My dance card's full, right? But I'd rather I'm I feel so firm about I'd rather I'm I feel so firm about I'd rather I'm I feel so firm about this um given the peace that it's this um given the peace that it's this um given the peace that it's brought me. Yeah. That I realize like, brought me. Yeah. That I realize like, brought me. Yeah. That I realize like, yeah, like I may never talk to that yeah, like I may never talk to that yeah, like I may never talk to that person again. I might, I might not. person again. I might, I might not. person again. I might, I might not. Right. But at the first hint of drama, Right. But at the first hint of drama, Right. But at the first hint of drama, like I'm done. And and I think it's like I'm done. And and I think it's like I'm done. And and I think it's because um I forced so much suffering on because um I forced so much suffering on because um I forced so much suffering on myself for so long of trying to resolve myself for so long of trying to resolve myself for so long of trying to resolve these things that clearly wouldn't work. these things that clearly wouldn't work. these things that clearly wouldn't work. And uh I don't know, I feel immense And uh I don't know, I feel immense And uh I don't know, I feel immense freedom from it. But I think I hear this freedom from it. But I think I hear this freedom from it. But I think I hear this with other people like, "Oh yeah, but with other people like, "Oh yeah, but with other people like, "Oh yeah, but you know, they're gonna change or you know, they're gonna change or you know, they're gonna change or you know, he's gonna stop drinking or not know, he's gonna stop drinking or not know, he's gonna stop drinking or not referring to me. I'm not a drinker, but referring to me. I'm not a drinker, but referring to me. I'm not a drinker, but there was a hard and I quit drinking." there was a hard and I quit drinking." there was a hard and I quit drinking." Um didn't have a problem with it. I just Um didn't have a problem with it. I just Um didn't have a problem with it. I just was like, I'm done with alcohol. Just was like, I'm done with alcohol. Just was like, I'm done with alcohol. Just like that relationship's over. Um, like that relationship's over. Um, like that relationship's over. Um, and they just cling to this like thing and they just cling to this like thing and they just cling to this like thing that it's got to like they just won't that it's got to like they just won't that it's got to like they just won't let go. Yeah. And and I don't What let go. Yeah. And and I don't What let go. Yeah. And and I don't What is that about? Why do we hold on to is that about? Why do we hold on to is that about? Why do we hold on to the thing that doesn't work even if we the thing that doesn't work even if we the thing that doesn't work even if we know we're not going to like stay with know we're not going to like stay with know we're not going to like stay with it? Yes. What is this obsession? It's it? Yes. What is this obsession? It's it? Yes. What is this obsession? It's interesting. So, um I'm thinking about interesting. So, um I'm thinking about interesting. So, um I'm thinking about how when you say no drama, um you know, how when you say no drama, um you know, how when you say no drama, um you know, what does that actually mean? And it's what does that actually mean? And it's what does that actually mean? And it's really important because when you look really important because when you look really important because when you look at why people who are most satisfied at why people who are most satisfied at why people who are most satisfied with their lives, um you know, what is with their lives, um you know, what is with their lives, um you know, what is it about their lives, they're surrounded it about their lives, they're surrounded it about their lives, they're surrounded by people that they feel good about. by people that they feel good about. by people that they feel good about. Now, let me be clear about what that Now, let me be clear about what that Now, let me be clear about what that means. So, you know, we talk about this means. So, you know, we talk about this means. So, you know, we talk about this concept of idiot compassion versus wise concept of idiot compassion versus wise concept of idiot compassion versus wise compassion. Idiot compassion. Idiot compassion. Idiot compassion. Idiot compassion. Idiot compassion. Idiot compassion. I love that phrase. I don't compassion. I love that phrase. I don't compassion. I love that phrase. I don't even know what it means and I love it even know what it means and I love it even know what it means and I love it already. So idiot compassion is what if already. So idiot compassion is what if already. So idiot compassion is what if you surround yourself with people who you surround yourself with people who you surround yourself with people who are only going to validate your are only going to validate your are only going to validate your experience when you say no drama that's experience when you say no drama that's experience when you say no drama that's not necessarily a great thing. So like not necessarily a great thing. So like not necessarily a great thing. So like for example um you know let's say that for example um you know let's say that for example um you know let's say that um you know someone says to her friends um you know someone says to her friends um you know someone says to her friends like I don't understand why he broke up like I don't understand why he broke up like I don't understand why he broke up with me or I don't understand you know with me or I don't understand you know with me or I don't understand you know why this keeps happening to me and your why this keeps happening to me and your why this keeps happening to me and your friend's like no you go girl he's wrong friend's like no you go girl he's wrong friend's like no you go girl he's wrong you're right you know whatever or you you're right you know whatever or you you're right you know whatever or you know my partner's doing this and we know my partner's doing this and we know my partner's doing this and we tend to kind of feel like our job as a tend to kind of feel like our job as a tend to kind of feel like our job as a friend is to support the position of our friend is to support the position of our friend is to support the position of our friends. That's idiot compassion. Wise friends. That's idiot compassion. Wise friends. That's idiot compassion. Wise compassion is what you get in therapy compassion is what you get in therapy compassion is what you get in therapy where we say, you know, like what might where we say, you know, like what might where we say, you know, like what might be going on here. It's kind of like if a be going on here. It's kind of like if a be going on here. It's kind of like if a fight breaks out in every bar you're fight breaks out in every bar you're fight breaks out in every bar you're going to, maybe it's you. We don't say going to, maybe it's you. We don't say going to, maybe it's you. We don't say that to our friends in idiot compassion. that to our friends in idiot compassion. that to our friends in idiot compassion. Okay. So, so think about that. So, is it Okay. So, so think about that. So, is it Okay. So, so think about that. So, is it that you want no drama, meaning you want that you want no drama, meaning you want that you want no drama, meaning you want your friends to kind of back up your friends to kind of back up your friends to kind of back up everything you're saying? You're not everything you're saying? You're not everything you're saying? You're not going to grow as a person. You're not going to grow as a person. You're not going to grow as a person. You're not going to hear what you need to hear. The going to hear what you need to hear. The going to hear what you need to hear. The friends you want to surround yourself friends you want to surround yourself friends you want to surround yourself with are people who will tell you the with are people who will tell you the with are people who will tell you the truth in a kind, respectful way and that truth in a kind, respectful way and that truth in a kind, respectful way and that you're willing to hear it. So some you're willing to hear it. So some you're willing to hear it. So some people think that it would be drama if people think that it would be drama if people think that it would be drama if their friends kind of called them on their friends kind of called them on their friends kind of called them on their right? Um that's not their right? Um that's not their right? Um that's not drama. So that's a healthy, drama. So that's a healthy, drama. So that's a healthy, communicative, open, honest communicative, open, honest communicative, open, honest relationship. I agree. By the way, I relationship. I agree. By the way, I relationship. I agree. By the way, I think that my definition of drama is think that my definition of drama is think that my definition of drama is when challenging things are presented in when challenging things are presented in when challenging things are presented in a way that's not uh in effort to a way that's not uh in effort to a way that's not uh in effort to resolve. Right. What I'm talking resolve. Right. What I'm talking resolve. Right. What I'm talking about is evacuative expression. Like about is evacuative expression. Like about is evacuative expression. Like when things, you know, um I mean, and when things, you know, um I mean, and when things, you know, um I mean, and I'm sort of chuckling on the inside too I'm sort of chuckling on the inside too I'm sort of chuckling on the inside too about this thing about friends. I mean, about this thing about friends. I mean, about this thing about friends. I mean, I would say my group of friends is I would say my group of friends is I would say my group of friends is they're amazing. I'm blessed with they're amazing. I'm blessed with they're amazing. I'm blessed with incredible friends and friendships. I'm incredible friends and friendships. I'm incredible friends and friendships. I'm so blessed. I only wish I had more time so blessed. I only wish I had more time so blessed. I only wish I had more time for all of them. the um were pretty hard for all of them. the um were pretty hard for all of them. the um were pretty hard on each other in terms of being very on each other in terms of being very on each other in terms of being very blunt, very um like that was dumb is blunt, very um like that was dumb is blunt, very um like that was dumb is maybe more male specific kind of maybe more male specific kind of maybe more male specific kind of language like that was dumb. Like why'd language like that was dumb. Like why'd language like that was dumb. Like why'd you do that? It was super stupid. Or you do that? It was super stupid. Or you do that? It was super stupid. Or yeah, don't be an idiot. Don't do it yeah, don't be an idiot. Don't do it yeah, don't be an idiot. Don't do it again. Or um no, I totally disagree. again. Or um no, I totally disagree. again. Or um no, I totally disagree. That that's a lot of the exchange in my That that's a lot of the exchange in my That that's a lot of the exchange in my friend group. Um I would say maybe it's friend group. Um I would say maybe it's friend group. Um I would say maybe it's just the culture I grew up in just the culture I grew up in just the culture I grew up in academia. very little validation. academia. very little validation. academia. very little validation. Validation isn't a big part of it. Um, Validation isn't a big part of it. Um, Validation isn't a big part of it. Um, but I am also surrounded by people that but I am also surrounded by people that but I am also surrounded by people that are very self-critical. So, it's sort of are very self-critical. So, it's sort of are very self-critical. So, it's sort of inherent to the way they work in their inherent to the way they work in their inherent to the way they work in their work, in their relationships, in their work, in their relationships, in their work, in their relationships, in their life, in their fitness. Like, pretty life, in their fitness. Like, pretty life, in their fitness. Like, pretty much everyone's pretty get after it, much everyone's pretty get after it, much everyone's pretty get after it, right? What I'm talking about is when right? What I'm talking about is when right? What I'm talking about is when people say no drama, what they mean is people say no drama, what they mean is people say no drama, what they mean is um don't bring anything up, right? Don't um don't bring anything up, right? Don't um don't bring anything up, right? Don't don't challenge anything. don't bring don't challenge anything. don't bring don't challenge anything. don't bring anything to my attention that maybe anything to my attention that maybe anything to my attention that maybe needs to be brought to my attention needs to be brought to my attention needs to be brought to my attention because I could be better in this because I could be better in this because I could be better in this relationship. Um, you know, to me, I relationship. Um, you know, to me, I relationship. Um, you know, to me, I think what you're talking about is think what you're talking about is think what you're talking about is volatility um, which is drama, right? Like, can you um, which is drama, right? Like, can you um, which is drama, right? Like, can you express the thing you want to express in express the thing you want to express in express the thing you want to express in a way that feels um, like an invitation a way that feels um, like an invitation a way that feels um, like an invitation or like it comes from a place of or like it comes from a place of or like it comes from a place of curiosity as opposed to blame. So often curiosity as opposed to blame. So often curiosity as opposed to blame. So often people will come at the person and say people will come at the person and say people will come at the person and say you did this as opposed to I was you did this as opposed to I was you did this as opposed to I was confused by what happened back there. confused by what happened back there. confused by what happened back there. What what happened? Why you know why did What what happened? Why you know why did What what happened? Why you know why did you make that choice or why what you make that choice or why what you make that choice or why what happened between us here? Can we talk happened between us here? Can we talk happened between us here? Can we talk about that? So you're being curious about that? So you're being curious about that? So you're being curious about the other person's experience as about the other person's experience as about the other person's experience as opposed to blaming the other person and opposed to blaming the other person and opposed to blaming the other person and assuming their intentions or why they assuming their intentions or why they assuming their intentions or why they did something or something about their did something or something about their did something or something about their character. So drama tends to be from all character. So drama tends to be from all character. So drama tends to be from all the assumptions. Like I know that my the assumptions. Like I know that my the assumptions. Like I know that my truth is the right story. That's how you truth is the right story. That's how you truth is the right story. That's how you would come at that, right? And yours, would come at that, right? And yours, would come at that, right? And yours, you were wrong. And I think it's so you were wrong. And I think it's so you were wrong. And I think it's so interesting because people come to interesting because people come to interesting because people come to therapy with these faulty narratives. Um therapy with these faulty narratives. Um therapy with these faulty narratives. Um you know, we're all we're all you know, we're all we're all you know, we're all we're all storytellers. We all try to make sense storytellers. We all try to make sense storytellers. We all try to make sense of something and we all believe that our of something and we all believe that our of something and we all believe that our story is the absolute accurate version story is the absolute accurate version story is the absolute accurate version of the story. And it's actually of the story. And it's actually of the story. And it's actually it's so funny when you see couples and it's so funny when you see couples and it's so funny when you see couples and they experienced the same, you know, they experienced the same, you know, they experienced the same, you know, they were part of the same experience they were part of the same experience they were part of the same experience and they have wildly different versions and they have wildly different versions and they have wildly different versions and then there's some part where the ven and then there's some part where the ven and then there's some part where the ven diagram overlaps and then finally they diagram overlaps and then finally they diagram overlaps and then finally they can see, oh that person's not a bad can see, oh that person's not a bad can see, oh that person's not a bad person. They were coming at it because person. They were coming at it because person. They were coming at it because they in their story they believed this they in their story they believed this they in their story they believed this and that's so important. So drama and that's so important. So drama and that's so important. So drama happens when assumptions are made. happens when assumptions are made. happens when assumptions are made. People characterize the other person's People characterize the other person's People characterize the other person's story as inaccurate, their own story as story as inaccurate, their own story as story as inaccurate, their own story as accurate, and then there's lots of kind accurate, and then there's lots of kind accurate, and then there's lots of kind of there's no space for curiosity or of there's no space for curiosity or of there's no space for curiosity or connection. It's all rupture, no repair. connection. It's all rupture, no repair. connection. It's all rupture, no repair. As you're saying this, I realized what I As you're saying this, I realized what I As you're saying this, I realized what I mean by drama because I it's a very mean by drama because I it's a very mean by drama because I it's a very broad term. Um, and I come from a broad term. Um, and I come from a broad term. Um, and I come from a background where my dad's from South background where my dad's from South background where my dad's from South America, my mom's from New York. Like, America, my mom's from New York. Like, America, my mom's from New York. Like, so like emotive expression is not what so like emotive expression is not what so like emotive expression is not what I'm referring to, right? like I'm people I'm referring to, right? like I'm people I'm referring to, right? like I'm people being passionate about something or even being passionate about something or even being passionate about something or even angry about something or even having a angry about something or even having a angry about something or even having a problem like hey that didn't feel good. problem like hey that didn't feel good. problem like hey that didn't feel good. That's not what I'm referring to. I That's not what I'm referring to. I That's not what I'm referring to. I realize as you were saying it what it is realize as you were saying it what it is realize as you were saying it what it is that gets me. It's when that I put under that gets me. It's when that I put under that gets me. It's when that I put under the category of drama which for the category of drama which for the category of drama which for which I have zero tolerance for unless which I have zero tolerance for unless which I have zero tolerance for unless you can convince me otherwise is when you can convince me otherwise is when you can convince me otherwise is when people dynamite the mind on the way out. people dynamite the mind on the way out. people dynamite the mind on the way out. It's yes, I'm telling you how much this It's yes, I'm telling you how much this It's yes, I'm telling you how much this sucks. This is how I feel or this is sucks. This is how I feel or this is sucks. This is how I feel or this is what you did and then I'm inaccessible. what you did and then I'm inaccessible. what you did and then I'm inaccessible. and um you know so they're not really and um you know so they're not really and um you know so they're not really interested. It's this evacuative interested. It's this evacuative interested. It's this evacuative expression or projection as you said. expression or projection as you said. expression or projection as you said. That's what I'm defining as trauma. That That's what I'm defining as trauma. That That's what I'm defining as trauma. That to me is far and away different than to me is far and away different than to me is far and away different than saying hey listen like this sucked. Can saying hey listen like this sucked. Can saying hey listen like this sucked. Can you think about this? Can we talk about you think about this? Can we talk about you think about this? Can we talk about this? Um Andrew, you screwed up. Like okay Um Andrew, you screwed up. Like okay Um Andrew, you screwed up. Like okay great. Like let's figure it out. great. Like let's figure it out. great. Like let's figure it out. Um absolutely. But it's this um I'm Um absolutely. But it's this um I'm Um absolutely. But it's this um I'm rolling a grenade in the door and I'm rolling a grenade in the door and I'm rolling a grenade in the door and I'm out of here. Right. That to me is the out of here. Right. That to me is the out of here. Right. That to me is the one that um I'm like I just I'm too old one that um I'm like I just I'm too old one that um I'm like I just I'm too old for that The the silent treatment for that The the silent treatment for that The the silent treatment is actually incredibly aggressive and is actually incredibly aggressive and is actually incredibly aggressive and hostile. People think that the loud hostile. People think that the loud hostile. People think that the loud one is the problem in the relationship. one is the problem in the relationship. one is the problem in the relationship. Sometimes the silent one is the one Sometimes the silent one is the one Sometimes the silent one is the one who's the problem. You know, it's the who's the problem. You know, it's the who's the problem. You know, it's the person who smiles through everything and person who smiles through everything and person who smiles through everything and doesn't really say anything, but they're doesn't really say anything, but they're doesn't really say anything, but they're being so passive aggressive. Or the being so passive aggressive. Or the being so passive aggressive. Or the person who then, as you said, detonates person who then, as you said, detonates person who then, as you said, detonates the bomb and then goes silent and that's the bomb and then goes silent and that's the bomb and then goes silent and that's their punishment. the they're punishing their punishment. the they're punishing their punishment. the they're punishing you by not talking to you for a day or you by not talking to you for a day or you by not talking to you for a day or two or three. That's incredibly hostile. two or three. That's incredibly hostile. two or three. That's incredibly hostile. And the other way that people do that is And the other way that people do that is And the other way that people do that is you bring up something in a nice way to you bring up something in a nice way to you bring up something in a nice way to someone and here's how they create someone and here's how they create someone and here's how they create drama and but they're shutting drama and but they're shutting drama and but they're shutting something down. They're shutting down something down. They're shutting down something down. They're shutting down any possibility of communication is any possibility of communication is any possibility of communication is every time you bring up something to every time you bring up something to every time you bring up something to them, they cry. Now, people don't like them, they cry. Now, people don't like them, they cry. Now, people don't like it when I say this. They say as a it when I say this. They say as a it when I say this. They say as a therapist they should be able to feel therapist they should be able to feel therapist they should be able to feel sad or hurt when someone brings up sad or hurt when someone brings up sad or hurt when someone brings up something and they should be able to something and they should be able to something and they should be able to cry. And I'm saying no. Sometimes crying cry. And I'm saying no. Sometimes crying cry. And I'm saying no. Sometimes crying is a manipulation. is a manipulation. is a manipulation. You can manipulate someone. So I'll see You can manipulate someone. So I'll see You can manipulate someone. So I'll see a couple and one person will bring up a couple and one person will bring up a couple and one person will bring up something. Let's say, you know, like something. Let's say, you know, like something. Let's say, you know, like when you do this, you know, or this when you do this, you know, or this when you do this, you know, or this hurts me or I don't like this or I need hurts me or I don't like this or I need hurts me or I don't like this or I need more help with this and the person cries more help with this and the person cries more help with this and the person cries like you're hurting my feelings. this like you're hurting my feelings. this like you're hurting my feelings. this is, you know, as opposed to saying this is, you know, as opposed to saying this is, you know, as opposed to saying this person is trying to communicate with person is trying to communicate with person is trying to communicate with you. You're going to have feelings about you. You're going to have feelings about you. You're going to have feelings about it, but there's a manipulative way in it, but there's a manipulative way in it, but there's a manipulative way in which people will which people will which people will cry every time or many times. And it cry every time or many times. And it cry every time or many times. And it shuts down any possibility of shuts down any possibility of shuts down any possibility of communication. And so we have to say, communication. And so we have to say, communication. And so we have to say, you know, what are you doing here? Every you know, what are you doing here? Every you know, what are you doing here? Every time you cry, then the other person time you cry, then the other person time you cry, then the other person feels like, well, I can't bring this up feels like, well, I can't bring this up feels like, well, I can't bring this up because I'm hurting my partner. And now because I'm hurting my partner. And now because I'm hurting my partner. And now we can never have communication because we can never have communication because we can never have communication because if I bring something up, I'm in a if I bring something up, I'm in a if I bring something up, I'm in a catch22. If I don't bring it up, we have catch22. If I don't bring it up, we have catch22. If I don't bring it up, we have a problem. If I bring it up, you're a problem. If I bring it up, you're a problem. If I bring it up, you're gonna say I'm hurting your feelings and gonna say I'm hurting your feelings and gonna say I'm hurting your feelings and then I have to stop. So, I have to and then I have to stop. So, I have to and then I have to stop. So, I have to be extra careful. And I don't know, be extra careful. And I don't know, be extra careful. And I don't know, there's no way to move forward here. there's no way to move forward here. there's no way to move forward here. So, what do you do in that instance? We So, what do you do in that instance? We So, what do you do in that instance? We have to talk about the functionality of have to talk about the functionality of have to talk about the functionality of the crime. You know, why is it so hard the crime. You know, why is it so hard the crime. You know, why is it so hard for you to hear something that your for you to hear something that your for you to hear something that your partner is saying? Do you feel blamed? partner is saying? Do you feel blamed? partner is saying? Do you feel blamed? Do you feel shame? Shame is something Do you feel shame? Shame is something Do you feel shame? Shame is something that we avoid at all costs, right? No that we avoid at all costs, right? No that we avoid at all costs, right? No one wants to feel that. Do you feel like one wants to feel that. Do you feel like one wants to feel that. Do you feel like this person is making a global statement this person is making a global statement this person is making a global statement when they're not? That they're saying when they're not? That they're saying when they're not? That they're saying you're a bad person as opposed to what you're a bad person as opposed to what you're a bad person as opposed to what you did here was bad. So there's a you did here was bad. So there's a you did here was bad. So there's a difference between who you are and what difference between who you are and what difference between who you are and what you did. And often we paint with a big you did. And often we paint with a big you did. And often we paint with a big brush when we're trying to communicate brush when we're trying to communicate brush when we're trying to communicate with our partners, you know, like you're with our partners, you know, like you're with our partners, you know, like you're bad as opposed to that thing that you bad as opposed to that thing that you bad as opposed to that thing that you did that was not good. that thing you did that was not good. that thing you did that was not good. that thing you did was bad, but you inherently are not did was bad, but you inherently are not did was bad, but you inherently are not a bad person. And we tend to tell our a bad person. And we tend to tell our a bad person. And we tend to tell our partners in all kinds of ways that partners in all kinds of ways that partners in all kinds of ways that they're bad people when they do they're bad people when they do they're bad people when they do something that displeases us. We have to something that displeases us. We have to something that displeases us. We have to be really careful about separating what be really careful about separating what be really careful about separating what they did from who they are. And we need they did from who they are. And we need they did from who they are. And we need to do that with ourselves. So often we to do that with ourselves. So often we to do that with ourselves. So often we do something and then we feel so much do something and then we feel so much do something and then we feel so much shame around what we did and we say, shame around what we did and we say, shame around what we did and we say, "Oh, I'm a terrible person." As opposed "Oh, I'm a terrible person." As opposed "Oh, I'm a terrible person." As opposed to, "I did something that doesn't align to, "I did something that doesn't align to, "I did something that doesn't align with who I want to be." it doesn't align with who I want to be." it doesn't align with who I want to be." it doesn't align with actually who I am. And that's good with actually who I am. And that's good with actually who I am. And that's good that you feel bad about it because if we that you feel bad about it because if we that you feel bad about it because if we didn't have guilt, right? So guilt is a didn't have guilt, right? So guilt is a didn't have guilt, right? So guilt is a good positive feeling. Shame, nothing good positive feeling. Shame, nothing good positive feeling. Shame, nothing comes from shame. We just tend to sort comes from shame. We just tend to sort comes from shame. We just tend to sort of like retreat from shame. Guilt is of like retreat from shame. Guilt is of like retreat from shame. Guilt is great. Guilt is saying you're not a great. Guilt is saying you're not a great. Guilt is saying you're not a sociopath. Guilt is saying um what I did sociopath. Guilt is saying um what I did sociopath. Guilt is saying um what I did not align with the person that I am. did not align with the person that I am. did not align with the person that I am. So I am a good person. I did something So I am a good person. I did something So I am a good person. I did something that felt not aligned with that. And so that felt not aligned with that. And so that felt not aligned with that. And so I need to be aware that it's good that I need to be aware that it's good that I need to be aware that it's good that I feel guilt. If I didn't feel guilt, that feel guilt. If I didn't feel guilt, that feel guilt. If I didn't feel guilt, that would say something about my character, would say something about my character, would say something about my character, but the fact that I do feel guilt means but the fact that I do feel guilt means but the fact that I do feel guilt means that I'm willing to look at myself and that I'm willing to look at myself and that I'm willing to look at myself and I'm willing to do something different I'm willing to do something different I'm willing to do something different and I'm willing to make a change. And and I'm willing to make a change. And and I'm willing to make a change. And here I'm making a bunch of assumptions. here I'm making a bunch of assumptions. here I'm making a bunch of assumptions. I wonder if the crying is uh is I wonder if the crying is uh is I wonder if the crying is uh is pre-programmed in some people because pre-programmed in some people because pre-programmed in some people because it's what it's what it's what um was able to elicit sympathy and um was able to elicit sympathy and um was able to elicit sympathy and protect them. like if like if they protect them. like if like if they protect them. like if like if they didn't do it that they'd get hit or if didn't do it that they'd get hit or if didn't do it that they'd get hit or if they didn't do it would like the they didn't do it would like the they didn't do it would like the bombardment would continue. Yeah. bombardment would continue. Yeah. bombardment would continue. Yeah. Absolutely. Everything we do is for Absolutely. Everything we do is for Absolutely. Everything we do is for self-preservation and we're just not self-preservation and we're just not self-preservation and we're just not aware of it. Like we want to avoid aware of it. Like we want to avoid aware of it. Like we want to avoid pain at all costs and so even though a pain at all costs and so even though a pain at all costs and so even though a lot of what we do to avoid pain creates lot of what we do to avoid pain creates lot of what we do to avoid pain creates more pain but that's not our intent. So, more pain but that's not our intent. So, more pain but that's not our intent. So, anything that you know when people there anything that you know when people there anything that you know when people there there's somebody that I write about in there's somebody that I write about in there's somebody that I write about in my book who comes off as very my book who comes off as very my book who comes off as very unlikable at the beginning of the book unlikable at the beginning of the book unlikable at the beginning of the book and people say why did you even take him and people say why did you even take him and people say why did you even take him into your practice? Why did you work into your practice? Why did you work into your practice? Why did you work with him? Why did you treat him? And with him? Why did you treat him? And with him? Why did you treat him? And when they get to the end of the book, when they get to the end of the book, when they get to the end of the book, not to spoil everything, but they he's not to spoil everything, but they he's not to spoil everything, but they he's probably the person they love the best. probably the person they love the best. probably the person they love the best. And it's because I'm looking at that And it's because I'm looking at that And it's because I'm looking at that person's actions as they're coming from person's actions as they're coming from person's actions as they're coming from a place of he's protecting himself from a place of he's protecting himself from a place of he's protecting himself from pain. So he's an to everybody pain. So he's an to everybody pain. So he's an to everybody because it doesn't let anybody in. It because it doesn't let anybody in. It because it doesn't let anybody in. It doesn't let him have the possibility of doesn't let him have the possibility of doesn't let him have the possibility of being hurt again because he was terribly being hurt again because he was terribly being hurt again because he was terribly hurt. And so, you know, we say hurt hurt. And so, you know, we say hurt hurt. And so, you know, we say hurt people hurt people. What are they doing? people hurt people. What are they doing? people hurt people. What are they doing? They're protecting themselves from more They're protecting themselves from more They're protecting themselves from more pain because if they let themselves be pain because if they let themselves be pain because if they let themselves be vulnerable, they're exposed to the vulnerable, they're exposed to the vulnerable, they're exposed to the possibility of pain and they don't want possibility of pain and they don't want possibility of pain and they don't want that. Are there some people for whom that. Are there some people for whom that. Are there some people for whom therapy just ain't going to help? Yes. therapy just ain't going to help? Yes. therapy just ain't going to help? Yes. Um, people who are not willing to Um, people who are not willing to Um, people who are not willing to self-reflect and it's hard, right? I self-reflect and it's hard, right? I self-reflect and it's hard, right? I think a lot of people come to therapy think a lot of people come to therapy think a lot of people come to therapy and they say, "I want something to and they say, "I want something to and they say, "I want something to change, but what they want to change is change, but what they want to change is change, but what they want to change is something else or someone else." And something else or someone else." And something else or someone else." And you, again, you can influence that. You you, again, you can influence that. You you, again, you can influence that. You can't change another person. Before can't change another person. Before can't change another person. Before people come to couples therapy with me, people come to couples therapy with me, people come to couples therapy with me, um, I ask them to each separately come um, I ask them to each separately come um, I ask them to each separately come up with the one thing that they want to up with the one thing that they want to up with the one thing that they want to work on about themselves. M so it's not work on about themselves. M so it's not work on about themselves. M so it's not what do you want to change in your what do you want to change in your what do you want to change in your partner. It's if you were going to be partner. It's if you were going to be partner. It's if you were going to be the best possible version of yourself in the best possible version of yourself in the best possible version of yourself in a relationship. What is the one thing a relationship. What is the one thing a relationship. What is the one thing that you really want to work on in our that you really want to work on in our that you really want to work on in our coup's work together? Well, no. I coup's work together? Well, no. I coup's work together? Well, no. I want to work on things, but I really want to work on things, but I really want to work on things, but I really need the other person. No, wait a need the other person. No, wait a need the other person. No, wait a minute. I won't even see them in the minute. I won't even see them in the minute. I won't even see them in the room until they each have a very clear room until they each have a very clear room until they each have a very clear sense of this is the thing that I want sense of this is the thing that I want sense of this is the thing that I want to work on. Now, that might change over to work on. Now, that might change over to work on. Now, that might change over time depending on what we uncover, but time depending on what we uncover, but time depending on what we uncover, but they need to come in with a goal. Like they need to come in with a goal. Like they need to come in with a goal. Like we all know that there's something about we all know that there's something about we all know that there's something about ourselves that we could do better at in ourselves that we could do better at in ourselves that we could do better at in a relationship. And so what is that a relationship. And so what is that a relationship. And so what is that thing? What do you want to work on? And thing? What do you want to work on? And thing? What do you want to work on? And if the other person happens to change, if the other person happens to change, if the other person happens to change, great. If they don't, that's good great. If they don't, that's good great. If they don't, that's good information, too. But you're not coming information, too. But you're not coming information, too. But you're not coming in because you think the other person's in because you think the other person's in because you think the other person's going to change. You're coming in to going to change. You're coming in to going to change. You're coming in to grow on your own. And you're growing in grow on your own. And you're growing in grow on your own. And you're growing in the context of this relationship, but the context of this relationship, but the context of this relationship, but you are doing some personal growth in you are doing some personal growth in you are doing some personal growth in the couples. I happen to think couples the couples. I happen to think couples the couples. I happen to think couples therapy moves us along faster therapy moves us along faster therapy moves us along faster individually than individual therapy individually than individual therapy individually than individual therapy does. Interesting. Because in individual does. Interesting. Because in individual does. Interesting. Because in individual therapy, you're telling a story. It's therapy, you're telling a story. It's therapy, you're telling a story. It's your perspective. I have to, as a your perspective. I have to, as a your perspective. I have to, as a therapist, intuitit what else might be therapist, intuitit what else might be therapist, intuitit what else might be going on out there. In couples therapy, going on out there. In couples therapy, going on out there. In couples therapy, I see how this person reacts with other I see how this person reacts with other I see how this person reacts with other people. Now, I can see that in the people. Now, I can see that in the people. Now, I can see that in the therapeutic relationship individually, therapeutic relationship individually, therapeutic relationship individually, like whatever, this is a microcosm of like whatever, this is a microcosm of like whatever, this is a microcosm of how they interact out there. But I'm how they interact out there. But I'm how they interact out there. But I'm different from the people they interact different from the people they interact different from the people they interact with out there because of the nature of with out there because of the nature of with out there because of the nature of the therapeutic relationship. So they the therapeutic relationship. So they the therapeutic relationship. So they will there will be what we call will there will be what we call will there will be what we call transference where they transfer some of transference where they transfer some of transference where they transfer some of their feelings about other people into their feelings about other people into their feelings about other people into the relationship with the therapist and the relationship with the therapist and the relationship with the therapist and that gives me a really good idea of how that gives me a really good idea of how that gives me a really good idea of how they interact out there. Could you give they interact out there. Could you give they interact out there. Could you give me an example of transference um me an example of transference um me an example of transference um positive and negative? Yeah. So um let's positive and negative? Yeah. So um let's positive and negative? Yeah. So um let's say that I say something and it turns say that I say something and it turns say that I say something and it turns out that they felt criticized. Well, it out that they felt criticized. Well, it out that they felt criticized. Well, it could be that I said something in a could be that I said something in a could be that I said something in a critical way, maybe. Um, entirely critical way, maybe. Um, entirely critical way, maybe. Um, entirely possible. It could be that um they have possible. It could be that um they have possible. It could be that um they have kind of transferred feelings about a kind of transferred feelings about a kind of transferred feelings about a parent onto me if I happen to be the age parent onto me if I happen to be the age parent onto me if I happen to be the age of their parent um or similar to or if of their parent um or similar to or if of their parent um or similar to or if there's enough of an age difference there's enough of an age difference there's enough of an age difference between us. And they heard something between us. And they heard something between us. And they heard something that was meant to be compassionate, but that was meant to be compassionate, but that was meant to be compassionate, but it was also true and something they it was also true and something they it was also true and something they need to look at, but they heard it as need to look at, but they heard it as need to look at, but they heard it as criticism. Sometimes you transfer, criticism. Sometimes you transfer, criticism. Sometimes you transfer, there's romantic transference. People there's romantic transference. People there's romantic transference. People get, you know, romantically attached to get, you know, romantically attached to get, you know, romantically attached to their therapists and you have to be able their therapists and you have to be able their therapists and you have to be able to talk about that. Obviously, you know, to talk about that. Obviously, you know, to talk about that. Obviously, you know, you have very clear boundaries. Nothing you have very clear boundaries. Nothing you have very clear boundaries. Nothing can ever happen. All that, but it's okay can ever happen. All that, but it's okay can ever happen. All that, but it's okay to bring that up. People think I'm not to bring that up. People think I'm not to bring that up. People think I'm not allowed to say that, you know, I have allowed to say that, you know, I have allowed to say that, you know, I have these feelings. And then we deal with these feelings. And then we deal with these feelings. And then we deal with them and we see, you know, how we can them and we see, you know, how we can them and we see, you know, how we can talk through that. And it's generally talk through that. And it's generally talk through that. And it's generally not that the person wants to get with not that the person wants to get with not that the person wants to get with you. It's really more about like what it you. It's really more about like what it you. It's really more about like what it means to feel means to feel means to feel romantically loved or what it means to romantically loved or what it means to romantically loved or what it means to be loved in general and that they put be loved in general and that they put be loved in general and that they put like a romantic veneer over that. So, like a romantic veneer over that. So, like a romantic veneer over that. So, you know, love is so complicated and you know, love is so complicated and you know, love is so complicated and it's so it's so it's so multiaceted. Um, so there's that kind of multiaceted. Um, so there's that kind of multiaceted. Um, so there's that kind of transference that happens. But I think transference that happens. But I think transference that happens. But I think with couples when I say you need to with couples when I say you need to with couples when I say you need to be able to work on the, you know, be able to work on the, you know, be able to work on the, you know, something that would, if you were to be something that would, if you were to be something that would, if you were to be the best possible version of yourself in the best possible version of yourself in the best possible version of yourself in this relationship, what would you want this relationship, what would you want this relationship, what would you want to work on? It might be I need to work on? It might be I need to work on? It might be I need to self-regulate better. It might be um I self-regulate better. It might be um I self-regulate better. It might be um I need to be less needy um of the other I need to be less needy um of the other I need to be less needy um of the other I need to expect. In other words, a lot of need to expect. In other words, a lot of need to expect. In other words, a lot of people think that their partner needs to people think that their partner needs to people think that their partner needs to be like everything. You need to be like everything. You need to be like everything. You need to telepathically read my mind and if you telepathically read my mind and if you telepathically read my mind and if you don't, you don't care. You need to don't, you don't care. You need to don't, you don't care. You need to intuit it what I wanted to do for my intuit it what I wanted to do for my intuit it what I wanted to do for my birthday. And if you didn't, then you birthday. And if you didn't, then you birthday. And if you didn't, then you don't really know me. Um, and these don't really know me. Um, and these don't really know me. Um, and these sound like kind of extreme, almost sound like kind of extreme, almost sound like kind of extreme, almost immature examples, but these are the immature examples, but these are the immature examples, but these are the kinds of things that people get kinds of things that people get kinds of things that people get caught up in, you know, and I'm giving caught up in, you know, and I'm giving caught up in, you know, and I'm giving kind of like the highest level of that, kind of like the highest level of that, kind of like the highest level of that, but they can be much more nuanced and but they can be much more nuanced and but they can be much more nuanced and much deeper. And so, um, you and much deeper. And so, um, you and much deeper. And so, um, you know, I think that people, you asked who know, I think that people, you asked who know, I think that people, you asked who cannot be helped, people who are not cannot be helped, people who are not cannot be helped, people who are not willing to self-reflect and look at willing to self-reflect and look at willing to self-reflect and look at themselves. I love that uh statement you themselves. I love that uh statement you themselves. I love that uh statement you made which is um if people are coming to made which is um if people are coming to made which is um if people are coming to therapy they need to ask about the therapy they need to ask about the therapy they need to ask about the change they want to make in themselves. change they want to make in themselves. change they want to make in themselves. Yeah. And and what their role is in what Yeah. And and what their role is in what Yeah. And and what their role is in what is not going the way they want in their is not going the way they want in their is not going the way they want in their lives. And is this isn't about blaming lives. And is this isn't about blaming lives. And is this isn't about blaming them for the problem at all. It's about them for the problem at all. It's about them for the problem at all. It's about saying there might be some truly saying there might be some truly saying there might be some truly difficult situations out there. You difficult situations out there. You difficult situations out there. You might have a parent with mental health might have a parent with mental health might have a parent with mental health issues and you know what are you going issues and you know what are you going issues and you know what are you going to do about that? You probably aren't to do about that? You probably aren't to do about that? You probably aren't going to change the fact that they have going to change the fact that they have going to change the fact that they have mental health issues. Um, but your mental health issues. Um, but your mental health issues. Um, but your reaction can change. So you can do reaction can change. So you can do reaction can change. So you can do something different. We can talk about something different. We can talk about something different. We can talk about what that might look like. You cannot what that might look like. You cannot what that might look like. You cannot engage in that dance. You can set engage in that dance. You can set engage in that dance. You can set boundaries. You can, you know, there are boundaries. You can, you know, there are boundaries. You can, you know, there are different ways to make choices about different ways to make choices about different ways to make choices about that. Um, there are sort of like that. Um, there are sort of like that. Um, there are sort of like societal things that we can't change, societal things that we can't change, societal things that we can't change, but like what can you do so that you but like what can you do so that you but like what can you do so that you feel like you have agency in the world? feel like you have agency in the world? feel like you have agency in the world? Because we all have agency to some Because we all have agency to some Because we all have agency to some degree. So where do we find that agency degree. So where do we find that agency degree. So where do we find that agency as opposed to going into this like as opposed to going into this like as opposed to going into this like helpless I'm the victim position? And helpless I'm the victim position? And helpless I'm the victim position? And people don't like to hear that. They say people don't like to hear that. They say people don't like to hear that. They say what are you what kind of therapist what are you what kind of therapist what are you what kind of therapist are you calling people victims? I'm not are you calling people victims? I'm not are you calling people victims? I'm not saying people are victims. I'm saying people are victims. I'm saying people are victims. I'm saying people have the mindset that they don't people have the mindset that they don't people have the mindset that they don't have agency and then they become have agency and then they become have agency and then they become victims. But when you realize that you victims. But when you realize that you victims. But when you realize that you have agency, you realize, wow, there are have agency, you realize, wow, there are have agency, you realize, wow, there are really difficult people, things, really difficult people, things, really difficult people, things, circumstances in the world, but I get to circumstances in the world, but I get to circumstances in the world, but I get to choose how to respond to them. going choose how to respond to them. going choose how to respond to them. going back to this thing about texting. How back to this thing about texting. How back to this thing about texting. How many of the challenges that people many of the challenges that people many of the challenges that people present to you in your office these days present to you in your office these days present to you in your office these days um incorporates or starts with yeah so I um incorporates or starts with yeah so I um incorporates or starts with yeah so I got this text uh versus you know got this text uh versus you know got this text uh versus you know somebody came to me or called me and uh somebody came to me or called me and uh somebody came to me or called me and uh we had a hard interaction or we had a we had a hard interaction or we had a we had a hard interaction or we had a conversation or something happened at conversation or something happened at conversation or something happened at work. I mean how much of it is in the work. I mean how much of it is in the work. I mean how much of it is in the digital world nowadays? Yeah. So, here's digital world nowadays? Yeah. So, here's digital world nowadays? Yeah. So, here's what's interesting about texting is so what's interesting about texting is so what's interesting about texting is so many times people will come in and many times people will come in and many times people will come in and they'll say, "We had this conversation they'll say, "We had this conversation they'll say, "We had this conversation on text and I'll say, "Can you show me on text and I'll say, "Can you show me on text and I'll say, "Can you show me the conversation?" Which people think, why conversation?" Which people think, why conversation?" Which people think, why would you do that? Why wouldn't you want would you do that? Why wouldn't you want would you do that? Why wouldn't you want to hear the narrative from that person? to hear the narrative from that person? to hear the narrative from that person? Well, I just heard the narrative, but I Well, I just heard the narrative, but I Well, I just heard the narrative, but I want to see what was actually said want to see what was actually said want to see what was actually said because they're like, "Oh, I don't because they're like, "Oh, I don't because they're like, "Oh, I don't really know. All right, let me read you really know. All right, let me read you really know. All right, let me read you what they said." And so, but I want to what they said." And so, but I want to what they said." And so, but I want to see what both parts of that were. And see what both parts of that were. And see what both parts of that were. And then the person can see, oh, here's how then the person can see, oh, here's how then the person can see, oh, here's how I contributed to that or here's a choice I contributed to that or here's a choice I contributed to that or here's a choice that I made in that moment. Again, I that I made in that moment. Again, I that I made in that moment. Again, I prefer that these conversations that prefer that these conversations that prefer that these conversations that people have are face to face people have are face to face people have are face to face conversations when they're kind of about conversations when they're kind of about conversations when they're kind of about something in the relationship. You know, something in the relationship. You know, something in the relationship. You know, text is great for like your dailiness text is great for like your dailiness text is great for like your dailiness of, hey, look what I had for lunch or of, hey, look what I had for lunch or of, hey, look what I had for lunch or how you doing or I love you or whatever, how you doing or I love you or whatever, how you doing or I love you or whatever, right? Or, you know, can you pick up the right? Or, you know, can you pick up the right? Or, you know, can you pick up the kid? But when you're having some kind kid? But when you're having some kind kid? But when you're having some kind of, you know, again, rupture or of, you know, again, rupture or of, you know, again, rupture or conflict between you, that's not a text conflict between you, that's not a text conflict between you, that's not a text conversation. But many people will do conversation. But many people will do conversation. But many people will do that on text. And then now we have a that on text. And then now we have a that on text. And then now we have a record. So it's not just like what my record. So it's not just like what my record. So it's not just like what my client is saying to me. It's like this client is saying to me. It's like this client is saying to me. It's like this is how the conversation actually went is how the conversation actually went is how the conversation actually went down. We have a transcript of it. And down. We have a transcript of it. And down. We have a transcript of it. And it's really helpful for people to be it's really helpful for people to be it's really helpful for people to be able to look at that transcript. I able to look at that transcript. I able to look at that transcript. I agree. Um, at the same time, I feel like Um, at the same time, I feel like Um, at the same time, I feel like breakups are much harder than they used breakups are much harder than they used breakups are much harder than they used to be because you can block someone on to be because you can block someone on to be because you can block someone on social media, but then the block itself social media, but then the block itself social media, but then the block itself becomes this thing. Um, you can mute becomes this thing. Um, you can mute becomes this thing. Um, you can mute people. You can put your phone away, but people. You can put your phone away, but people. You can put your phone away, but unless you block their number, they can, unless you block their number, they can, unless you block their number, they can, you know, send you things. You can um go you know, send you things. You can um go you know, send you things. You can um go back and read texts if you're an back and read texts if you're an back and read texts if you're an obsessive person. obsessive person. obsessive person. Um, you know, there just so many venues Um, you know, there just so many venues Um, you know, there just so many venues for or avenues, excuse me, for people to for or avenues, excuse me, for people to for or avenues, excuse me, for people to access our psyche when we're trying to access our psyche when we're trying to access our psyche when we're trying to move on. And in the old days, kids, you move on. And in the old days, kids, you move on. And in the old days, kids, you know, you had a phone with an answering know, you had a phone with an answering know, you had a phone with an answering machine, you broke up, it sucked, you machine, you broke up, it sucked, you machine, you broke up, it sucked, you looked at the photos, you put the photos looked at the photos, you put the photos looked at the photos, you put the photos in a box, or you burned them, and you in a box, or you burned them, and you in a box, or you burned them, and you put the box in a shelf, and then when put the box in a shelf, and then when put the box in a shelf, and then when you got into a new relationship, you got into a new relationship, you got into a new relationship, you either hid the box or you destroyed the either hid the box or you destroyed the either hid the box or you destroyed the box and you moved on. And um people's box and you moved on. And um people's box and you moved on. And um people's phone numbers changed and uh it was so phone numbers changed and uh it was so phone numbers changed and uh it was so much easier. I noticed that one tended much easier. I noticed that one tended much easier. I noticed that one tended to just remember more good stuff because to just remember more good stuff because to just remember more good stuff because there wasn't other stuff coming in. The there wasn't other stuff coming in. The there wasn't other stuff coming in. The bad stuff tended to dissipate or maybe bad stuff tended to dissipate or maybe bad stuff tended to dissipate or maybe it didn't. It was just so much easier. it didn't. It was just so much easier. it didn't. It was just so much easier. You weren't being uh infiltrated by the You weren't being uh infiltrated by the You weren't being uh infiltrated by the past and um you know because of the past and um you know because of the past and um you know because of the nature of electronic stuff. I just feel nature of electronic stuff. I just feel nature of electronic stuff. I just feel like it's like the past trying to like it's like the past trying to like it's like the past trying to like hold us back and this is on both hold us back and this is on both hold us back and this is on both sides, you know. It doesn't matter if sides, you know. It doesn't matter if sides, you know. It doesn't matter if the breakup was amicable, then you long the breakup was amicable, then you long the breakup was amicable, then you long for the person now and again or the for the person now and again or the for the person now and again or the breakup was rough and then you like you breakup was rough and then you like you breakup was rough and then you like you relive ele you know there's so many relive ele you know there's so many relive ele you know there's so many variants on this that variants on this that variants on this that um I don't know it just feels like um I don't know it just feels like um I don't know it just feels like breaking up's already the one of the breaking up's already the one of the breaking up's already the one of the hardest things. People I think don't hardest things. People I think don't hardest things. People I think don't acknowledge just how hard breakups are, acknowledge just how hard breakups are, acknowledge just how hard breakups are, right? They don't. And I think there's right? They don't. And I think there's right? They don't. And I think there's this hierarchy of pain that people have this hierarchy of pain that people have this hierarchy of pain that people have about certain things like, well, you about certain things like, well, you about certain things like, well, you only dated for this amount of time. How only dated for this amount of time. How only dated for this amount of time. How can it be that painful this amount of can it be that painful this amount of can it be that painful this amount of time after the breakup? You know, that time after the breakup? You know, that time after the breakup? You know, that like there's this hierarchy. But if it like there's this hierarchy. But if it like there's this hierarchy. But if it was a divorce, then you know, people was a divorce, then you know, people was a divorce, then you know, people understand why a year later you're still understand why a year later you're still understand why a year later you're still dealing with it or you know how if you dealing with it or you know how if you dealing with it or you know how if you were only married for 5 years versus were only married for 5 years versus were only married for 5 years versus married for 20 years. Like there's some married for 20 years. Like there's some married for 20 years. Like there's some hierarchy of pain that we have around hierarchy of pain that we have around hierarchy of pain that we have around things like it was a miscarriage but things like it was a miscarriage but things like it was a miscarriage but your child you know your eight-year-old your child you know your eight-year-old your child you know your eight-year-old didn't die you know sorry I mean that's didn't die you know sorry I mean that's didn't die you know sorry I mean that's just people say that kind of thing. No just people say that kind of thing. No just people say that kind of thing. No no they don't they don't say it but no they don't they don't say it but no they don't they don't say it but that's how they treat people. It's like that's how they treat people. It's like that's how they treat people. It's like you had a miscarriage like that what you had a miscarriage like that what you had a miscarriage like that what they say is like oh it's okay you'll get they say is like oh it's okay you'll get they say is like oh it's okay you'll get pregnant again if your child dies pregnant again if your child dies pregnant again if your child dies they're not like it's okay you'll have they're not like it's okay you'll have they're not like it's okay you'll have another child right but it feels the another child right but it feels the another child right but it feels the person who had a miscarriage is that person who had a miscarriage is that person who had a miscarriage is that they lost their child. It's very they lost their child. It's very they lost their child. It's very painful. But listen to how we talk to painful. But listen to how we talk to painful. But listen to how we talk to people who have these experiences that people who have these experiences that people who have these experiences that we tend to think that some experiences we tend to think that some experiences we tend to think that some experiences are sort of higher on the hierarchy of are sort of higher on the hierarchy of are sort of higher on the hierarchy of pain than others are. And so we think pain than others are. And so we think pain than others are. And so we think like a breakup is not as bad as like a like a breakup is not as bad as like a like a breakup is not as bad as like a breakup that in a non-marriage or a breakup that in a non-marriage or a breakup that in a non-marriage or a short marriage is not as hard as a short marriage is not as hard as a short marriage is not as hard as a breakup with uh you know a long marriage breakup with uh you know a long marriage breakup with uh you know a long marriage or whatever the hierarchy is. Um or even or whatever the hierarchy is. Um or even or whatever the hierarchy is. Um or even someone who you know it's like well and someone who you know it's like well and someone who you know it's like well and this is the reason that people don't this is the reason that people don't this is the reason that people don't actually get help for things because actually get help for things because actually get help for things because they think well you know it's just this they think well you know it's just this they think well you know it's just this it's not really that bad or I'm feeling it's not really that bad or I'm feeling it's not really that bad or I'm feeling kind of sad or I can't sleep or I'm kind of sad or I can't sleep or I'm kind of sad or I can't sleep or I'm having trouble in this relationship but having trouble in this relationship but having trouble in this relationship but it's not that bad cuz I have a roof over it's not that bad cuz I have a roof over it's not that bad cuz I have a roof over my head and food on the table so I don't my head and food on the table so I don't my head and food on the table so I don't need to go get help. But let's say you need to go get help. But let's say you need to go get help. But let's say you fall and you clearly have like, you fall and you clearly have like, you fall and you clearly have like, you know, broken your wrist. You're not know, broken your wrist. You're not know, broken your wrist. You're not going to sit there and go, I don't need going to sit there and go, I don't need going to sit there and go, I don't need to do anything about that cuz I don't to do anything about that cuz I don't to do anything about that cuz I don't have stage 4 cancer. You're going to be have stage 4 cancer. You're going to be have stage 4 cancer. You're going to be like, I'm going because I need to get my like, I'm going because I need to get my like, I'm going because I need to get my wrist repaired. So, we treat sort of wrist repaired. So, we treat sort of wrist repaired. So, we treat sort of physical health and mental health as two physical health and mental health as two physical health and mental health as two separate entities when of course the separate entities when of course the separate entities when of course the mind and the body are all intertwined. mind and the body are all intertwined. mind and the body are all intertwined. And I think that with breakups, it's the And I think that with breakups, it's the And I think that with breakups, it's the same thing. It's like people think, same thing. It's like people think, same thing. It's like people think, well, it's not that big of a deal after well, it's not that big of a deal after well, it's not that big of a deal after the first x amount of time. And breakups the first x amount of time. And breakups the first x amount of time. And breakups can really mark you depending on how can really mark you depending on how can really mark you depending on how they went down. Like if it was really they went down. Like if it was really they went down. Like if it was really volatile, if it was one of these things volatile, if it was one of these things volatile, if it was one of these things where you got no sense of um if you were where you got no sense of um if you were where you got no sense of um if you were cheated on, um if you didn't understand cheated on, um if you didn't understand cheated on, um if you didn't understand why the breakup happened, like you it why the breakup happened, like you it why the breakup happened, like you it was very surprising to you. um you know was very surprising to you. um you know was very surprising to you. um you know all those things. It can really it can all those things. It can really it can all those things. It can really it can really be a different kind of breakup really be a different kind of breakup really be a different kind of breakup than a breakup where a person it might than a breakup where a person it might than a breakup where a person it might be very painful but you understand sort be very painful but you understand sort be very painful but you understand sort of why the breakup is happening. Doesn't of why the breakup is happening. Doesn't of why the breakup is happening. Doesn't mean you don't feel the loss but there's mean you don't feel the loss but there's mean you don't feel the loss but there's something different about the quality of something different about the quality of something different about the quality of the breakup. And so then people tell the breakup. And so then people tell the breakup. And so then people tell stories about the breakup because they stories about the breakup because they stories about the breakup because they didn't get the real story. So the story didn't get the real story. So the story didn't get the real story. So the story now becomes like you don't really now becomes like you don't really now becomes like you don't really understand why the person is breaking up understand why the person is breaking up understand why the person is breaking up with you um because they didn't with you um because they didn't with you um because they didn't communicate during the relationship that communicate during the relationship that communicate during the relationship that maybe they were unhappy and now you maybe they were unhappy and now you maybe they were unhappy and now you watch them on social media. So you're watch them on social media. So you're watch them on social media. So you're watching a story and you have this whole watching a story and you have this whole watching a story and you have this whole story in your mind of look at them story in your mind of look at them story in your mind of look at them they're on this vacation or they're not they're on this vacation or they're not they're on this vacation or they're not even like with another person. They're even like with another person. They're even like with another person. They're just like look they look so happy but just like look they look so happy but just like look they look so happy but it's social media. Of course they look it's social media. Of course they look it's social media. Of course they look happy. People are not posting on social happy. People are not posting on social happy. People are not posting on social media of I'm so sad about my media of I'm so sad about my media of I'm so sad about my breakup generally. There's a whole like breakup generally. There's a whole like breakup generally. There's a whole like sort of subculture of people who do sort of subculture of people who do sort of subculture of people who do that, but it's a different thing. Very that, but it's a different thing. Very that, but it's a different thing. Very generational. Yes. But I mean, in generational. Yes. But I mean, in generational. Yes. But I mean, in general, you're having to you sort of general, you're having to you sort of general, you're having to you sort of like you want to move forward, but and like you want to move forward, but and like you want to move forward, but and by the way about grief, it's not like by the way about grief, it's not like by the way about grief, it's not like moving on because we're sort of shaped moving on because we're sort of shaped moving on because we're sort of shaped by every experience that we have, but by every experience that we have, but by every experience that we have, but it's about moving forward. So people it's about moving forward. So people it's about moving forward. So people always say about grief, you need to move always say about grief, you need to move always say about grief, you need to move on. No, you need to move forward. Let's on. No, you need to move forward. Let's on. No, you need to move forward. Let's just talk about that. Um, so you let's just talk about that. Um, so you let's just talk about that. Um, so you let's say you have to move forward. It's very say you have to move forward. It's very say you have to move forward. It's very hard to move forward when you're hard to move forward when you're hard to move forward when you're watching the other person's life. You're watching the other person's life. You're watching the other person's life. You're not moving forward at all. They're not moving forward at all. They're not moving forward at all. They're moving forward. Maybe you don't really moving forward. Maybe you don't really moving forward. Maybe you don't really know. But why are you spending so much know. But why are you spending so much know. But why are you spending so much time watching someone else move forward? time watching someone else move forward? time watching someone else move forward? Can we focus on how you might move Can we focus on how you might move Can we focus on how you might move forward? Whatever that might look like, forward? Whatever that might look like, forward? Whatever that might look like, but it's really hard when you have this but it's really hard when you have this but it's really hard when you have this like split screen of their life is like split screen of their life is like split screen of their life is happening and your life is happening. I happening and your life is happening. I happening and your life is happening. I definitely want to talk about grief. Um definitely want to talk about grief. Um definitely want to talk about grief. Um before we do that, I' I'd like to kind before we do that, I' I'd like to kind before we do that, I' I'd like to kind of double click into this uh breakup of double click into this uh breakup of double click into this uh breakup thing. Um in my observation and thing. Um in my observation and thing. Um in my observation and experience, one of the hardest things experience, one of the hardest things experience, one of the hardest things about breakups is uh this idea that we about breakups is uh this idea that we about breakups is uh this idea that we want to somehow we want to somehow we want to somehow um come to a common narrative. And there um come to a common narrative. And there um come to a common narrative. And there seems to be a lot of um desire to kind seems to be a lot of um desire to kind seems to be a lot of um desire to kind of understand where the other the other of understand where the other the other of understand where the other the other person's experience of what happened. person's experience of what happened. person's experience of what happened. um and a very I don't I don't think it's um and a very I don't I don't think it's um and a very I don't I don't think it's intentional, but I think people can be intentional, but I think people can be intentional, but I think people can be somewhat um destructive in a breakup by somewhat um destructive in a breakup by somewhat um destructive in a breakup by um changing the whole this notion like um changing the whole this notion like um changing the whole this notion like the like it was all an illusion or the like it was all an illusion or the like it was all an illusion or something or you know where you know I something or you know where you know I something or you know where you know I mean I guess I've had enough mean I guess I've had enough mean I guess I've had enough relationships and breakups to realize relationships and breakups to realize relationships and breakups to realize that you know there's love that continues you know there's love that continues you know there's love that continues there's things that you thought were there's things that you thought were there's things that you thought were love that weren't. I mean, there's love that weren't. I mean, there's love that weren't. I mean, there's love that doesn't continue and there's love that doesn't continue and there's love that doesn't continue and the there's all sorts of shapes and the there's all sorts of shapes and the there's all sorts of shapes and forms of this stuff, but that um like forms of this stuff, but that um like forms of this stuff, but that um like good well-meaning people that take good well-meaning people that take good well-meaning people that take divergent paths divergent paths divergent paths um I've learned it doesn't mean that um I've learned it doesn't mean that um I've learned it doesn't mean that um anything else. Sometimes it literally anything else. Sometimes it literally anything else. Sometimes it literally just means that right there isn't a need just means that right there isn't a need just means that right there isn't a need to rewrite the script like it wasn't to rewrite the script like it wasn't to rewrite the script like it wasn't what I thought. it actually was what I what I thought. it actually was what I what I thought. it actually was what I thought and then it was something thought and then it was something thought and then it was something different or it just circumstances different or it just circumstances different or it just circumstances changed or things changed. I'm not changed or things changed. I'm not changed or things changed. I'm not trying to make light of this. I mean I trying to make light of this. I mean I trying to make light of this. I mean I would argue I'm probably one of the would argue I'm probably one of the would argue I'm probably one of the least skilled people at breakups least skilled people at breakups least skilled people at breakups although I've gotten quote unquote although I've gotten quote unquote although I've gotten quote unquote better at it. It's always super painful. better at it. It's always super painful. better at it. It's always super painful. Like I've never had a breakup that Like I've never had a breakup that Like I've never had a breakup that didn't really hurt. It doesn't matter if didn't really hurt. It doesn't matter if didn't really hurt. It doesn't matter if I left or they left. That just didn't I left or they left. That just didn't I left or they left. That just didn't really hurt. And I think it's this idea really hurt. And I think it's this idea really hurt. And I think it's this idea of like, and this is why I think it's an of like, and this is why I think it's an of like, and this is why I think it's an interesting perhaps segue to grief is interesting perhaps segue to grief is interesting perhaps segue to grief is that it's almost like as something ends, that it's almost like as something ends, that it's almost like as something ends, we look back and we evaluate the we look back and we evaluate the we look back and we evaluate the story. Mhm. And try and figure out, was story. Mhm. And try and figure out, was story. Mhm. And try and figure out, was that real? Right. Was it not real? How that real? Right. Was it not real? How that real? Right. Was it not real? How could that have been real? And then could that have been real? And then could that have been real? And then we're here, right? There was all this we're here, right? There was all this we're here, right? There was all this hope and expectation. And I um yeah, I hope and expectation. And I um yeah, I hope and expectation. And I um yeah, I think about this a lot. Yeah. So think about this a lot. Yeah. So think about this a lot. Yeah. So sometimes what the loss is about isn't sometimes what the loss is about isn't sometimes what the loss is about isn't so much about the other person. It's so much about the other person. It's so much about the other person. It's about the loss of what it feels like to about the loss of what it feels like to about the loss of what it feels like to be in a primary relationship. So you're be in a primary relationship. So you're be in a primary relationship. So you're losing the primary relationship and then losing the primary relationship and then losing the primary relationship and then happens to be with this specific person. happens to be with this specific person. happens to be with this specific person. And so there were good qualities about And so there were good qualities about And so there were good qualities about that specific person and qualities that specific person and qualities that specific person and qualities that maybe weren't right for you, but what maybe weren't right for you, but what maybe weren't right for you, but what you're losing is the dailiness. So, so you're losing is the dailiness. So, so you're losing is the dailiness. So, so much of what feels good about being in a much of what feels good about being in a much of what feels good about being in a primary relationship is, you know, you primary relationship is, you know, you primary relationship is, you know, you get to tell the person the minutiae of get to tell the person the minutiae of get to tell the person the minutiae of your day, the little things, um, the your day, the little things, um, the your day, the little things, um, the shared history and the shared history and the shared history and the shared experiences that become the experiences that become the experiences that become the shortorthhand and the inside jokes and shortorthhand and the inside jokes and shortorthhand and the inside jokes and the routine of, you know, you your the routine of, you know, you your the routine of, you know, you your flight landed, who are you going to flight landed, who are you going to flight landed, who are you going to text? Oh, text your partner, right? Um, text? Oh, text your partner, right? Um, text? Oh, text your partner, right? Um, you know, just the built-in you know, just the built-in you know, just the built-in infrastructure of being in a primary infrastructure of being in a primary infrastructure of being in a primary relationship and someone who knows like relationship and someone who knows like relationship and someone who knows like what kind of pizza you like and you know what kind of pizza you like and you know what kind of pizza you like and you know all those little things that come from, all those little things that come from, all those little things that come from, you know, going through daily life you know, going through daily life you know, going through daily life together and you know all the things together and you know all the things together and you know all the things about their families and you know all about their families and you know all about their families and you know all the things about the people in their the things about the people in their the things about the people in their lives and the people they're talking lives and the people they're talking lives and the people they're talking about like this friend and this boss and about like this friend and this boss and about like this friend and this boss and whatever their co-workers. Um, so it's whatever their co-workers. Um, so it's whatever their co-workers. Um, so it's this whole world that's been this whole world that's been this whole world that's been co-created and then all of a sudden when co-created and then all of a sudden when co-created and then all of a sudden when that person isn't there anymore that the that person isn't there anymore that the that person isn't there anymore that the daily of your life changes drastically. daily of your life changes drastically. daily of your life changes drastically. like you're not waking up with that like you're not waking up with that like you're not waking up with that person, you're not eating meals with person, you're not eating meals with person, you're not eating meals with that person, you're not talking about that person, you're not talking about that person, you're not talking about what's for dinner with that person, what's for dinner with that person, what's for dinner with that person, you're not um saying you're wondering you're not um saying you're wondering you're not um saying you're wondering how that thing with their sister worked how that thing with their sister worked how that thing with their sister worked out, but you don't know now because out, but you don't know now because out, but you don't know now because right and you're losing the side kind of right and you're losing the side kind of right and you're losing the side kind of shared people too. Like you might have shared people too. Like you might have shared people too. Like you might have liked that person's family a lot. liked that person's family a lot. liked that person's family a lot. Sometimes you stay in touch with the Sometimes you stay in touch with the Sometimes you stay in touch with the family, but sometimes you don't. Um so family, but sometimes you don't. Um so family, but sometimes you don't. Um so like your world changes so much in the like your world changes so much in the like your world changes so much in the day-to-day. You're not just losing that day-to-day. You're not just losing that day-to-day. You're not just losing that person, you're losing an entire world person, you're losing an entire world person, you're losing an entire world that you were living in. And now your that you were living in. And now your that you were living in. And now your world looks so different and you have world looks so different and you have world looks so different and you have nothing to replace it with yet. So it nothing to replace it with yet. So it nothing to replace it with yet. So it doesn't mean you have to replace it with doesn't mean you have to replace it with doesn't mean you have to replace it with another partner. You might replace it another partner. You might replace it another partner. You might replace it with things in your own life, but you with things in your own life, but you with things in your own life, but you just, you know, breakups tend to happen. just, you know, breakups tend to happen. just, you know, breakups tend to happen. Um maybe you saw the breakup coming, but Um maybe you saw the breakup coming, but Um maybe you saw the breakup coming, but you're not really imagining what it will you're not really imagining what it will you're not really imagining what it will be like after until you're in it. you be like after until you're in it. you be like after until you're in it. you can't really understand what it's can't really understand what it's can't really understand what it's like until you're in that breakup phase. like until you're in that breakup phase. like until you're in that breakup phase. So, I think that makes it so hard So, I think that makes it so hard So, I think that makes it so hard because you're losing a lifestyle, because you're losing a lifestyle, because you're losing a lifestyle, right? Like the daily of your life. And right? Like the daily of your life. And right? Like the daily of your life. And um you know, it's like it's like when um you know, it's like it's like when um you know, it's like it's like when you're in a relationship, you're in the you're in a relationship, you're in the you're in a relationship, you're in the present, but you're also in the future. present, but you're also in the future. present, but you're also in the future. So, you imagined that the present was So, you imagined that the present was So, you imagined that the present was going to be the future. And now, mother going to be the future. And now, mother going to be the future. And now, mother of all plot twist, the future was just of all plot twist, the future was just of all plot twist, the future was just taken away along with the present. So, taken away along with the present. So, taken away along with the present. So, it's not just you're losing the it's not just you're losing the it's not just you're losing the day-to-day, you're losing what you day-to-day, you're losing what you day-to-day, you're losing what you imagine next year was going to be like imagine next year was going to be like imagine next year was going to be like in five years were going to be like. So, in five years were going to be like. So, in five years were going to be like. So, it's a huge thing. Um, it's so it's a huge thing. Um, it's so it's a huge thing. Um, it's so interesting because in my most recent interesting because in my most recent interesting because in my most recent book, it starts with my breakup and book, it starts with my breakup and book, it starts with my breakup and that's how I end up in therapy. And my that's how I end up in therapy. And my that's how I end up in therapy. And my whole thing is like, you know, the idiot whole thing is like, you know, the idiot whole thing is like, you know, the idiot compassion that we were talking about compassion that we were talking about compassion that we were talking about with my friends of he's a jerk and he's with my friends of he's a jerk and he's with my friends of he's a jerk and he's terrible and you dodged a bullet. my terrible and you dodged a bullet. my terrible and you dodged a bullet. my therapist, which who I thought was going therapist, which who I thought was going therapist, which who I thought was going to validate this position, um to validate this position, um to validate this position, um didn't for the for the better. Um and so didn't for the for the better. Um and so didn't for the for the better. Um and so by the end of the book, you know, people by the end of the book, you know, people by the end of the book, you know, people even write in now, they're like, "Oh, I even write in now, they're like, "Oh, I even write in now, they're like, "Oh, I can't believe I call him boyfriend in can't believe I call him boyfriend in can't believe I call him boyfriend in the book. I can't believe he did that." the book. I can't believe he did that." the book. I can't believe he did that." And I'm like, "No, no, no. I was And I'm like, "No, no, no. I was And I'm like, "No, no, no. I was trying to say he's a good guy." Like, trying to say he's a good guy." Like, trying to say he's a good guy." Like, you have to understand that I was seeing you have to understand that I was seeing you have to understand that I was seeing this through the lens of the breakup. this through the lens of the breakup. this through the lens of the breakup. And then over time, I see that I was And then over time, I see that I was And then over time, I see that I was responsible for this, too. I had a role responsible for this, too. I had a role responsible for this, too. I had a role in this, too. I chose not to see the in this, too. I chose not to see the in this, too. I chose not to see the things that I didn't want to see because things that I didn't want to see because things that I didn't want to see because I didn't want to live in that world of I didn't want to live in that world of I didn't want to live in that world of the breakup. Right. So, um, so I think the breakup. Right. So, um, so I think the breakup. Right. So, um, so I think it's uh wanting what you were it's uh wanting what you were it's uh wanting what you were saying earlier about wanting to have a saying earlier about wanting to have a saying earlier about wanting to have a shared narrative like we feel so wounded shared narrative like we feel so wounded shared narrative like we feel so wounded by the fact that the person let's say by the fact that the person let's say by the fact that the person let's say that they broke up with us um or even if that they broke up with us um or even if that they broke up with us um or even if you break up with them that they don't you break up with them that they don't you break up with them that they don't see the relationship the way you saw it. see the relationship the way you saw it. see the relationship the way you saw it. like they had a different experience of like they had a different experience of like they had a different experience of it and you feel like well they're not it and you feel like well they're not it and you feel like well they're not seeing it in the right way. No, they're seeing it in the right way. No, they're seeing it in the right way. No, they're just seeing it. They are seeing it in just seeing it. They are seeing it in just seeing it. They are seeing it in the right way from their perspective. the right way from their perspective. the right way from their perspective. And I think that we have this way of And I think that we have this way of And I think that we have this way of wanting to heal the wound by they're wanting to heal the wound by they're wanting to heal the wound by they're saying, "Oh, no, you were great in saying, "Oh, no, you were great in saying, "Oh, no, you were great in this relationship. It was me." Or, "We this relationship. It was me." Or, "We this relationship. It was me." Or, "We were both great and it just didn't work were both great and it just didn't work were both great and it just didn't work out." Yes. Right. But and we out." Yes. Right. But and we out." Yes. Right. But and we so want that. And and the reality is so want that. And and the reality is so want that. And and the reality is that um your partner's going to see that um your partner's going to see that um your partner's going to see things about you that maybe you don't things about you that maybe you don't things about you that maybe you don't agree with or maybe they're true and agree with or maybe they're true and agree with or maybe they're true and that's why they hurt. that's why they hurt. that's why they hurt. I always find I miss the person's smell. I always find I miss the person's smell. I always find I miss the person's smell. Yes. It's those little things, those Yes. It's those little things, those Yes. It's those little things, those kind of intangibles. I think that takes kind of intangibles. I think that takes kind of intangibles. I think that takes the longest. Yeah. Uh I have a really the longest. Yeah. Uh I have a really the longest. Yeah. Uh I have a really good uh audio memory, too. I can like good uh audio memory, too. I can like good uh audio memory, too. I can like close my eyes. have been able to do this close my eyes. have been able to do this close my eyes. have been able to do this since I was a kid and hear people's since I was a kid and hear people's since I was a kid and hear people's voices. Mhm. And um Yeah. Um but like voices. Mhm. And um Yeah. Um but like voices. Mhm. And um Yeah. Um but like smells I think um we come to expect smells I think um we come to expect smells I think um we come to expect them. Yeah. Um and then we don't notice them. Yeah. Um and then we don't notice them. Yeah. Um and then we don't notice they're there. Yeah. And then the they're there. Yeah. And then the they're there. Yeah. And then the person's gone and then we're like, "Wow, person's gone and then we're like, "Wow, person's gone and then we're like, "Wow, it smells different here." So there's it smells different here." So there's it smells different here." So there's this theory. It's it's from the Gottmans this theory. It's it's from the Gottmans this theory. It's it's from the Gottmans who do this research on couples and they who do this research on couples and they who do this research on couples and they talk about the bank of goodwill that you talk about the bank of goodwill that you talk about the bank of goodwill that you need five deposits into the bank of need five deposits into the bank of need five deposits into the bank of goodwill for every one withdrawal. And goodwill for every one withdrawal. And goodwill for every one withdrawal. And so we tend to when we're in a so we tend to when we're in a so we tend to when we're in a relationship, we don't like something relationship, we don't like something relationship, we don't like something about something that's happening in the about something that's happening in the about something that's happening in the relationship. We think about what's not relationship. We think about what's not relationship. We think about what's not working. We're taking all these working. We're taking all these working. We're taking all these withdrawals from the Bank of Goodwill. withdrawals from the Bank of Goodwill. withdrawals from the Bank of Goodwill. But like things like smell, that's a But like things like smell, that's a But like things like smell, that's a deposit. Like you smell so good. I deposit. Like you smell so good. I deposit. Like you smell so good. I really like your smell. Do we say that really like your smell. Do we say that really like your smell. Do we say that enough? Do we focus on the things like enough? Do we focus on the things like enough? Do we focus on the things like how many deposits are we actually making how many deposits are we actually making how many deposits are we actually making so that when we do make a withdrawal, it so that when we do make a withdrawal, it so that when we do make a withdrawal, it doesn't empty the bank account? And it doesn't empty the bank account? And it doesn't empty the bank account? And it it's usually when a breakup happens that it's usually when a breakup happens that it's usually when a breakup happens that all of a sudden we think about all those all of a sudden we think about all those all of a sudden we think about all those things that we didn't deposit but now we things that we didn't deposit but now we things that we didn't deposit but now we miss, right? That were sitting in our miss, right? That were sitting in our miss, right? That were sitting in our bank account and we don't have access to bank account and we don't have access to bank account and we don't have access to that account anymore. The account's that account anymore. The account's that account anymore. The account's closed. But when the account was open, closed. But when the account was open, closed. But when the account was open, we didn't look at what we had in there. we didn't look at what we had in there. we didn't look at what we had in there. And I think that the people who are what And I think that the people who are what And I think that the people who are what I see with couples who are most I see with couples who are most I see with couples who are most successful are the people who do notice successful are the people who do notice successful are the people who do notice what's in the bank account, even if they what's in the bank account, even if they what's in the bank account, even if they have to take a withdrawal every now and have to take a withdrawal every now and have to take a withdrawal every now and again. I'm always um struck by how again. I'm always um struck by how again. I'm always um struck by how people talk about their partners when people talk about their partners when people talk about their partners when their partners aren't around. Very their partners aren't around. Very their partners aren't around. Very important. Um the other day this kid important. Um the other day this kid important. Um the other day this kid came up to me in the gym kid. He was came up to me in the gym kid. He was came up to me in the gym kid. He was probably in his 30s, but there I go probably in his 30s, but there I go probably in his 30s, but there I go again. um he was a podcast fan. We were again. um he was a podcast fan. We were again. um he was a podcast fan. We were just chatting. I like to ask people like just chatting. I like to ask people like just chatting. I like to ask people like what do you do and what do you do and what do you do and he's in uh tech I think now I don't he's in uh tech I think now I don't he's in uh tech I think now I don't recall but um and uh like where are you recall but um and uh like where are you recall but um and uh like where are you from? And he's like he's from Brazil. from? And he's like he's from Brazil. from? And he's like he's from Brazil. Cool. You know and then we were talking Cool. You know and then we were talking Cool. You know and then we were talking about something. He said you know my about something. He said you know my about something. He said you know my girlfriend um and then we got into some girlfriend um and then we got into some girlfriend um and then we got into some discussion about travel in South discussion about travel in South discussion about travel in South America or something and then at one America or something and then at one America or something and then at one point he said oh yeah she's like my point he said oh yeah she's like my point he said oh yeah she's like my flower. And the way you said it, I was flower. And the way you said it, I was flower. And the way you said it, I was like, "Wow, that's beautiful." You know, like, "Wow, that's beautiful." You know, like, "Wow, that's beautiful." You know, again, I'm half Latin and um but I again, I'm half Latin and um but I again, I'm half Latin and um but I haven't heard that enough. And I was haven't heard that enough. And I was haven't heard that enough. And I was like, "Wow." And I said, "That's amazing like, "Wow." And I said, "That's amazing like, "Wow." And I said, "That's amazing that you just referred to her as a that you just referred to her as a that you just referred to her as a flower." He goes, "Yes, she's just she's flower." He goes, "Yes, she's just she's flower." He goes, "Yes, she's just she's like the flower in my life." And I was like the flower in my life." And I was like the flower in my life." And I was like, "Wow." Like, "You don't hear that like, "Wow." Like, "You don't hear that like, "Wow." Like, "You don't hear that often." You know, I also don't get into often." You know, I also don't get into often." You know, I also don't get into conversations like this very often, but conversations like this very often, but conversations like this very often, but somehow he just shared that somehow he just shared that somehow he just shared that spontaneously. Yeah. And uh she wasn't spontaneously. Yeah. And uh she wasn't spontaneously. Yeah. And uh she wasn't there to hear it. I can't remember the there to hear it. I can't remember the there to hear it. I can't remember the guy's name, forgive me. um she'll never guy's name, forgive me. um she'll never guy's name, forgive me. um she'll never know that I that he referred to her that know that I that he referred to her that know that I that he referred to her that way, but it was really beautiful. Yeah. way, but it was really beautiful. Yeah. way, but it was really beautiful. Yeah. And there's certain people um like I And there's certain people um like I And there's certain people um like I heard Rogan one day talking about his heard Rogan one day talking about his heard Rogan one day talking about his wife on a podcast. He was like she's wife on a podcast. He was like she's wife on a podcast. He was like she's just so nice. Like he just the just so nice. Like he just the just so nice. Like he just the appreciation he has for her in the in appreciation he has for her in the in appreciation he has for her in the in the in the small details of how he the in the small details of how he the in the small details of how he refers to her. Um and those are just two refers to her. Um and those are just two refers to her. Um and those are just two examples. And then I could give a bunch examples. And then I could give a bunch examples. And then I could give a bunch of negative examples about people. of negative examples about people. of negative examples about people. Gosh, I don't want to put it on one or Gosh, I don't want to put it on one or Gosh, I don't want to put it on one or the other side of the male female the other side of the male female the other side of the male female dynamic, but like but when people say dynamic, but like but when people say dynamic, but like but when people say like, "Oh, yeah, like they're a pain in like, "Oh, yeah, like they're a pain in like, "Oh, yeah, like they're a pain in my ass or like the um referring to my ass or like the um referring to my ass or like the um referring to people as their old lady or their old people as their old lady or their old people as their old lady or their old man." Like that's an interesting man." Like that's an interesting man." Like that's an interesting but kind of in my mind not the sweetest but kind of in my mind not the sweetest but kind of in my mind not the sweetest um way. Maybe it could be. Maybe it um way. Maybe it could be. Maybe it um way. Maybe it could be. Maybe it depends on the tone. Anyway, I'm depends on the tone. Anyway, I'm depends on the tone. Anyway, I'm casting a lot of um shadows and light casting a lot of um shadows and light casting a lot of um shadows and light where perhaps I shouldn't. That where perhaps I shouldn't. That where perhaps I shouldn't. That interaction was delightful and I thought interaction was delightful and I thought interaction was delightful and I thought awesome for him and awesome for her. awesome for him and awesome for her. awesome for him and awesome for her. That's why I often start a couple That's why I often start a couple That's why I often start a couple session with how did you meet? Because session with how did you meet? Because session with how did you meet? Because usually when people come to couples usually when people come to couples usually when people come to couples therapy they think the first thing therapy they think the first thing therapy they think the first thing that's going to happen is you're going that's going to happen is you're going that's going to happen is you're going to say so what's going on? What's not to say so what's going on? What's not to say so what's going on? What's not you know what's then they'll start with you know what's then they'll start with you know what's then they'll start with the problem and then they're like in the problem and then they're like in the problem and then they're like in that withdrawal from the bank account that withdrawal from the bank account that withdrawal from the bank account space. So, I like to say, "Well, tell me space. So, I like to say, "Well, tell me space. So, I like to say, "Well, tell me how you met." And immediately, usually how you met." And immediately, usually how you met." And immediately, usually there's like, "Oh," and they have this there's like, "Oh," and they have this there's like, "Oh," and they have this great story, right? And they great story, right? And they great story, right? And they remember what they love about the other remember what they love about the other remember what they love about the other person. So, we start with that. And you person. So, we start with that. And you person. So, we start with that. And you can see them sort of remembering who the can see them sort of remembering who the can see them sort of remembering who the person is that they fell in love with. person is that they fell in love with. person is that they fell in love with. Like, oh, I thought he was so cute or Like, oh, I thought he was so cute or Like, oh, I thought he was so cute or um, you know, oh, was this really we um, you know, oh, was this really we um, you know, oh, was this really we were friends for a year and I didn't were friends for a year and I didn't were friends for a year and I didn't know if he liked me and then this know if he liked me and then this know if he liked me and then this happened and then I really admired this happened and then I really admired this happened and then I really admired this about him or her, right? And so they about him or her, right? And so they about him or her, right? And so they start in this different space. And I start in this different space. And I start in this different space. And I think I think about it like, and this is think I think about it like, and this is think I think about it like, and this is going to sound like a weird metaphor, going to sound like a weird metaphor, going to sound like a weird metaphor, but you think about like non-stick pans but you think about like non-stick pans but you think about like non-stick pans versus like, you know, a regular pan versus like, you know, a regular pan versus like, you know, a regular pan that you have to put something in so that you have to put something in so that you have to put something in so that the stuff doesn't stick to it. When that the stuff doesn't stick to it. When that the stuff doesn't stick to it. When I think about like there are people for I think about like there are people for I think about like there are people for whom the good stuff, they're like teflon whom the good stuff, they're like teflon whom the good stuff, they're like teflon pans. The good stuff doesn't stick, but pans. The good stuff doesn't stick, but pans. The good stuff doesn't stick, but the bad stuff about the other person the bad stuff about the other person the bad stuff about the other person sticks like a non-stick, like a like a sticks like a non-stick, like a like a sticks like a non-stick, like a like a pan that sticks, right? So, it's like pan that sticks, right? So, it's like pan that sticks, right? So, it's like you think about like what is sticking you think about like what is sticking you think about like what is sticking about your partner when you when you about your partner when you when you about your partner when you when you think about like what they're putting in think about like what they're putting in think about like what they're putting in the pan, right? Like are you a teflon the pan, right? Like are you a teflon the pan, right? Like are you a teflon pan for good things or are you an you pan for good things or are you an you pan for good things or are you an you know, a different kind of pan for know, a different kind of pan for know, a different kind of pan for good things? Because you have to think good things? Because you have to think good things? Because you have to think like what am I focusing on? Where does like what am I focusing on? Where does like what am I focusing on? Where does my attention go? And so, you know, why my attention go? And so, you know, why my attention go? And so, you know, why are you focusing on the things that are you focusing on the things that are you focusing on the things that are upsetting you so much? And you know, upsetting you so much? And you know, upsetting you so much? And you know, there are there are certain things there are there are certain things there are there are certain things that you're never going to change about that you're never going to change about that you're never going to change about your partner. like your partner. We your partner. like your partner. We your partner. like your partner. We don't get to order up our partners all a don't get to order up our partners all a don't get to order up our partners all a cart. We don't get to say like, I'll cart. We don't get to say like, I'll cart. We don't get to say like, I'll take these qualities of my partner, but take these qualities of my partner, but take these qualities of my partner, but I'll take this thing that I don't like I'll take this thing that I don't like I'll take this thing that I don't like about them on the side. You don't get to about them on the side. You don't get to about them on the side. You don't get to do that. People come, there are no do that. People come, there are no do that. People come, there are no substitutions. They come as a whole. substitutions. They come as a whole. substitutions. They come as a whole. That's it. That's what's offered on the That's it. That's what's offered on the That's it. That's what's offered on the menu. And so people think, well, I can menu. And so people think, well, I can menu. And so people think, well, I can change the thing that I don't like and I change the thing that I don't like and I change the thing that I don't like and I can like make that person all a cart. can like make that person all a cart. can like make that person all a cart. You can't do that. You can't order them You can't do that. You can't order them You can't do that. You can't order them up that way. So, there are always going up that way. So, there are always going up that way. So, there are always going to be things that irritate you or that to be things that irritate you or that to be things that irritate you or that are suboptimal in a perfect world are suboptimal in a perfect world are suboptimal in a perfect world about your partner. Are you going to about your partner. Are you going to about your partner. Are you going to focus on that or are you going to focus on that or are you going to focus on that or are you going to focus on the things that you really love about on the things that you really love about on the things that you really love about your partner? your partner? your partner? There's a saying from 12step which is There's a saying from 12step which is There's a saying from 12step which is identify don't compare which is identify don't compare which is identify don't compare which is um like because you'll hear people um like because you'll hear people um like because you'll hear people outside of 12step talking about for outside of 12step talking about for outside of 12step talking about for instance um you know like uh you know instance um you know like uh you know instance um you know like uh you know well he's this and this and well he's this and this and well he's this and this and ambitious and this and that but he's ambitious and this and that but he's ambitious and this and that but he's like kind of emotionally unavailable but like kind of emotionally unavailable but like kind of emotionally unavailable but he's more available and people will he's more available and people will he's more available and people will talk about male or female partners right talk about male or female partners right talk about male or female partners right um or potential partners as like or um or potential partners as like or um or potential partners as like or people that they're dating as if you to people that they're dating as if you to people that they're dating as if you to cluge together the best of all people cluge together the best of all people cluge together the best of all people and get this like perfect tapestry of and get this like perfect tapestry of and get this like perfect tapestry of the person that's got all the features the person that's got all the features the person that's got all the features you want because yeah some people are a you want because yeah some people are a you want because yeah some people are a little more um easygoing light-hearted little more um easygoing light-hearted little more um easygoing light-hearted and sometimes not always less ambitious. and sometimes not always less ambitious. and sometimes not always less ambitious. Those things in my experience tend to Those things in my experience tend to Those things in my experience tend to correlate not always. Some people are correlate not always. Some people are correlate not always. Some people are super hard driving. They get it done and super hard driving. They get it done and super hard driving. They get it done and they have the capacity to be immense they have the capacity to be immense they have the capacity to be immense providers but they have less time and providers but they have less time and providers but they have less time and sometimes they're not as emotionally sometimes they're not as emotionally sometimes they're not as emotionally available. Again stereotyping like crazy available. Again stereotyping like crazy available. Again stereotyping like crazy here. Um but people get this idea that here. Um but people get this idea that here. Um but people get this idea that they're sort of like com through the they're sort of like com through the they're sort of like com through the comparison they can arrive at the comparison they can arrive at the comparison they can arrive at the perfect person when in fact I think perfect person when in fact I think perfect person when in fact I think appreciation not being teflon about the appreciation not being teflon about the appreciation not being teflon about the positive stuff comes from kind of positive stuff comes from kind of positive stuff comes from kind of shutting out the idea that there's an shutting out the idea that there's an shutting out the idea that there's an alternative but of course you don't want alternative but of course you don't want alternative but of course you don't want to end up in a situation where the to end up in a situation where the to end up in a situation where the person is you know not truly not good for you is you know not truly not good for you is you know not truly not good for you right well right that's not what I'm right well right that's not what I'm right well right that's not what I'm talking about right and I don't think talking about right and I don't think talking about right and I don't think you are but yeah with that caveat I you are but yeah with that caveat I you are but yeah with that caveat I think that um accepting that people are think that um accepting that people are think that um accepting that people are complicated And there is no cluing complicated And there is no cluing complicated And there is no cluing together of people. At some point you together of people. At some point you together of people. At some point you make a choice. And this is when people make a choice. And this is when people make a choice. And this is when people cheat. What often happens is there's a cheat. What often happens is there's a cheat. What often happens is there's a there's a specific quality about their there's a specific quality about their there's a specific quality about their partner. Maybe sometimes it has nothing partner. Maybe sometimes it has nothing partner. Maybe sometimes it has nothing to do with your partner. By the way, and to do with your partner. By the way, and to do with your partner. By the way, and I think this is so important to talk I think this is so important to talk I think this is so important to talk about when we talk about infidelity that about when we talk about infidelity that about when we talk about infidelity that often it really has nothing to do with often it really has nothing to do with often it really has nothing to do with the partner that somebody is expecting the partner that somebody is expecting the partner that somebody is expecting their partner again going back to their partner again going back to their partner again going back to vitality and aliveness to provide that vitality and aliveness to provide that vitality and aliveness to provide that for them. And if the partner doesn't for them. And if the partner doesn't for them. And if the partner doesn't provide that for them, but your partner provide that for them, but your partner provide that for them, but your partner shouldn't be providing that for you. shouldn't be providing that for you. shouldn't be providing that for you. They're additive. They're not providing They're additive. They're not providing They're additive. They're not providing a lack or a deficit in you. Um that a lack or a deficit in you. Um that a lack or a deficit in you. Um that sometimes that's why people cheat. But sometimes that's why people cheat. But sometimes that's why people cheat. But other times they say like there's this other times they say like there's this other times they say like there's this quality about my partner that is really, quality about my partner that is really, quality about my partner that is really, you know, like I don't like it. Um like you know, like I don't like it. Um like you know, like I don't like it. Um like let's take for example, um I wish that let's take for example, um I wish that let's take for example, um I wish that my partner were more, let's say, my partner were more, let's say, my partner were more, let's say, ambitious. So they go and they like ambitious. So they go and they like ambitious. So they go and they like cheat with someone who's more ambitious, cheat with someone who's more ambitious, cheat with someone who's more ambitious, but then the person isn't loving or but then the person isn't loving or but then the person isn't loving or isn't communicative or isn't, you know, isn't communicative or isn't, you know, isn't communicative or isn't, you know, whatever the other good qualities that whatever the other good qualities that whatever the other good qualities that the partner they have has. So they think the partner they have has. So they think the partner they have has. So they think that by replacing this one trait that by replacing this one trait that by replacing this one trait that the other person's going to have all the other person's going to have all the other person's going to have all the other great traits that the existing other great traits that the existing other great traits that the existing partner already has. And generally partner already has. And generally partner already has. And generally you're trading like one set of problems you're trading like one set of problems you're trading like one set of problems for another set of problems. So, it's for another set of problems. So, it's for another set of problems. So, it's interesting that people think like, I interesting that people think like, I interesting that people think like, I can fix this problem because this person can fix this problem because this person can fix this problem because this person has that thing that I really want. Now, has that thing that I really want. Now, has that thing that I really want. Now, if your partner doesn't have any of if your partner doesn't have any of if your partner doesn't have any of that, like it's a degree. It's on a that, like it's a degree. It's on a that, like it's a degree. It's on a spectrum. So, is your partner not spectrum. So, is your partner not spectrum. So, is your partner not ambitious at all? Or is your partner ambitious at all? Or is your partner ambitious at all? Or is your partner ambitious about different kinds of ambitious about different kinds of ambitious about different kinds of things? Like, they want to be a really things? Like, they want to be a really things? Like, they want to be a really good parent and they're really, you good parent and they're really, you good parent and they're really, you know, invested in that or they want to know, invested in that or they want to know, invested in that or they want to do something like philanthropic and do something like philanthropic and do something like philanthropic and they're really invested in that but it they're really invested in that but it they're really invested in that but it doesn't pay a lot, you know? So like doesn't pay a lot, you know? So like doesn't pay a lot, you know? So like what are they like what energizes them? what are they like what energizes them? what are they like what energizes them? What where is their purpose? Where is What where is their purpose? Where is What where is their purpose? Where is their meaning? You know, there's their meaning? You know, there's their meaning? You know, there's different kinds of ambition. I feel like different kinds of ambition. I feel like different kinds of ambition. I feel like um placing one's attention on the good um placing one's attention on the good um placing one's attention on the good things uh as much as possible and things uh as much as possible and things uh as much as possible and really and really letting those fill us really and really letting those fill us really and really letting those fill us up as much as possible is really key. I up as much as possible is really key. I up as much as possible is really key. I didn't say this. I borrowed this, I didn't say this. I borrowed this, I didn't say this. I borrowed this, but you know that um two of the most but you know that um two of the most but you know that um two of the most dangerous words in the English language dangerous words in the English language dangerous words in the English language are if only. you know this idea are if only. you know this idea are if only. you know this idea like if only this you know because for like if only this you know because for like if only this you know because for two reasons one is it's very unlikely two reasons one is it's very unlikely two reasons one is it's very unlikely that if only comes true but the other that if only comes true but the other that if only comes true but the other one is it takes our attention one is it takes our attention one is it takes our attention away from seeing what what's there right away from seeing what what's there right away from seeing what what's there right so I like to say it's the difference so I like to say it's the difference so I like to say it's the difference between the what if and the what is and between the what if and the what is and between the what if and the what is and people who focus too much on the what if people who focus too much on the what if people who focus too much on the what if what if this lose sight of what is and what if this lose sight of what is and what if this lose sight of what is and usually there's so much good that's that usually there's so much good that's that usually there's so much good that's that they really don't want to give up in the they really don't want to give up in the they really don't want to give up in the what is so If you're going to keep what is so If you're going to keep what is so If you're going to keep focusing on the what if, you can you focusing on the what if, you can you focusing on the what if, you can you blind yourself to the what is. And I blind yourself to the what is. And I blind yourself to the what is. And I think the what if is a big trap. think the what if is a big trap. think the what if is a big trap. Yeah. I think this notion of Yeah. I think this notion of Yeah. I think this notion of attention and appreciation attention and appreciation attention and appreciation um just seems so fundamental. Well, um just seems so fundamental. Well, um just seems so fundamental. Well, it's kind of like think of it. So I am it's kind of like think of it. So I am it's kind of like think of it. So I am sort of an amateur photographer and I sort of an amateur photographer and I sort of an amateur photographer and I think about it like you can take a think about it like you can take a think about it like you can take a picture of you can like focus on the picture of you can like focus on the picture of you can like focus on the same subject, you can f focus on one same subject, you can f focus on one same subject, you can f focus on one part of it or you can just move the part of it or you can just move the part of it or you can just move the camera slightly and then you're focused camera slightly and then you're focused camera slightly and then you're focused on something entirely different but it's on something entirely different but it's on something entirely different but it's the same thing that I'm taking a picture the same thing that I'm taking a picture the same thing that I'm taking a picture of. Right? So I always say to people of. Right? So I always say to people of. Right? So I always say to people like can you your focus is always on like can you your focus is always on like can you your focus is always on this can you like move the camera this can you like move the camera this can you like move the camera slightly and focus you know find a slightly and focus you know find a slightly and focus you know find a different part to focus the camera on. different part to focus the camera on. different part to focus the camera on. If you're always focusing on something If you're always focusing on something If you're always focusing on something that makes you unhappy, you're going to that makes you unhappy, you're going to that makes you unhappy, you're going to be unhappy. So, why don't you just move be unhappy. So, why don't you just move be unhappy. So, why don't you just move the camera and focus on the other the camera and focus on the other the camera and focus on the other things? You get to choose. People think things? You get to choose. People think things? You get to choose. People think they have no choice in the matter, they have no choice in the matter, they have no choice in the matter, right? Like, well, my brain just goes right? Like, well, my brain just goes right? Like, well, my brain just goes there. My mind just goes there. It's there. My mind just goes there. It's there. My mind just goes there. It's like, no, you get to choose what you put like, no, you get to choose what you put like, no, you get to choose what you put your attention on. You actually have a your attention on. You actually have a your attention on. You actually have a choice. What I love about what's coming choice. What I love about what's coming choice. What I love about what's coming through here is that you emphasize the through here is that you emphasize the through here is that you emphasize the role of these unconscious processes. we role of these unconscious processes. we role of these unconscious processes. we default to people that aren't healthy default to people that aren't healthy default to people that aren't healthy for us sometimes, not always. Um, and for us sometimes, not always. Um, and for us sometimes, not always. Um, and yet you also emphasize that we have a yet you also emphasize that we have a yet you also emphasize that we have a lot of agency lot of agency lot of agency these days. It seems like there's a these days. It seems like there's a these days. It seems like there's a default toward um looking outward. You default toward um looking outward. You default toward um looking outward. You know, for all that's been said about know, for all that's been said about know, for all that's been said about meditation and reflection and journaling meditation and reflection and journaling meditation and reflection and journaling on this podcast and others, like we all on this podcast and others, like we all on this podcast and others, like we all know these tools are available, they know these tools are available, they know these tools are available, they basically just take time. I mean, with basically just take time. I mean, with basically just take time. I mean, with meditation, you don't even need a pen meditation, you don't even need a pen meditation, you don't even need a pen and paper. Mhm. Um but we tend to look and paper. Mhm. Um but we tend to look and paper. Mhm. Um but we tend to look outward for answers. Um do you ever outward for answers. Um do you ever outward for answers. Um do you ever give homework to your patients give homework to your patients give homework to your patients to just like think or journal or is to just like think or journal or is to just like think or journal or is there work tend to be more behavioral? there work tend to be more behavioral? there work tend to be more behavioral? you know, it's kind of like I feel like you know, it's kind of like I feel like you know, it's kind of like I feel like the work that we do in the room is about the work that we do in the room is about the work that we do in the room is about understanding um and you know, and understanding um and you know, and understanding um and you know, and understanding sort of like where the gap is between sort of like where the gap is between sort of like where the gap is between what we say we want and what we actually what we say we want and what we actually what we say we want and what we actually do. Mhm. So, usually there is it's all do. Mhm. So, usually there is it's all do. Mhm. So, usually there is it's all about what is in that gap, what is about what is in that gap, what is about what is in that gap, what is getting in the way because we're very getting in the way because we're very getting in the way because we're very clear by the way about what we want clear by the way about what we want clear by the way about what we want usually and then there's like some gap usually and then there's like some gap usually and then there's like some gap between our behavior that isn't moving between our behavior that isn't moving between our behavior that isn't moving in that direction. In fact, moves us in that direction. In fact, moves us in that direction. In fact, moves us often either keeps us stuck or moves us often either keeps us stuck or moves us often either keeps us stuck or moves us in the opposite direction. So, it's kind in the opposite direction. So, it's kind in the opposite direction. So, it's kind of out in the world between sessions. of out in the world between sessions. of out in the world between sessions. We're working on the behavior around We're working on the behavior around We're working on the behavior around what is getting in the way in that gap. what is getting in the way in that gap. what is getting in the way in that gap. And then we're doing kind of the And then we're doing kind of the And then we're doing kind of the thinking and the feeling in the session. thinking and the feeling in the session. thinking and the feeling in the session. I don't mean that people aren't thinking I don't mean that people aren't thinking I don't mean that people aren't thinking and feeling outside of session. It means and feeling outside of session. It means and feeling outside of session. It means they're using their feelings and their they're using their feelings and their they're using their feelings and their thoughts differently. They're taking thoughts differently. They're taking thoughts differently. They're taking different actions with the feelings and different actions with the feelings and different actions with the feelings and thoughts outside of the session. Do you thoughts outside of the session. Do you thoughts outside of the session. Do you ever tell people um whatever whenever ever tell people um whatever whenever ever tell people um whatever whenever you think that just do the opposite? you think that just do the opposite? you think that just do the opposite? So, it's really funny because so many So, it's really funny because so many So, it's really funny because so many people say like your gut knows, right? people say like your gut knows, right? people say like your gut knows, right? Like listen to your gut. And for some Like listen to your gut. And for some Like listen to your gut. And for some people, because it's historical, right? people, because it's historical, right? people, because it's historical, right? Like what's in their gut? It's like no, Like what's in their gut? It's like no, Like what's in their gut? It's like no, don't listen to your gut. And it no, don't listen to your gut. And it no, don't listen to your gut. And it sounds really strange for a therapist to sounds really strange for a therapist to sounds really strange for a therapist to say to somebody, no, don't listen to say to somebody, no, don't listen to say to somebody, no, don't listen to your gut. But sometimes you literally your gut. But sometimes you literally your gut. But sometimes you literally have to say to people, whatever your have to say to people, whatever your have to say to people, whatever your first instinct is there, do the first instinct is there, do the first instinct is there, do the opposite. Do the thing that feels opposite. Do the thing that feels opposite. Do the thing that feels uncomfortable. Because your gut is what uncomfortable. Because your gut is what uncomfortable. Because your gut is what feels comfortable. And the thing that feels comfortable. And the thing that feels comfortable. And the thing that feels comfortable again is the familiar. feels comfortable again is the familiar. feels comfortable again is the familiar. and the familiar isn't necessarily the and the familiar isn't necessarily the and the familiar isn't necessarily the thing that is going to lead you to where thing that is going to lead you to where thing that is going to lead you to where you want to go. So, it's not like I want you want to go. So, it's not like I want you want to go. So, it's not like I want people to second guessess themselves or people to second guessess themselves or people to second guessess themselves or not trust themselves. It's that not trust themselves. It's that not trust themselves. It's that sometimes you have to learn how to hear sometimes you have to learn how to hear sometimes you have to learn how to hear that very quiet voice inside you that very quiet voice inside you that very quiet voice inside you because your gut is the louder one, because your gut is the louder one, because your gut is the louder one, right? Your gut is your first instinct right? Your gut is your first instinct right? Your gut is your first instinct and it's the kind of the pre-program, and it's the kind of the pre-program, and it's the kind of the pre-program, the pattern, the automatic response. the pattern, the automatic response. the pattern, the automatic response. Like if you think when we talk about Like if you think when we talk about Like if you think when we talk about sort of like neurological pathways, sort of like neurological pathways, sort of like neurological pathways, there's this like freeway that's been there's this like freeway that's been there's this like freeway that's been built with this one response. Like built with this one response. Like built with this one response. Like here's the input, right? And here's the here's the input, right? And here's the here's the input, right? And here's the map that follows. Like this person map that follows. Like this person map that follows. Like this person did this and you're going to like travel did this and you're going to like travel did this and you're going to like travel down that freeway because that's been down that freeway because that's been down that freeway because that's been the well-paved road because you've done the well-paved road because you've done the well-paved road because you've done it a million times. Doesn't really work it a million times. Doesn't really work it a million times. Doesn't really work out for you. I want people to create out for you. I want people to create out for you. I want people to create kind of side roads and different roads kind of side roads and different roads kind of side roads and different roads and let's take a different path and let's take a different path and let's take a different path and let's kind of dig out a new um let's kind of dig out a new um let's kind of dig out a new um like a new road, right? that now. So, like a new road, right? that now. So, like a new road, right? that now. So, your first instinct is still going to be your first instinct is still going to be your first instinct is still going to be like, let's get on the freeway. And I'm like, let's get on the freeway. And I'm like, let's get on the freeway. And I'm like, no, let's take a side road. Let's like, no, let's take a side road. Let's like, no, let's take a side road. Let's do something a little bit different. do something a little bit different. do something a little bit different. Let's take a different path and let's Let's take a different path and let's Let's take a different path and let's that path will now become the new that path will now become the new that path will now become the new freeway because you're going to keep freeway because you're going to keep freeway because you're going to keep going down. You know, we're going to dig going down. You know, we're going to dig going down. You know, we're going to dig out that path. The freeway is going to out that path. The freeway is going to out that path. The freeway is going to not be trafficked on. We're going to not be trafficked on. We're going to not be trafficked on. We're going to shut down that freeway eventually and shut down that freeway eventually and shut down that freeway eventually and you're going to have a new freeway you're going to have a new freeway you're going to have a new freeway that's your automatic path. So, right that's your automatic path. So, right that's your automatic path. So, right now, you've got to do the opposite to now, you've got to do the opposite to now, you've got to do the opposite to build this new freeway. I just mixed 20 build this new freeway. I just mixed 20 build this new freeway. I just mixed 20 metaph metaphors, but the point is metaph metaphors, but the point is metaph metaphors, but the point is that um sometimes your gut is just that um sometimes your gut is just that um sometimes your gut is just taking you down a welltrodden path that taking you down a welltrodden path that taking you down a welltrodden path that is not the best path for you. There's a is not the best path for you. There's a is not the best path for you. There's a great line in that movie High Fidelity great line in that movie High Fidelity great line in that movie High Fidelity based on the Nick Hornby novel, which I based on the Nick Hornby novel, which I based on the Nick Hornby novel, which I also highly recommend where he's like, also highly recommend where he's like, also highly recommend where he's like, you know, people tell me that we should you know, people tell me that we should you know, people tell me that we should listen to our gut. Well, after what 30 listen to our gut. Well, after what 30 listen to our gut. Well, after what 30 years, I've come to the conclusion that years, I've come to the conclusion that years, I've come to the conclusion that my gut has for brains. you know, my gut has for brains. you know, my gut has for brains. you know, like, you know, he's just realizing that like, you know, he's just realizing that like, you know, he's just realizing that his reflex on what to do with, you his reflex on what to do with, you his reflex on what to do with, you know, his relationship life is just know, his relationship life is just know, his relationship life is just completely off. Um, some people will completely off. Um, some people will completely off. Um, some people will hear what we're talking about right now hear what we're talking about right now hear what we're talking about right now and we'll say, "Yeah, but um, my gut and we'll say, "Yeah, but um, my gut and we'll say, "Yeah, but um, my gut also tells me when I'm in danger." We're also tells me when I'm in danger." We're also tells me when I'm in danger." We're obviously not talking about when you can obviously not talking about when you can obviously not talking about when you can sense danger. So, here's the thing. So, sense danger. So, here's the thing. So, sense danger. So, here's the thing. So, what feels dangerous sometimes, so your what feels dangerous sometimes, so your what feels dangerous sometimes, so your gut is trying to protect you. gut is trying to protect you. gut is trying to protect you. So what feels dangerous is going into So what feels dangerous is going into So what feels dangerous is going into this new situation this new situation this new situation because it's uncomfortable to do because it's uncomfortable to do because it's uncomfortable to do something different. So your gut is something different. So your gut is something different. So your gut is saying, "Oh, let's do the comfortable saying, "Oh, let's do the comfortable saying, "Oh, let's do the comfortable thing that we've always done." Even if thing that we've always done." Even if thing that we've always done." Even if the comfortable thing makes you the comfortable thing makes you the comfortable thing makes you miserable, let's do the comfortable miserable, let's do the comfortable miserable, let's do the comfortable thing that we've always done because it thing that we've always done because it thing that we've always done because it feels very dangerous to try this new feels very dangerous to try this new feels very dangerous to try this new thing. But sometimes doing the thing thing. But sometimes doing the thing thing. But sometimes doing the thing that feels dangerous is actually less that feels dangerous is actually less that feels dangerous is actually less dangerous. Oh my. So, so in other words, dangerous. Oh my. So, so in other words, dangerous. Oh my. So, so in other words, people say a lot of times people say, "I people say a lot of times people say, "I people say a lot of times people say, "I don't want to take a risk. It's too don't want to take a risk. It's too don't want to take a risk. It's too risky." But sometimes the safest thing risky." But sometimes the safest thing risky." But sometimes the safest thing you can do is to take a risk. Doing the you can do is to take a risk. Doing the you can do is to take a risk. Doing the safe thing is actually, you know, you safe thing is actually, you know, you safe thing is actually, you know, you say it's too say it's too say it's too risky. If the safest thing you can do is risky. If the safest thing you can do is risky. If the safest thing you can do is to take a risk because it's going to take a risk because it's going to take a risk because it's going to lead you closer to what you want to lead you closer to what you want to lead you closer to what you want to accomplish or the thing that you're accomplish or the thing that you're accomplish or the thing that you're trying to get toward. I um completely trying to get toward. I um completely trying to get toward. I um completely agree. Uh, I also in my in my life I've agree. Uh, I also in my in my life I've agree. Uh, I also in my in my life I've had the experience of I've taken big had the experience of I've taken big had the experience of I've taken big risks with my career multiple times and risks with my career multiple times and risks with my career multiple times and it's always worked out. Thank goodness. it's always worked out. Thank goodness. it's always worked out. Thank goodness. A lot of my teen years and 20s and A lot of my teen years and 20s and A lot of my teen years and 20s and 30s were spent um learning to 30s were spent um learning to 30s were spent um learning to overcome the adrenaline response. Mhm. overcome the adrenaline response. Mhm. overcome the adrenaline response. Mhm. And I learned to take progressively more And I learned to take progressively more And I learned to take progressively more and more risk and you know ended up and more risk and you know ended up and more risk and you know ended up having a air failure scuba diving cage having a air failure scuba diving cage having a air failure scuba diving cage at diving with great white sharks. I at diving with great white sharks. I at diving with great white sharks. I don't say this to sound tough. I say don't say this to sound tough. I say don't say this to sound tough. I say this cuz it's like what was I thinking? this cuz it's like what was I thinking? this cuz it's like what was I thinking? I was I took it too far. Mh. Right? You I was I took it too far. Mh. Right? You I was I took it too far. Mh. Right? You know, so I think learning to overcome know, so I think learning to overcome know, so I think learning to overcome the adrenaline response and be calm and the adrenaline response and be calm and the adrenaline response and be calm and adrenaline I think has its value. Um, I adrenaline I think has its value. Um, I adrenaline I think has its value. Um, I also took tremendous risk in my personal also took tremendous risk in my personal also took tremendous risk in my personal life getting involved with people I life getting involved with people I life getting involved with people I never should have gotten involved with. never should have gotten involved with. never should have gotten involved with. And I blame myself. I don't blame them, And I blame myself. I don't blame them, And I blame myself. I don't blame them, right? I mean, I was in choice. So, I right? I mean, I was in choice. So, I right? I mean, I was in choice. So, I can imagine that some people are so can imagine that some people are so can imagine that some people are so averse to uh danger that they don't averse to uh danger that they don't averse to uh danger that they don't put themselves into circumstances in put themselves into circumstances in put themselves into circumstances in which they could really come to thrive. which they could really come to thrive. which they could really come to thrive. And some people are just wired to um go And some people are just wired to um go And some people are just wired to um go into the fire to the point where it's into the fire to the point where it's into the fire to the point where it's destructive. Yeah. Either in with destructive. Yeah. Either in with destructive. Yeah. Either in with physical pursuits or in uh romantic with physical pursuits or in uh romantic with physical pursuits or in uh romantic relationships. You know, I I'll take relationships. You know, I I'll take relationships. You know, I I'll take it outside my own story. I mean, I take it outside my own story. I mean, I take it outside my own story. I mean, I have a friend, a dear friend who um I have a friend, a dear friend who um I have a friend, a dear friend who um you know was in an like an incredibly you know was in an like an incredibly you know was in an like an incredibly physically abusive relationship number physically abusive relationship number physically abusive relationship number 12. Mhm. And she eventually came to the 12. Mhm. And she eventually came to the 12. Mhm. And she eventually came to the conclusion that her threat sensing um conclusion that her threat sensing um conclusion that her threat sensing um threshold was just way too high. Did threshold was just way too high. Did threshold was just way too high. Did some really good work to understand why some really good work to understand why some really good work to understand why that was and realized that her fear that was and realized that her fear that was and realized that her fear response didn't kick in until it was response didn't kick in until it was response didn't kick in until it was like a nine alarm fire, right? And so, like a nine alarm fire, right? And so, like a nine alarm fire, right? And so, you know, she needed um to listen to you know, she needed um to listen to you know, she needed um to listen to that, as you mentioned, that like super that, as you mentioned, that like super that, as you mentioned, that like super quiet whisper early on quiet whisper early on quiet whisper early on um because anyone else who didn't have um because anyone else who didn't have um because anyone else who didn't have her history, which is sadly a very, very her history, which is sadly a very, very her history, which is sadly a very, very challenging history in her family would challenging history in her family would challenging history in her family would have um immediately been like, "Yeah, have um immediately been like, "Yeah, have um immediately been like, "Yeah, I'm out." But she was like, "This is I'm out." But she was like, "This is I'm out." But she was like, "This is normal." Yeah. when um when I was in normal." Yeah. when um when I was in normal." Yeah. when um when I was in medical school, I remember the people medical school, I remember the people medical school, I remember the people who wanted to work in the ER were like who wanted to work in the ER were like who wanted to work in the ER were like who were like, I want to do emergency who were like, I want to do emergency who were like, I want to do emergency medicine were people often who um grew medicine were people often who um grew medicine were people often who um grew up in environments where danger was a up in environments where danger was a up in environments where danger was a part of it, right? So, they're used to part of it, right? So, they're used to part of it, right? So, they're used to that and it doesn't really strike them that and it doesn't really strike them that and it doesn't really strike them as like their sense of danger, as like their sense of danger, as like their sense of danger, their barometer is different from maybe their barometer is different from maybe their barometer is different from maybe a different person's. Um I think of it a different person's. Um I think of it a different person's. Um I think of it as like a thermostat. When you think as like a thermostat. When you think as like a thermostat. When you think about like let's say you want to set about like let's say you want to set about like let's say you want to set your thermostat at like 72 degrees, your thermostat at like 72 degrees, your thermostat at like 72 degrees, right? Some people their thermostat is right? Some people their thermostat is right? Some people their thermostat is off because in their house like they did off because in their house like they did off because in their house like they did the slightest thing and their parents the slightest thing and their parents the slightest thing and their parents treated it like it was a huge horrible treated it like it was a huge horrible treated it like it was a huge horrible mistake and they're bad and it was an mistake and they're bad and it was an mistake and they're bad and it was an emergency, right? So they don't know how emergency, right? So they don't know how emergency, right? So they don't know how to calibrate like what does 72 actually to calibrate like what does 72 actually to calibrate like what does 72 actually feel like? or the opposite like some big feel like? or the opposite like some big feel like? or the opposite like some big thing happened and their parents thing happened and their parents thing happened and their parents underreacted and so they don't really underreacted and so they don't really underreacted and so they don't really know kind of like what is what does 72 know kind of like what is what does 72 know kind of like what is what does 72 feel like? I don't really know what that feel like? I don't really know what that feel like? I don't really know what that like good temperature is like. So, I think good temperature is like. So, I think good temperature is like. So, I think that there's a lot of um people who stay that there's a lot of um people who stay that there's a lot of um people who stay in situations that are like it's like in situations that are like it's like in situations that are like it's like other people would say, "Whoa, it's like other people would say, "Whoa, it's like other people would say, "Whoa, it's like 100 degrees in here. Get out. There's a 100 degrees in here. Get out. There's a 100 degrees in here. Get out. There's a fire." Right? And this person's like, fire." Right? And this person's like, fire." Right? And this person's like, "No, it's just it feels like 72." They "No, it's just it feels like 72." They "No, it's just it feels like 72." They don't know. Um and so it's really about don't know. Um and so it's really about don't know. Um and so it's really about recalibrating. And I think when we talk recalibrating. And I think when we talk recalibrating. And I think when we talk about risk and danger, you have to learn about risk and danger, you have to learn about risk and danger, you have to learn how to calibrate your own how to calibrate your own how to calibrate your own thermostat. And I think that that's thermostat. And I think that that's thermostat. And I think that that's really important. We talk about that's really important. We talk about that's really important. We talk about the difference between productive the difference between productive the difference between productive anxiety and unproductive anxiety. So anxiety and unproductive anxiety. So anxiety and unproductive anxiety. So unproductive anxiety is there's some unproductive anxiety is there's some unproductive anxiety is there's some kind of danger and I'm going to ruminate kind of danger and I'm going to ruminate kind of danger and I'm going to ruminate and ruminate and ruminate and I'm and ruminate and ruminate and I'm and ruminate and ruminate and I'm thinking about it all the time and thinking about it all the time and thinking about it all the time and somehow that's going to keep me safe somehow that's going to keep me safe somehow that's going to keep me safe because I'm thinking about it. And then because I'm thinking about it. And then because I'm thinking about it. And then there's productive anxiety which is oh there's productive anxiety which is oh there's productive anxiety which is oh it's good that I sense the danger it's good that I sense the danger it's good that I sense the danger because I'm going to do something about because I'm going to do something about because I'm going to do something about this. Like I have a plan for how to deal this. Like I have a plan for how to deal this. Like I have a plan for how to deal with this. So, it might be I'm in this with this. So, it might be I'm in this with this. So, it might be I'm in this relationship and it just doesn't feel relationship and it just doesn't feel relationship and it just doesn't feel right, but and this person is acting right, but and this person is acting right, but and this person is acting this way toward me and I know I this way toward me and I know I this way toward me and I know I shouldn't be treated this way, but I shouldn't be treated this way, but I shouldn't be treated this way, but I don't know, maybe it's okay. And that's don't know, maybe it's okay. And that's don't know, maybe it's okay. And that's not productive. That's just anxiety. not productive. That's just anxiety. not productive. That's just anxiety. You're just circling, ruminating. You're just circling, ruminating. You're just circling, ruminating. Productive anxiety would be like, Productive anxiety would be like, Productive anxiety would be like, "Something's wrong. Like, I shouldn't be "Something's wrong. Like, I shouldn't be "Something's wrong. Like, I shouldn't be treated this way. So, my plan is I'm treated this way. So, my plan is I'm treated this way. So, my plan is I'm going to try to talk to my partner about going to try to talk to my partner about going to try to talk to my partner about this or we're going to go to therapy this or we're going to go to therapy this or we're going to go to therapy about this and see if it improves. And about this and see if it improves. And about this and see if it improves. And if it doesn't, I'm going to leave to if it doesn't, I'm going to leave to if it doesn't, I'm going to leave to find a different relationship." You're find a different relationship." You're find a different relationship." You're right. You want to sense danger but the right. You want to sense danger but the right. You want to sense danger but the question is it productive or is it question is it productive or is it question is it productive or is it unproductive? What do we do with it? So unproductive? What do we do with it? So unproductive? What do we do with it? So people when I say like trust your gut people when I say like trust your gut people when I say like trust your gut some somebody might say well my gut some somebody might say well my gut some somebody might say well my gut is that like when things are really is that like when things are really is that like when things are really unpleasant you stick with it because my unpleasant you stick with it because my unpleasant you stick with it because my parent stuck with my other parent when parent stuck with my other parent when parent stuck with my other parent when things are really unpleasant and that's things are really unpleasant and that's things are really unpleasant and that's what you do right so that doesn't make what you do right so that doesn't make what you do right so that doesn't make sense. So, I think that do the opposite sense. So, I think that do the opposite sense. So, I think that do the opposite in that case. It's like, oh, you think in that case. It's like, oh, you think in that case. It's like, oh, you think you're supposed to stay in this case you're supposed to stay in this case you're supposed to stay in this case because your parents did like do the because your parents did like do the because your parents did like do the opposite. See what happens if you do opposite. See what happens if you do opposite. See what happens if you do something different. We hear that um something different. We hear that um something different. We hear that um there's value to being able to be on there's value to being able to be on there's value to being able to be on one's own, right? Like, you know, some one's own, right? Like, you know, some one's own, right? Like, you know, some people seem to always need to be in a people seem to always need to be in a people seem to always need to be in a relationship and um some people probably relationship and um some people probably relationship and um some people probably don't. But um do you think there's value don't. But um do you think there's value don't. But um do you think there's value to people really understanding to people really understanding to people really understanding themselves first? I know some couples themselves first? I know some couples themselves first? I know some couples that got together in like their first that got together in like their first that got together in like their first year of college that are still together. year of college that are still together. year of college that are still together. Uh they have kids now in college, which Uh they have kids now in college, which Uh they have kids now in college, which is a trip and they seem super happy. is a trip and they seem super happy. is a trip and they seem super happy. They are super happy from what I know. They are super happy from what I know. They are super happy from what I know. And I know people that have had many And I know people that have had many And I know people that have had many relationships and then find somebody and relationships and then find somebody and relationships and then find somebody and some people take time on their own, some people take time on their own, some people take time on their own, some people don't. How important is this people don't. How important is this people don't. How important is this notion about knowing oneself really? notion about knowing oneself really? notion about knowing oneself really? Yeah. So when you look at what are the Yeah. So when you look at what are the Yeah. So when you look at what are the factors that determine the success of a factors that determine the success of a factors that determine the success of a relationship or a marriage um emotional relationship or a marriage um emotional relationship or a marriage um emotional maturity is number one. Number two by maturity is number one. Number two by maturity is number one. Number two by the way is flexibility. That being with the way is flexibility. That being with the way is flexibility. That being with someone incredibly rigid is very hard. someone incredibly rigid is very hard. someone incredibly rigid is very hard. Define rigid. Uh rigid is things have to Define rigid. Uh rigid is things have to Define rigid. Uh rigid is things have to be this way in the practical space like be this way in the practical space like be this way in the practical space like toothpaste has to be on the right not on toothpaste has to be on the right not on toothpaste has to be on the right not on the left kind of thing. And emotionally the left kind of thing. And emotionally the left kind of thing. And emotionally rigid like this is wrong, this is right, rigid like this is wrong, this is right, rigid like this is wrong, this is right, this is the way you do it, this is not this is the way you do it, this is not this is the way you do it, this is not the way you do it. the way you do it. the way you do it. um you know you behave this way, you um you know you behave this way, you um you know you behave this way, you don't behave this way as opposed to don't behave this way as opposed to don't behave this way as opposed to people have different personalities. people have different personalities. people have different personalities. They have different ways of They have different ways of They have different ways of communicating. Um, and yes, the rigidity communicating. Um, and yes, the rigidity communicating. Um, and yes, the rigidity around sort of like the household of around sort of like the household of around sort of like the household of course too, but just a rigid course too, but just a rigid course too, but just a rigid personality, you know, like I can't personality, you know, like I can't personality, you know, like I can't leave it this time. I have to leave it leave it this time. I have to leave it leave it this time. I have to leave it this time. We have to be here now, you this time. We have to be here now, you this time. We have to be here now, you know, like whatever. We can't there's no know, like whatever. We can't there's no know, like whatever. We can't there's no flexibility around anything. Or even flexibility around anything. Or even flexibility around anything. Or even flexibility around plans. Like when you flexibility around plans. Like when you flexibility around plans. Like when you get married, you don't know what 5 get married, you don't know what 5 get married, you don't know what 5 years, 10 years down the line is going years, 10 years down the line is going years, 10 years down the line is going to be like. Are you flexible with how to be like. Are you flexible with how to be like. Are you flexible with how you're moving in whatever direction the you're moving in whatever direction the you're moving in whatever direction the other person is moving in whatever other person is moving in whatever other person is moving in whatever direction? Like if you need things to be direction? Like if you need things to be direction? Like if you need things to be static, that's very rigid. And it's hard static, that's very rigid. And it's hard static, that's very rigid. And it's hard because people are not static. There are because people are not static. There are because people are not static. There are things about their core personality that things about their core personality that things about their core personality that tend to be static, but people evolve. tend to be static, but people evolve. tend to be static, but people evolve. And so you have to leave room for the And so you have to leave room for the And so you have to leave room for the evolution of there are three evolution of there are three evolution of there are three entities. There's you, there's the other entities. There's you, there's the other entities. There's you, there's the other person, and there's the relationship. person, and there's the relationship. person, and there's the relationship. And all three of those entities are And all three of those entities are And all three of those entities are going to evolve over time. And if you going to evolve over time. And if you going to evolve over time. And if you don't have flexibility and you insist don't have flexibility and you insist don't have flexibility and you insist that they stay exactly the same, that's that they stay exactly the same, that's that they stay exactly the same, that's going to be problematic. Going back to going to be problematic. Going back to going to be problematic. Going back to whether somebody needs to spend time whether somebody needs to spend time whether somebody needs to spend time alone before they get into a alone before they get into a alone before they get into a relationship or how much you need to relationship or how much you need to relationship or how much you need to know yourself before you get into a know yourself before you get into a know yourself before you get into a relationship. I think people have this relationship. I think people have this relationship. I think people have this misconception that they have to be fully misconception that they have to be fully misconception that they have to be fully formed and then before they can get into formed and then before they can get into formed and then before they can get into a relationship. And the thing is that a relationship. And the thing is that a relationship. And the thing is that you grow in connection with others. And you grow in connection with others. And you grow in connection with others. And so people you're saying you're so people you're saying you're so people you're saying you're so surprised that these people met in surprised that these people met in surprised that these people met in college and you know they've been college and you know they've been college and you know they've been together all this time and of course together all this time and of course together all this time and of course they were so young. Oh no I'm not they were so young. Oh no I'm not they were so young. Oh no I'm not surprised. Okay. No, no, no. I'm surprised. Okay. No, no, no. I'm surprised. Okay. No, no, no. I'm envious. Okay. uh because they in a in a envious. Okay. uh because they in a in a envious. Okay. uh because they in a in a in a in a light way because they got in a in a light way because they got in a in a light way because they got their first jobs in parallel. They they their first jobs in parallel. They they their first jobs in parallel. They they uh sadly their parents passed away in uh sadly their parents passed away in uh sadly their parents passed away in parallel. They they went through a parallel. They they went through a parallel. They they went through a number of life evolutions together. number of life evolutions together. number of life evolutions together. Their life story is a co-mingled story. Their life story is a co-mingled story. Their life story is a co-mingled story. Yes. You know, it reminds me of um I had Yes. You know, it reminds me of um I had Yes. You know, it reminds me of um I had a therapy client who was divorced and a therapy client who was divorced and a therapy client who was divorced and she was talking about dating again and she was talking about dating again and she was talking about dating again and she met someone great and she said, "I she met someone great and she said, "I she met someone great and she said, "I love this person so much and this person love this person so much and this person love this person so much and this person is actually a much better person for me, is actually a much better person for me, is actually a much better person for me, but there's a sadness that she said he but there's a sadness that she said he but there's a sadness that she said he will never have met my parents cuz they will never have met my parents cuz they will never have met my parents cuz they had died. um he will not know like all had died. um he will not know like all had died. um he will not know like all these things about who I was when I was these things about who I was when I was these things about who I was when I was 25 or 35 or you know what it was like 25 or 35 or you know what it was like 25 or 35 or you know what it was like when I went through this particular when I went through this particular when I went through this particular thing in life or you know again like the thing in life or you know again like the thing in life or you know again like the you know wasn't there with the you know wasn't there with the you know wasn't there with the birth of our children birth of our children birth of our children um didn't know our kids at that age. So um didn't know our kids at that age. So um didn't know our kids at that age. So it's true that there there's something it's true that there there's something it's true that there there's something very um important about having a shared very um important about having a shared very um important about having a shared history. It's not end all beall. She's history. It's not end all beall. She's history. It's not end all beall. She's happier in that second marriage. But happier in that second marriage. But happier in that second marriage. But there is something to be said about there is something to be said about there is something to be said about people think, well, I have to wait until people think, well, I have to wait until people think, well, I have to wait until I'm at this point before I can seriously I'm at this point before I can seriously I'm at this point before I can seriously consider dating someone who might become consider dating someone who might become consider dating someone who might become my life partner. And I think that you my life partner. And I think that you my life partner. And I think that you grow in connection with people or people grow in connection with people or people grow in connection with people or people say, you know, like, I'm not ready to be say, you know, like, I'm not ready to be say, you know, like, I'm not ready to be in a relationship because I don't know in a relationship because I don't know in a relationship because I don't know enough about myself. You're going to enough about myself. You're going to enough about myself. You're going to learn so much more about yourself when learn so much more about yourself when learn so much more about yourself when you are with someone because you're you are with someone because you're you are with someone because you're forced to. someone's holding up a mirror forced to. someone's holding up a mirror forced to. someone's holding up a mirror to you. It's like how I say that, you to you. It's like how I say that, you to you. It's like how I say that, you know, I was saying earlier that when I know, I was saying earlier that when I know, I was saying earlier that when I see couples, people grow individually so see couples, people grow individually so see couples, people grow individually so much faster because they're in much faster because they're in much faster because they're in relationship with someone and really relationship with someone and really relationship with someone and really having that mirror held up to them. I having that mirror held up to them. I having that mirror held up to them. I mean, you can sit there and think like mean, you can sit there and think like mean, you can sit there and think like by yourself till the, you know, till you by yourself till the, you know, till you by yourself till the, you know, till you turn blue in the face. But the reality turn blue in the face. But the reality turn blue in the face. But the reality is no one's giving you feedback. You're is no one's giving you feedback. You're is no one's giving you feedback. You're not interacting. You're not pushing up not interacting. You're not pushing up not interacting. You're not pushing up against anything. Yeah, I totally agree. against anything. Yeah, I totally agree. against anything. Yeah, I totally agree. I mean certainly most of my uh evolution I mean certainly most of my uh evolution I mean certainly most of my uh evolution has been in relation to other things and has been in relation to other things and has been in relation to other things and not just romantic relationships. I mean not just romantic relationships. I mean not just romantic relationships. I mean like jobs that didn't feel right like jobs that didn't feel right like jobs that didn't feel right that I eventually moved on to a that I eventually moved on to a that I eventually moved on to a different job. Like you just learn so different job. Like you just learn so different job. Like you just learn so much based also on what didn't work. much based also on what didn't work. much based also on what didn't work. Yeah. I mean there's real Yeah. I mean there's real Yeah. I mean there's real information there. information there. information there. I definitely want to uh go back to grief I definitely want to uh go back to grief I definitely want to uh go back to grief and talk about loss, but I feel like um and talk about loss, but I feel like um and talk about loss, but I feel like um there's a hatch that we opened earlier there's a hatch that we opened earlier there's a hatch that we opened earlier that I'd like to um peer into for a bit, that I'd like to um peer into for a bit, that I'd like to um peer into for a bit, which is this um male female distinction which is this um male female distinction which is this um male female distinction dynamic uh that nowadays is very dynamic uh that nowadays is very dynamic uh that nowadays is very prominent especially in um I would say prominent especially in um I would say prominent especially in um I would say people like 40 and younger. Um it's so people like 40 and younger. Um it's so people like 40 and younger. Um it's so different now um in terms of the different now um in terms of the different now um in terms of the dynamics of what boys and men hear about dynamics of what boys and men hear about dynamics of what boys and men hear about boys and men generally what girls and boys and men generally what girls and boys and men generally what girls and women hear about girls generally and women hear about girls generally and women hear about girls generally and therefore how like we think about therefore how like we think about therefore how like we think about ourselves. But um you have a son. Mhm. ourselves. But um you have a son. Mhm. ourselves. But um you have a son. Mhm. What do you think are some of the What do you think are some of the What do you think are some of the positive things that have evolved in positive things that have evolved in positive things that have evolved in this kind of landscape and then what do this kind of landscape and then what do this kind of landscape and then what do what do you think are some of the things what do you think are some of the things what do you think are some of the things that are creating problems for that are creating problems for that are creating problems for sake of romantic relationship but also sake of romantic relationship but also sake of romantic relationship but also just relationship to self? I think just relationship to self? I think just relationship to self? I think romantically um it's very hard for young romantically um it's very hard for young romantically um it's very hard for young people like in their teens and early 20s people like in their teens and early 20s people like in their teens and early 20s because they don't have kind of an because they don't have kind of an because they don't have kind of an infrastructure around romantic infrastructure around romantic infrastructure around romantic relationships. Um there's not the relationships. Um there's not the relationships. Um there's not the typical kind of courting um because it typical kind of courting um because it typical kind of courting um because it feels kind of old. Guys don't ask girls feels kind of old. Guys don't ask girls feels kind of old. Guys don't ask girls out on dates anymore. They they do out on dates anymore. They they do out on dates anymore. They they do but they don't really know how or they but they don't really know how or they but they don't really know how or they do it on text, right? do it on text, right? do it on text, right? um as opposed to just like there's um as opposed to just like there's um as opposed to just like there's something really profound about having something really profound about having something really profound about having to call someone on the phone and ask to call someone on the phone and ask to call someone on the phone and ask them out on a date. You grow so much as them out on a date. You grow so much as them out on a date. You grow so much as a person by doing that and it kind of a person by doing that and it kind of a person by doing that and it kind of sets the stage for the relationship as sets the stage for the relationship as sets the stage for the relationship as well. Um or asking someone out in well. Um or asking someone out in well. Um or asking someone out in person. It's hard. You're really person. It's hard. You're really person. It's hard. You're really vulnerable. So, it's easy to kind of vulnerable. So, it's easy to kind of vulnerable. So, it's easy to kind of avoid vulnerability because you can do avoid vulnerability because you can do avoid vulnerability because you can do so many things on text and, you know, so many things on text and, you know, so many things on text and, you know, pretend that it's not a vulnerable act. pretend that it's not a vulnerable act. pretend that it's not a vulnerable act. Um, and people, you know, don't Um, and people, you know, don't Um, and people, you know, don't necessarily even call it a date, you necessarily even call it a date, you necessarily even call it a date, you know, it's like, hey, you want to hang know, it's like, hey, you want to hang know, it's like, hey, you want to hang out? Um, you know, which is just it's out? Um, you know, which is just it's out? Um, you know, which is just it's kind of the language around it. So, kind of the language around it. So, kind of the language around it. So, there's not sort of like the structure there's not sort of like the structure there's not sort of like the structure of we're going on a date that's much of we're going on a date that's much of we're going on a date that's much less common. Whereas in your era and less common. Whereas in your era and less common. Whereas in your era and my era, it was much more like you knew my era, it was much more like you knew my era, it was much more like you knew when you were being asked on a date. It when you were being asked on a date. It when you were being asked on a date. It was it was not so ambiguous. Um, and I was it was not so ambiguous. Um, and I was it was not so ambiguous. Um, and I think social media makes it really hard think social media makes it really hard think social media makes it really hard because, you know, any misstep someone's because, you know, any misstep someone's because, you know, any misstep someone's going to post about it potentially or going to post about it potentially or going to post about it potentially or they've got you on video or things that they've got you on video or things that they've got you on video or things that are really embarrassing or scary when are really embarrassing or scary when are really embarrassing or scary when you're first getting into a relationship you're first getting into a relationship you're first getting into a relationship with someone. You know, that could with someone. You know, that could with someone. You know, that could become if you're with the wrong person become if you're with the wrong person become if you're with the wrong person who's emotionally immature. And many who's emotionally immature. And many who's emotionally immature. And many young people, you know, they're young people, you know, they're young people, you know, they're learning and growing. Um they do all learning and growing. Um they do all learning and growing. Um they do all kinds of things that humiliate the other kinds of things that humiliate the other kinds of things that humiliate the other person, you know, like here's a list of person, you know, like here's a list of person, you know, like here's a list of someone's red flags that I'm going to someone's red flags that I'm going to someone's red flags that I'm going to share with everybody. Can you imagine? share with everybody. Can you imagine? share with everybody. Can you imagine? And it's on social media. So teens are And it's on social media. So teens are And it's on social media. So teens are doing this, people in their 20s are doing this, people in their 20s are doing this, people in their 20s are doing this. Yes. Or can you believe doing this. Yes. Or can you believe doing this. Yes. Or can you believe someone, you know, like information that someone, you know, like information that someone, you know, like information that should remain private does not remain should remain private does not remain should remain private does not remain private. I'm not talking about things private. I'm not talking about things private. I'm not talking about things that are bad that someone did that are that are bad that someone did that are that are bad that someone did that are like need to be reported. I'm talking like need to be reported. I'm talking like need to be reported. I'm talking about like embarrassing things or about like embarrassing things or about like embarrassing things or someone was, you know, socially someone was, you know, socially someone was, you know, socially unskilled. Her breath was bad. His his unskilled. Her breath was bad. His his unskilled. Her breath was bad. His his he smelled bad. That kind of thing. his he smelled bad. That kind of thing. his he smelled bad. That kind of thing. Yeah. Anything like or you know, this Yeah. Anything like or you know, this Yeah. Anything like or you know, this is this is what or this is what he did is this is what or this is what he did is this is what or this is what he did on the date that was, you know, on the date that was, you know, on the date that was, you know, embarrassing. Um, you know, he did this embarrassing. Um, you know, he did this embarrassing. Um, you know, he did this weird impression or, you know, whatever weird impression or, you know, whatever weird impression or, you know, whatever it is. Um, but also just like sexual it is. Um, but also just like sexual it is. Um, but also just like sexual encounters or you know like nothing encounters or you know like nothing encounters or you know like nothing feels totally private like you just the feels totally private like you just the feels totally private like you just the level of trust that you have to have in level of trust that you have to have in level of trust that you have to have in your partner now that were just was just your partner now that were just was just your partner now that were just was just taken for granted. Like sure people taken for granted. Like sure people taken for granted. Like sure people might have said something to their best might have said something to their best might have said something to their best friend but they also had better friend but they also had better friend but they also had better boundaries around that. Like you kind of boundaries around that. Like you kind of boundaries around that. Like you kind of knew in our society what was private and knew in our society what was private and knew in our society what was private and what was not. And because people grow up what was not. And because people grow up what was not. And because people grow up on social media, they don't really have on social media, they don't really have on social media, they don't really have experience with this sort of there's a experience with this sort of there's a experience with this sort of there's a private sphere and there's a public private sphere and there's a public private sphere and there's a public sphere. So, it's all kind of blurred and sphere. So, it's all kind of blurred and sphere. So, it's all kind of blurred and they don't really learn like what is they don't really learn like what is they don't really learn like what is private and what is not. And I think private and what is not. And I think private and what is not. And I think it's really nerve-wracking for people. it's really nerve-wracking for people. it's really nerve-wracking for people. So, people don't take we were talking So, people don't take we were talking So, people don't take we were talking about risk. People don't take risks in about risk. People don't take risks in about risk. People don't take risks in relationships. They don't they aren't relationships. They don't they aren't relationships. They don't they aren't really vulnerable because they're afraid really vulnerable because they're afraid really vulnerable because they're afraid that um you know they will be that um you know they will be that um you know they will be humiliated. So what do you think the humiliated. So what do you think the humiliated. So what do you think the need is to um to share that with the need is to um to share that with the need is to um to share that with the world? Is it because then they don't world? Is it because then they don't world? Is it because then they don't have to acknowledge that it might have to acknowledge that it might have to acknowledge that it might have been at least in part them like if been at least in part them like if been at least in part them like if you paint red flags on somebody then it you paint red flags on somebody then it you paint red flags on somebody then it can't then you're the person painting it can't then you're the person painting it can't then you're the person painting is not the one under scrutiny, right? I is not the one under scrutiny, right? I is not the one under scrutiny, right? I think they just feel hurt and they want think they just feel hurt and they want think they just feel hurt and they want to feel and so they feel like a dip in to feel and so they feel like a dip in to feel and so they feel like a dip in their self-esteem and they want to feel their self-esteem and they want to feel their self-esteem and they want to feel validated. And of course, if they make validated. And of course, if they make validated. And of course, if they make this list, their friends are going to this list, their friends are going to this list, their friends are going to say, "Yeah, you dodged a bullet. This say, "Yeah, you dodged a bullet. This say, "Yeah, you dodged a bullet. This person wasn't right for you. You deserve person wasn't right for you. You deserve person wasn't right for you. You deserve better." Um, and then they feel better better." Um, and then they feel better better." Um, and then they feel better about it. But you don't grow from that. about it. But you don't grow from that. about it. But you don't grow from that. So the thing is that if you can sit with So the thing is that if you can sit with So the thing is that if you can sit with that really hurts and this isn't and that really hurts and this isn't and that really hurts and this isn't and like this person is not the arbiter of like this person is not the arbiter of like this person is not the arbiter of my selfworth whoever broke up with me my selfworth whoever broke up with me my selfworth whoever broke up with me and for whatever reason you know just and for whatever reason you know just and for whatever reason you know just because someone doesn't value you because someone doesn't value you because someone doesn't value you doesn't mean you don't have value and I doesn't mean you don't have value and I doesn't mean you don't have value and I think that's a really important lesson think that's a really important lesson think that's a really important lesson for people to learn. So, you know, if I for people to learn. So, you know, if I for people to learn. So, you know, if I took like a some gold, right? Like a took like a some gold, right? Like a took like a some gold, right? Like a brick of gold and um you know, and a brick of gold and um you know, and a brick of gold and um you know, and someone said like, "I don't like that. I someone said like, "I don't like that. I someone said like, "I don't like that. I like silver or I like whatever I like, like silver or I like whatever I like, like silver or I like whatever I like, right?" Doesn't mean the gold inherently right?" Doesn't mean the gold inherently right?" Doesn't mean the gold inherently lost value. It means that for that lost value. It means that for that lost value. It means that for that person that block of gold didn't have person that block of gold didn't have person that block of gold didn't have value, but the gold has the same amount value, but the gold has the same amount value, but the gold has the same amount of value that it had. And I think that of value that it had. And I think that of value that it had. And I think that we tend to kind of consider somebody we tend to kind of consider somebody we tend to kind of consider somebody else's opinion of us to be the arbiter else's opinion of us to be the arbiter else's opinion of us to be the arbiter of our worth. And it's not like your of our worth. And it's not like your of our worth. And it's not like your worth is stable and people some people worth is stable and people some people worth is stable and people some people will value it, some people won't. Find will value it, some people won't. Find will value it, some people won't. Find the people who value it because those the people who value it because those the people who value it because those are the people that you want to be with. are the people that you want to be with. are the people that you want to be with. But it doesn't mean that you have less But it doesn't mean that you have less But it doesn't mean that you have less value because somebody doesn't value it value because somebody doesn't value it value because somebody doesn't value it or you have more value because someone or you have more value because someone or you have more value because someone does value it. You have the same amount does value it. You have the same amount does value it. You have the same amount of value either way. But I think young of value either way. But I think young of value either way. But I think young people are not, you know, it always people are not, you know, it always people are not, you know, it always hurts. We talked about breakups earlier, hurts. We talked about breakups earlier, hurts. We talked about breakups earlier, they always hurt. And especially when they always hurt. And especially when they always hurt. And especially when you're young and you don't have you're young and you don't have you're young and you don't have experience, but my concern is that experience, but my concern is that experience, but my concern is that they're not getting the experience of um they're not getting the experience of um they're not getting the experience of um of kind of sitting with it. And yes, you of kind of sitting with it. And yes, you of kind of sitting with it. And yes, you want you want to, you know, have your want you want to, you know, have your want you want to, you know, have your friends support you and all of that, but friends support you and all of that, but friends support you and all of that, but I think once you start posting about it I think once you start posting about it I think once you start posting about it or once you start kind of vilifying the or once you start kind of vilifying the or once you start kind of vilifying the other person, you're not learning the other person, you're not learning the other person, you're not learning the lesson. you're not learning how to deal lesson. you're not learning how to deal lesson. you're not learning how to deal with loss in your adult clients. with loss in your adult clients. with loss in your adult clients. Um, how much of the struggle that you Um, how much of the struggle that you Um, how much of the struggle that you hear about in terms of romantic hear about in terms of romantic hear about in terms of romantic relationships relates to again relationships relates to again relationships relates to again uh online aspects like uh apps and uh online aspects like uh apps and uh online aspects like uh apps and things like that? Do you think they things like that? Do you think they things like that? Do you think they facilitated things or made them um facilitated things or made them um facilitated things or made them um relationships more challenging? Well, I relationships more challenging? Well, I relationships more challenging? Well, I think what the apps do is there's a think what the apps do is there's a think what the apps do is there's a phenomenon that Barry Schwarz talks phenomenon that Barry Schwarz talks phenomenon that Barry Schwarz talks about in his book, The Paradox of about in his book, The Paradox of about in his book, The Paradox of Choice. And it's the idea that the more Choice. And it's the idea that the more Choice. And it's the idea that the more choice we have, the less happy we are. choice we have, the less happy we are. choice we have, the less happy we are. So, you need some choice, but it's kind So, you need some choice, but it's kind So, you need some choice, but it's kind of like, think of like a fishbowl, an of like, think of like a fishbowl, an of like, think of like a fishbowl, an aquarium, and an ocean. Fishbowl is not aquarium, and an ocean. Fishbowl is not aquarium, and an ocean. Fishbowl is not enough choice, just too constrained. enough choice, just too constrained. enough choice, just too constrained. Ocean, too much choice. You're like, Ocean, too much choice. You're like, Ocean, too much choice. You're like, "Yeah, there's no direction. Oh my "Yeah, there's no direction. Oh my "Yeah, there's no direction. Oh my gosh." The aquarium is perfect. It's a gosh." The aquarium is perfect. It's a gosh." The aquarium is perfect. It's a certain amount of choice, but it's certain amount of choice, but it's certain amount of choice, but it's manageable. You don't get flooded. you manageable. You don't get flooded. you manageable. You don't get flooded. you don't get overwhelmed. So, they did don't get overwhelmed. So, they did don't get overwhelmed. So, they did these experiments where like you'd be these experiments where like you'd be these experiments where like you'd be able to test out like we have this new able to test out like we have this new able to test out like we have this new jam and um we have uh 10 different jam and um we have uh 10 different jam and um we have uh 10 different flavors and which one do you like best flavors and which one do you like best flavors and which one do you like best and which one are you going to pick? and which one are you going to pick? and which one are you going to pick? People would get so overwhelmed they People would get so overwhelmed they People would get so overwhelmed they didn't even want to try them. They're didn't even want to try them. They're didn't even want to try them. They're like it's too much or we have two like it's too much or we have two like it's too much or we have two flavors. Which one do you like better? flavors. Which one do you like better? flavors. Which one do you like better? Right? Manageable. Um so there are Right? Manageable. Um so there are Right? Manageable. Um so there are people who are what we call satisficers people who are what we call satisficers people who are what we call satisficers and people who are maximizers. So, and people who are maximizers. So, and people who are maximizers. So, satisficers, well, let me tell you about satisficers, well, let me tell you about satisficers, well, let me tell you about maximizers first. Maximizers are people, maximizers first. Maximizers are people, maximizers first. Maximizers are people, let's say you want to buy a sweater, let's say you want to buy a sweater, let's say you want to buy a sweater, okay? You go into the store, you find a okay? You go into the store, you find a okay? You go into the store, you find a sweater that you like. Um, it's the sweater that you like. Um, it's the sweater that you like. Um, it's the right material, it's the right price, it right material, it's the right price, it right material, it's the right price, it fits you well, it's the right color, fits you well, it's the right color, fits you well, it's the right color, it's good. Great. The maximizer says, it's good. Great. The maximizer says, it's good. Great. The maximizer says, "But maybe I can find something better." "But maybe I can find something better." "But maybe I can find something better." So, I'm going to take that sweater. I'm So, I'm going to take that sweater. I'm So, I'm going to take that sweater. I'm going to put it on bottom of the pile so going to put it on bottom of the pile so going to put it on bottom of the pile so that nobody buys it. I'm going to go to that nobody buys it. I'm going to go to that nobody buys it. I'm going to go to the store next door and I'm going to see the store next door and I'm going to see the store next door and I'm going to see if they have something better. Maybe if they have something better. Maybe if they have something better. Maybe something's on sale. Maybe it's slightly something's on sale. Maybe it's slightly something's on sale. Maybe it's slightly higherend material, whatever it is, higherend material, whatever it is, higherend material, whatever it is, right? Um, but they keep going to stores right? Um, but they keep going to stores right? Um, but they keep going to stores and they keep doing this and then they and they keep doing this and then they and they keep doing this and then they think, "Oh, well, I found the greatest think, "Oh, well, I found the greatest think, "Oh, well, I found the greatest sweater ever and I'm going to get that sweater ever and I'm going to get that sweater ever and I'm going to get that one." Guess what? They are less one." Guess what? They are less one." Guess what? They are less satisfied with that purchase than the satisfied with that purchase than the satisfied with that purchase than the person who the satisficer who would have person who the satisficer who would have person who the satisficer who would have bought that first sweater in that first bought that first sweater in that first bought that first sweater in that first store and would have been super happy store and would have been super happy store and would have been super happy with that sweater. It's all opportunity with that sweater. It's all opportunity with that sweater. It's all opportunity cost. Okay. Because all of the cost. Okay. Because all of the cost. Okay. Because all of the energy, the emotional and cognitive energy, the emotional and cognitive energy, the emotional and cognitive energy that went into maximizing energy that went into maximizing energy that went into maximizing something for what kind of benefit? Like something for what kind of benefit? Like something for what kind of benefit? Like what percent benefit? Not much. compared what percent benefit? Not much. compared what percent benefit? Not much. compared to the amount of energy that they spent to the amount of energy that they spent to the amount of energy that they spent trying to maximize, they're never trying to maximize, they're never trying to maximize, they're never satisfied because even when they get satisfied because even when they get satisfied because even when they get that great product, something better is that great product, something better is that great product, something better is going to come out. There's going to be a going to come out. There's going to be a going to come out. There's going to be a new color that comes out like two weeks new color that comes out like two weeks new color that comes out like two weeks later that was in none of the stores. later that was in none of the stores. later that was in none of the stores. So, you're always kind of looking over So, you're always kind of looking over So, you're always kind of looking over if you're a maximizer, you're always if you're a maximizer, you're always if you're a maximizer, you're always kind of looking over your shoulder for kind of looking over your shoulder for kind of looking over your shoulder for like, what if something better is out like, what if something better is out like, what if something better is out there? In dating, that's what the apps there? In dating, that's what the apps there? In dating, that's what the apps are like. You go out with someone, you are like. You go out with someone, you are like. You go out with someone, you have a good time. You think, well, no have a good time. You think, well, no have a good time. You think, well, no butterflies, you know, no sparks, pretty butterflies, you know, no sparks, pretty butterflies, you know, no sparks, pretty good time, but I don't know. Um, I can good time, but I don't know. Um, I can good time, but I don't know. Um, I can go back on the apps. You go back on the go back on the apps. You go back on the go back on the apps. You go back on the apps, look at all the people there. apps, look at all the people there. apps, look at all the people there. Maybe they're better on this dimension Maybe they're better on this dimension Maybe they're better on this dimension or that dimension. And so what it does or that dimension. And so what it does or that dimension. And so what it does is it turns everyone into maximizers is it turns everyone into maximizers is it turns everyone into maximizers because there's an illusion of choice. because there's an illusion of choice. because there's an illusion of choice. Like not everybody you see is going to Like not everybody you see is going to Like not everybody you see is going to be better. And again, we don't get the be better. And again, we don't get the be better. And again, we don't get the allocart option with people. So there allocart option with people. So there allocart option with people. So there will be different dimensions in which will be different dimensions in which will be different dimensions in which people are more aligned with what you're people are more aligned with what you're people are more aligned with what you're looking for. But no one's going to be looking for. But no one's going to be looking for. But no one's going to be like perfect, right? So why are we like perfect, right? So why are we like perfect, right? So why are we looking for perfection? Why don't we looking for perfection? Why don't we looking for perfection? Why don't we look for And by the way, the satisficers look for And by the way, the satisficers look for And by the way, the satisficers are not settling. This isn't about like are not settling. This isn't about like are not settling. This isn't about like eh I'll just settle for something. It's eh I'll just settle for something. It's eh I'll just settle for something. It's like that sweater was great. You liked like that sweater was great. You liked like that sweater was great. You liked everything about it. You don't need to everything about it. You don't need to everything about it. You don't need to look for anything more. Will there be if look for anything more. Will there be if look for anything more. Will there be if you pick a partner, will there be you pick a partner, will there be you pick a partner, will there be someone more attractive? Of course. Will someone more attractive? Of course. Will someone more attractive? Of course. Will there be someone less attractive? Of there be someone less attractive? Of there be someone less attractive? Of course. Right. And by the way, if we course. Right. And by the way, if we course. Right. And by the way, if we treat dating like shopping, we forget treat dating like shopping, we forget treat dating like shopping, we forget that um in shopping we're the choosers. that um in shopping we're the choosers. that um in shopping we're the choosers. But in dating, someone has to choose us, But in dating, someone has to choose us, But in dating, someone has to choose us, too. And we, by the way, are not too. And we, by the way, are not too. And we, by the way, are not perfect. So, an exercise that I like to perfect. So, an exercise that I like to perfect. So, an exercise that I like to do with clients is I want you to write do with clients is I want you to write do with clients is I want you to write down all the reasons that it would be down all the reasons that it would be down all the reasons that it would be difficult to date you. So instead of difficult to date you. So instead of difficult to date you. So instead of making a list of all the qualities you making a list of all the qualities you making a list of all the qualities you want in a partner like the partner has want in a partner like the partner has want in a partner like the partner has to be this, they have to be that, they to be this, they have to be that, they to be this, they have to be that, they have to, you know, have these interests, have to, you know, have these interests, have to, you know, have these interests, they have to have this amount of they have to have this amount of they have to have this amount of ambition, they have to um look a certain ambition, they have to um look a certain ambition, they have to um look a certain way, they have to have these interests, way, they have to have these interests, way, they have to have these interests, whatever it is. Um I want you to write whatever it is. Um I want you to write whatever it is. Um I want you to write down everything that would make it down everything that would make it down everything that would make it difficult. What a great exercise to be difficult. What a great exercise to be difficult. What a great exercise to be with you. And some people, it's kind of with you. And some people, it's kind of with you. And some people, it's kind of like in a job interview and they say, like in a job interview and they say, like in a job interview and they say, "What are your weaknesses?" And we tend "What are your weaknesses?" And we tend "What are your weaknesses?" And we tend to say things that sound positive, you to say things that sound positive, you to say things that sound positive, you know, like my weakness is that I work know, like my weakness is that I work know, like my weakness is that I work too hard, that I'm too dedicated, that I too hard, that I'm too dedicated, that I too hard, that I'm too dedicated, that I can't, you know, let go. It's a non can't, you know, let go. It's a non can't, you know, let go. It's a non right. So, you have to be scrupulously right. So, you have to be scrupulously right. So, you have to be scrupulously honest with yourself. So, what makes it honest with yourself. So, what makes it honest with yourself. So, what makes it hard to be with you? And if you're hard to be with you? And if you're hard to be with you? And if you're really honest with yourself, suddenly really honest with yourself, suddenly really honest with yourself, suddenly you're less of a you're less of a you're less of a maximizer, right? because suddenly maximizer, right? because suddenly maximizer, right? because suddenly you're like, "Oh, someone is thinking you're like, "Oh, someone is thinking you're like, "Oh, someone is thinking about the things that, you know, they're about the things that, you know, they're about the things that, you know, they're looking at me holistically as well." And looking at me holistically as well." And looking at me holistically as well." And overall, I'm a pretty good package, but overall, I'm a pretty good package, but overall, I'm a pretty good package, but there are things that, you know, maybe there are things that, you know, maybe there are things that, you know, maybe they could maximize if they really they could maximize if they really they could maximize if they really wanted to, but then they're going to wanted to, but then they're going to wanted to, but then they're going to have to give up some other qualities have to give up some other qualities have to give up some other qualities that I have that the other person might that I have that the other person might that I have that the other person might not have. So, I think it's really not have. So, I think it's really not have. So, I think it's really important not to think about dating as important not to think about dating as important not to think about dating as shopping. And I think that people who shopping. And I think that people who shopping. And I think that people who grew up on apps tend to treat dating grew up on apps tend to treat dating grew up on apps tend to treat dating like shopping and they don't sit there like shopping and they don't sit there like shopping and they don't sit there and make the list of, oh, I can be this and make the list of, oh, I can be this and make the list of, oh, I can be this way and that makes it hard, you know, way and that makes it hard, you know, way and that makes it hard, you know, for someone to be with me. And you could for someone to be with me. And you could for someone to be with me. And you could name a million reasons. Oh, and by the name a million reasons. Oh, and by the name a million reasons. Oh, and by the way, I tell them that for all the traits way, I tell them that for all the traits way, I tell them that for all the traits you're looking for, however, whatever you're looking for, however, whatever you're looking for, however, whatever that number is, because they tend to that number is, because they tend to that number is, because they tend to have a lot, right? It's not just like I have a lot, right? It's not just like I have a lot, right? It's not just like I need these three things. It's like I need these three things. It's like I need these three things. It's like I need these 20 things. The list, right? need these 20 things. The list, right? need these 20 things. The list, right? The list. So I said for every um quality The list. So I said for every um quality The list. So I said for every um quality that you're looking for, whatever number that you're looking for, whatever number that you're looking for, whatever number that is, if it's 20, you need to name 20 that is, if it's 20, you need to name 20 that is, if it's 20, you need to name 20 things that make it hard to be with you. things that make it hard to be with you. things that make it hard to be with you. So it can't be like there are two things So it can't be like there are two things So it can't be like there are two things that make it hard to be with you, but that make it hard to be with you, but that make it hard to be with you, but you have a list of 20 things that you have a list of 20 things that you have a list of 20 things that you want. Do you think that after people want. Do you think that after people want. Do you think that after people make that list that they might take a make that list that they might take a make that list that they might take a look at that list and make some look at that list and make some look at that list and make some effort to um like reduce or eliminate effort to um like reduce or eliminate effort to um like reduce or eliminate some things from that list? Is that good some things from that list? Is that good some things from that list? Is that good selfwork? Like if somebody is super selfwork? Like if somebody is super selfwork? Like if somebody is super rigid about punctuality, anyone that rigid about punctuality, anyone that rigid about punctuality, anyone that knows me clearly uh that's not me. Um knows me clearly uh that's not me. Um knows me clearly uh that's not me. Um like I know some people that are so like I know some people that are so like I know some people that are so rigid about that. Let's say someone rigid about that. Let's say someone rigid about that. Let's say someone identifies that as one of the things identifies that as one of the things identifies that as one of the things that can be really difficult. Like they that can be really difficult. Like they that can be really difficult. Like they get really upset if somebody's 5 minutes get really upset if somebody's 5 minutes get really upset if somebody's 5 minutes late. I've interacted with these people. late. I've interacted with these people. late. I've interacted with these people. You're very difficult. Um to be around You're very difficult. Um to be around You're very difficult. Um to be around as an academic everything starts 10 as an academic everything starts 10 as an academic everything starts 10 minutes late. We end late. That's how it minutes late. We end late. That's how it minutes late. We end late. That's how it works. But works. But works. But um should they try to resolve that or um should they try to resolve that or um should they try to resolve that or reduce that feature or should they reduce that feature or should they reduce that feature or should they look at the list and say you know what look at the list and say you know what look at the list and say you know what like I'm not going to change that or like I'm not going to change that or like I'm not going to change that or this thing well I should probably change this thing well I should probably change this thing well I should probably change that. What else can the list do for that. What else can the list do for that. What else can the list do for people? Okay so relationships are like people? Okay so relationships are like people? Okay so relationships are like cement. So when you're first putting cement. So when you're first putting cement. So when you're first putting down right the cement it's wet and it's down right the cement it's wet and it's down right the cement it's wet and it's malleable. Um when it dries it's very malleable. Um when it dries it's very malleable. Um when it dries it's very hard to then now you have to like dig it hard to then now you have to like dig it hard to then now you have to like dig it up. So, let's say that punctuality is up. So, let's say that punctuality is up. So, let's say that punctuality is really important for someone and they really important for someone and they really important for someone and they think, well, I don't want to rock the think, well, I don't want to rock the think, well, I don't want to rock the boat. It's the beginning of the boat. It's the beginning of the boat. It's the beginning of the relationship. So, yeah, this person relationship. So, yeah, this person relationship. So, yeah, this person comes late all the time, but I'm going comes late all the time, but I'm going comes late all the time, but I'm going to say nothing about it and I'm going to say nothing about it and I'm going to say nothing about it and I'm going to be cool with that even though I'm not. be cool with that even though I'm not. be cool with that even though I'm not. And I'm sitting there seething every And I'm sitting there seething every And I'm sitting there seething every time they come late, right? And it's time they come late, right? And it's time they come late, right? And it's kind of like in the first three months kind of like in the first three months kind of like in the first three months of a relationship, I think it was Chris of a relationship, I think it was Chris of a relationship, I think it was Chris Rock who said this, in the first three Rock who said this, in the first three Rock who said this, in the first three months of a relationship, you're not months of a relationship, you're not months of a relationship, you're not you, you're the ambassador of you. So you, you're the ambassador of you. So you, you're the ambassador of you. So sometimes people will, you know, who sometimes people will, you know, who sometimes people will, you know, who really are not punctual will be punctual really are not punctual will be punctual really are not punctual will be punctual and then they'll change. That's not what and then they'll change. That's not what and then they'll change. That's not what I'm talking about. Um, I'm talking about I'm talking about. Um, I'm talking about I'm talking about. Um, I'm talking about someone who, you know, someone has someone who, you know, someone has someone who, you know, someone has they're just not a punctual person like they're just not a punctual person like they're just not a punctual person like you're saying you are. So if you're saying you are. So if you're saying you are. So if you're dating someone and that person is dating someone and that person is dating someone and that person is telling themselves like, I'm not going telling themselves like, I'm not going telling themselves like, I'm not going to bring it up. I don't want to rock the to bring it up. I don't want to rock the to bring it up. I don't want to rock the boat. It's early in the relationship. boat. It's early in the relationship. boat. It's early in the relationship. The cement is wet. This is when you need The cement is wet. This is when you need The cement is wet. This is when you need to bring it up. So because if you don't, to bring it up. So because if you don't, to bring it up. So because if you don't, what happens is it's like 6 months down what happens is it's like 6 months down what happens is it's like 6 months down the line. The person is like, "I can't the line. The person is like, "I can't the line. The person is like, "I can't believe you're late. What just h you believe you're late. What just h you believe you're late. What just h you know, why are you you're always late? know, why are you you're always late? know, why are you you're always late? You don't prioritize me." It's like the You don't prioritize me." It's like the You don't prioritize me." It's like the person's like, "I'm this is the first person's like, "I'm this is the first person's like, "I'm this is the first time hearing about this." Like the time hearing about this." Like the time hearing about this." Like the person has had a no opportunity to person has had a no opportunity to person has had a no opportunity to change it if they want to, but b no change it if they want to, but b no change it if they want to, but b no opportunity to explain. So, it might be opportunity to explain. So, it might be opportunity to explain. So, it might be that as happened with one of my therapy that as happened with one of my therapy that as happened with one of my therapy clients, the person was always late, but clients, the person was always late, but clients, the person was always late, but it was because he was trying to please it was because he was trying to please it was because he was trying to please her cuz she wanted to have dinner. He her cuz she wanted to have dinner. He her cuz she wanted to have dinner. He knew that she liked to eat on the knew that she liked to eat on the knew that she liked to eat on the earlier side. He worked really late. So, earlier side. He worked really late. So, earlier side. He worked really late. So, he was trying to kind of like get his he was trying to kind of like get his he was trying to kind of like get his work done and get there. And he was work done and get there. And he was work done and get there. And he was always late because he was trying to always late because he was trying to always late because he was trying to like be there when she wanted to have like be there when she wanted to have like be there when she wanted to have dinner. So, he said like, "I'm late dinner. So, he said like, "I'm late dinner. So, he said like, "I'm late because I do prioritize you. I'm because I do prioritize you. I'm because I do prioritize you. I'm actually leaving work early to be with actually leaving work early to be with actually leaving work early to be with you, but I should have just said I can't you, but I should have just said I can't you, but I should have just said I can't be here at this time." That's what I be here at this time." That's what I be here at this time." That's what I should have said. And I was worried you should have said. And I was worried you should have said. And I was worried you would get mad because it would be too would get mad because it would be too would get mad because it would be too late for you. So, you see the assumption late for you. So, you see the assumption late for you. So, you see the assumption that she made was you don't care about that she made was you don't care about that she made was you don't care about me. I'm not important to you. Your work me. I'm not important to you. Your work me. I'm not important to you. Your work is more important. And he's saying no, I is more important. And he's saying no, I is more important. And he's saying no, I actually was leaving work to be with you actually was leaving work to be with you actually was leaving work to be with you and I still couldn't get there on time. and I still couldn't get there on time. and I still couldn't get there on time. So, we need to figure out how to work So, we need to figure out how to work So, we need to figure out how to work this out. Like, can we have dinner later this out. Like, can we have dinner later this out. Like, can we have dinner later because I'm just going to be late if we because I'm just going to be late if we because I'm just going to be late if we do it earlier and you know what can we do it earlier and you know what can we do it earlier and you know what can we work out? So, that's an example of if work out? So, that's an example of if work out? So, that's an example of if you just bring it up early, you don't you just bring it up early, you don't you just bring it up early, you don't build up all these stories about the build up all these stories about the build up all these stories about the other person. This person doesn't care. other person. This person doesn't care. other person. This person doesn't care. they don't prioritize me, whatever the they don't prioritize me, whatever the they don't prioritize me, whatever the story is that you're making about that story is that you're making about that story is that you're making about that person. Um, and you have a chance to see person. Um, and you have a chance to see person. Um, and you have a chance to see is the person willing to do something is the person willing to do something is the person willing to do something about it or if they're not, are you about it or if they're not, are you about it or if they're not, are you willing to be flexible and say, you know willing to be flexible and say, you know willing to be flexible and say, you know what, this person, they just run late. what, this person, they just run late. what, this person, they just run late. And I like so many other things about And I like so many other things about And I like so many other things about them and I'm going to adjust to the fact them and I'm going to adjust to the fact them and I'm going to adjust to the fact that this is one thing that in a perfect that this is one thing that in a perfect that this is one thing that in a perfect world, I would like them to be more world, I would like them to be more world, I would like them to be more punctual, but there's so many great punctual, but there's so many great punctual, but there's so many great things that this is one thing that I'm things that this is one thing that I'm things that this is one thing that I'm going to adjust to. weaving this with going to adjust to. weaving this with going to adjust to. weaving this with what we were talking about earlier about what we were talking about earlier about what we were talking about earlier about gut sense um and the validity or lack of gut sense um and the validity or lack of gut sense um and the validity or lack of validity of gut sense. Um I certainly validity of gut sense. Um I certainly validity of gut sense. Um I certainly have had the experience and I know many have had the experience and I know many have had the experience and I know many other people have that after a other people have that after a other people have that after a relationship ends or when it's ending relationship ends or when it's ending relationship ends or when it's ending they think back and they go you know they think back and they go you know they think back and they go you know there was that thing at the beginning there was that thing at the beginning there was that thing at the beginning and I knew it then but I pushed it aside and I knew it then but I pushed it aside and I knew it then but I pushed it aside like I is that just a story we tell like I is that just a story we tell like I is that just a story we tell ourselves. I think that the most ourselves. I think that the most ourselves. I think that the most important question to ask yourself after important question to ask yourself after important question to ask yourself after you go on a first date or a second date you go on a first date or a second date you go on a first date or a second date or a third date is how do I feel when or a third date is how do I feel when or a third date is how do I feel when I'm with this person? I'm with this person? I'm with this person? Because all the other stuff is just kind Because all the other stuff is just kind Because all the other stuff is just kind of like a cognitive exercise, right? of like a cognitive exercise, right? of like a cognitive exercise, right? Like so one of my clients, she was said Like so one of my clients, she was said Like so one of my clients, she was said to herself like I don't want to date any to herself like I don't want to date any to herself like I don't want to date any she was in her early 30s and she said I she was in her early 30s and she said I she was in her early 30s and she said I don't I want to have kids with a don't I want to have kids with a don't I want to have kids with a partner. Um, I'm 31 years old. I don't partner. Um, I'm 31 years old. I don't partner. Um, I'm 31 years old. I don't want to date anyone. I'll date someone want to date anyone. I'll date someone want to date anyone. I'll date someone who's divorced, but I won't date someone who's divorced, but I won't date someone who's divorced, but I won't date someone who has who has who has kids. She met someone online. Um, the it kids. She met someone online. Um, the it kids. She met someone online. Um, the it didn't have the kid question in that didn't have the kid question in that didn't have the kid question in that particular app that she was using. Um, particular app that she was using. Um, particular app that she was using. Um, she went to meet him on the first date. she went to meet him on the first date. she went to meet him on the first date. She's having such a good time and it She's having such a good time and it She's having such a good time and it comes up that he has a kid. And she was comes up that he has a kid. And she was comes up that he has a kid. And she was having such a good time that she really having such a good time that she really having such a good time that she really debated like, should I go out with him debated like, should I go out with him debated like, should I go out with him again? not go out with him again. This again? not go out with him again. This again? not go out with him again. This is not what I want. I don't want to deal is not what I want. I don't want to deal is not what I want. I don't want to deal with that. It's too messy and it's not with that. It's too messy and it's not with that. It's too messy and it's not what I what I what I imagined. If she had known on that imagined. If she had known on that imagined. If she had known on that dating app that he had, you know, it had dating app that he had, you know, it had dating app that he had, you know, it had asked if he had kids and he had put asked if he had kids and he had put asked if he had kids and he had put that, she would never have met him. That that, she would never have met him. That that, she would never have met him. That is her husband. She is so happy. I mean, is her husband. She is so happy. I mean, is her husband. She is so happy. I mean, they've been married now for like 15 they've been married now for like 15 they've been married now for like 15 years. They have kids together. They years. They have kids together. They years. They have kids together. They have the other kid. She's so happy. So I have the other kid. She's so happy. So I have the other kid. She's so happy. So I think that when we make that list that think that when we make that list that think that when we make that list that you said like do you should you take you said like do you should you take you said like do you should you take things off the list. I think that you things off the list. I think that you things off the list. I think that you need to have flexibility about things need to have flexibility about things need to have flexibility about things that may not matter but you have to be that may not matter but you have to be that may not matter but you have to be very inflexible about the things that do very inflexible about the things that do very inflexible about the things that do matter. So character qualities they matter. So character qualities they matter. So character qualities they matter. Um values that align that matter. Um values that align that matter. Um values that align that matters. So those are things that don't matters. So those are things that don't matters. So those are things that don't be flexible on that. So I just want to be flexible on that. So I just want to be flexible on that. So I just want to make sure I understand. So we're talking make sure I understand. So we're talking make sure I understand. So we're talking about two different lists here. One is a about two different lists here. One is a about two different lists here. One is a list about a features about the other list about a features about the other list about a features about the other person. This is what I we hear is like person. This is what I we hear is like person. This is what I we hear is like the list. Um the number of times that the list. Um the number of times that the list. Um the number of times that friends are like you have to make a friends are like you have to make a friends are like you have to make a list. I never get around to making the list. I never get around to making the list. I never get around to making the list. But I like this other list that list. But I like this other list that list. But I like this other list that you described which are all the things you described which are all the things you described which are all the things about ourselves that would make us about ourselves that would make us about ourselves that would make us difficult to be with. Which list or both difficult to be with. Which list or both difficult to be with. Which list or both do we need to have rigidity versus do we need to have rigidity versus do we need to have rigidity versus flexibility on? I'm saying that when we flexibility on? I'm saying that when we flexibility on? I'm saying that when we think of that list and by the way a lot think of that list and by the way a lot think of that list and by the way a lot of people don't sit there and write a of people don't sit there and write a of people don't sit there and write a list but they have it in their head. you list but they have it in their head. you list but they have it in their head. you know, there's this process of I know know, there's this process of I know know, there's this process of I know what I'm looking for or whatever. Some what I'm looking for or whatever. Some what I'm looking for or whatever. Some people say like I know it when I see it, people say like I know it when I see it, people say like I know it when I see it, but there's really a list in there but there's really a list in there but there's really a list in there because you know what you're looking because you know what you're looking because you know what you're looking for and it matches this list in your for and it matches this list in your for and it matches this list in your head. Um, so on that list, I'm saying head. Um, so on that list, I'm saying head. Um, so on that list, I'm saying you need to put more things like you need to put more things like you need to put more things like character qualities. Are they honest? character qualities. Are they honest? character qualities. Are they honest? Are they reliable? Um, can I trust them? Are they reliable? Um, can I trust them? Are they reliable? Um, can I trust them? Do we have the same kind of vision of Do we have the same kind of vision of Do we have the same kind of vision of the kind of life that we want to lead? the kind of life that we want to lead? the kind of life that we want to lead? Um, you know, where are we aligned on Um, you know, where are we aligned on Um, you know, where are we aligned on those important things? cuz those things those important things? cuz those things those important things? cuz those things are those are those are sort of hard to are those are those are sort of hard to are those are those are sort of hard to bridge those gaps. Um you know like bridge those gaps. Um you know like bridge those gaps. Um you know like they're just going to keep coming up and they're just going to keep coming up and they're just going to keep coming up and be very difficult to deal with and be very difficult to deal with and be very difficult to deal with things like do we have to have all the things like do we have to have all the things like do we have to have all the same interests? No. Um you know do we um same interests? No. Um you know do we um same interests? No. Um you know do we um you know does the person have kids or you know does the person have kids or you know does the person have kids or not? Well, you may that may not be the not? Well, you may that may not be the not? Well, you may that may not be the ideal choice, but look what happened the ideal choice, but look what happened the ideal choice, but look what happened to this other person that you know like to this other person that you know like to this other person that you know like you don't know. I think that question you don't know. I think that question you don't know. I think that question that I'm going back to of how does this that I'm going back to of how does this that I'm going back to of how does this person make me feel? if the character person make me feel? if the character person make me feel? if the character qualities are there because sometimes qualities are there because sometimes qualities are there because sometimes people who don't have the character people who don't have the character people who don't have the character qualities that you want are very qualities that you want are very qualities that you want are very charming and they can make you feel charming and they can make you feel charming and they can make you feel great but if they have the character great but if they have the character great but if they have the character qualities do I feel calm around this qualities do I feel calm around this qualities do I feel calm around this person going back to the this idea of person going back to the this idea of person going back to the this idea of peace and calm um I like this idea peace and calm um I like this idea peace and calm um I like this idea somebody had mentioned that I love somebody had mentioned that I love somebody had mentioned that I love this metaphor of being able to bring this metaphor of being able to bring this metaphor of being able to bring your rough drafts to the other person your rough drafts to the other person your rough drafts to the other person meaning that you don't have to be on all meaning that you don't have to be on all meaning that you don't have to be on all the time with this person that you can the time with this person that you can the time with this person that you can bring sort of the rough draft of bring sort of the rough draft of bring sort of the rough draft of yourself of this idea of um you know yourself of this idea of um you know yourself of this idea of um you know your kind of imperfect draft and your kind of imperfect draft and your kind of imperfect draft and they collaborate with you on that and I they collaborate with you on that and I they collaborate with you on that and I think that's so beautiful right that think that's so beautiful right that think that's so beautiful right that like you can be what it means is you can like you can be what it means is you can like you can be what it means is you can be yourself and yourself doesn't mean I be yourself and yourself doesn't mean I be yourself and yourself doesn't mean I can be I can act in any way I want I can be I can act in any way I want I can be I can act in any way I want I can have no boundaries I can be abusive no have no boundaries I can be abusive no have no boundaries I can be abusive no that's not the rough draft but it's kind that's not the rough draft but it's kind that's not the rough draft but it's kind of like I am working this through I'm of like I am working this through I'm of like I am working this through I'm trying to understand this I'm not trying to understand this I'm not trying to understand this I'm not perfect sometimes I will make mistakes perfect sometimes I will make mistakes perfect sometimes I will make mistakes and can you be comfortable enough around and can you be comfortable enough around and can you be comfortable enough around each other to hold yourself accountable each other to hold yourself accountable each other to hold yourself accountable but still feel loved by the other but still feel loved by the other but still feel loved by the other person? I love the um the person? I love the um the person? I love the um the criteria for lack of a better word of criteria for lack of a better word of criteria for lack of a better word of you know how do I feel when I'm around you know how do I feel when I'm around you know how do I feel when I'm around this person? Yeah. Peace being a uh an this person? Yeah. Peace being a uh an this person? Yeah. Peace being a uh an anchor point or a place to look for. Um, anchor point or a place to look for. Um, anchor point or a place to look for. Um, and when I say how, I mean, do you feel and when I say how, I mean, do you feel and when I say how, I mean, do you feel calm? Mhm. Do you feel um content? And calm? Mhm. Do you feel um content? And calm? Mhm. Do you feel um content? And so calmness is different from sort of so calmness is different from sort of so calmness is different from sort of the activation. Um, contentment is the activation. Um, contentment is the activation. Um, contentment is different from like out of your mind different from like out of your mind different from like out of your mind happy. Of course, in the beginning and happy. Of course, in the beginning and happy. Of course, in the beginning and hopefully throughout the relationship, hopefully throughout the relationship, hopefully throughout the relationship, there will be times when you feel this there will be times when you feel this there will be times when you feel this like incredible energy around happiness and incredible energy around happiness and incredible energy around happiness and joy and being around the other person. joy and being around the other person. joy and being around the other person. But most of the time, what you're going But most of the time, what you're going But most of the time, what you're going to feel around your partner is a sense to feel around your partner is a sense to feel around your partner is a sense of safety, a safe place to land, of safety, a safe place to land, of safety, a safe place to land, contentment. Um, I enjoy this person's contentment. Um, I enjoy this person's contentment. Um, I enjoy this person's sense of humor. I enjoy sitting with sense of humor. I enjoy sitting with sense of humor. I enjoy sitting with them, even through our silences. I enjoy them, even through our silences. I enjoy them, even through our silences. I enjoy like sitting on the couch and watching a like sitting on the couch and watching a like sitting on the couch and watching a show with them. Um, I enjoy basically show with them. Um, I enjoy basically show with them. Um, I enjoy basically doing anything with them just because I doing anything with them just because I doing anything with them just because I like their like their like their presence. That's what I mean. Like, how presence. That's what I mean. Like, how presence. That's what I mean. Like, how do you feel? Does their presence feel do you feel? Does their presence feel do you feel? Does their presence feel additive to you? Does it feel like you additive to you? Does it feel like you additive to you? Does it feel like you in just are happier with their presence in just are happier with their presence in just are happier with their presence than you would be without their than you would be without their than you would be without their presence? And sometimes people feel presence? And sometimes people feel presence? And sometimes people feel like, "Oh, we have such a strong like, "Oh, we have such a strong like, "Oh, we have such a strong relationship. We're so drawn to each relationship. We're so drawn to each relationship. We're so drawn to each other." But what you're drawn to is when other." But what you're drawn to is when other." But what you're drawn to is when you're with each other, the presence is you're with each other, the presence is you're with each other, the presence is volatile. It's it's either like the high volatile. It's it's either like the high volatile. It's it's either like the high highs and the low highs and the low highs and the low lows. And that's not, you know, I'm lows. And that's not, you know, I'm lows. And that's not, you know, I'm talking about that sense of contentment talking about that sense of contentment talking about that sense of contentment just being in the other person's just being in the other person's just being in the other person's presence, the daily of it. presence, the daily of it. presence, the daily of it. There's um so much made of these love There's um so much made of these love There's um so much made of these love languages like their acts of service and languages like their acts of service and languages like their acts of service and I like you know gifts you know all that I like you know gifts you know all that I like you know gifts you know all that kind of stuff. Um, you know, I've kind of stuff. Um, you know, I've kind of stuff. Um, you know, I've heard it said, you know, what what's heard it said, you know, what what's heard it said, you know, what what's your love language? And someone, what's your love language? And someone, what's your love language? And someone, you know, I say all of them. You know, you know, I say all of them. You know, you know, I say all of them. You know, that person was me. All of them. Who that person was me. All of them. Who that person was me. All of them. Who doesn't like all of those? You know, doesn't like all of those? You know, doesn't like all of those? You know, both, you know, I like to think I both, you know, I like to think I both, you know, I like to think I offer them too, you know. Um, you know, offer them too, you know. Um, you know, offer them too, you know. Um, you know, who doesn't like all of those things? who doesn't like all of those things? who doesn't like all of those things? But I realize that some people place But I realize that some people place But I realize that some people place more value on certain um gestures and more value on certain um gestures and more value on certain um gestures and expressions and I think that's all expressions and I think that's all expressions and I think that's all fine and good. Uh, what I love about fine and good. Uh, what I love about fine and good. Uh, what I love about what you're saying, however, is that what you're saying, however, is that what you're saying, however, is that it's more about like a now we're it's more about like a now we're it's more about like a now we're sounding woo, but it's more of like an sounding woo, but it's more of like an sounding woo, but it's more of like an energetic match. This feeling of safety. energetic match. This feeling of safety. energetic match. This feeling of safety. You know, that the word peace to me just You know, that the word peace to me just You know, that the word peace to me just feel like hold so much value these days. feel like hold so much value these days. feel like hold so much value these days. I feel like the two things that I've I feel like the two things that I've I feel like the two things that I've come to really value more and more are come to really value more and more are come to really value more and more are peace and self-respect. peace and self-respect. peace and self-respect. Because it's hard to have um peace Because it's hard to have um peace Because it's hard to have um peace without self-respect. Yeah. Certainly without self-respect. Yeah. Certainly without self-respect. Yeah. Certainly hard to have self-respect without peace. hard to have self-respect without peace. hard to have self-respect without peace. Now, sometimes lack of peace can be from Now, sometimes lack of peace can be from Now, sometimes lack of peace can be from external things, but then we have to ask external things, but then we have to ask external things, but then we have to ask ourselves like, do we have any control ourselves like, do we have any control ourselves like, do we have any control over these external things? Yeah. I'm over these external things? Yeah. I'm over these external things? Yeah. I'm curious what your reflections are on curious what your reflections are on curious what your reflections are on like energy like an energy match. So, like energy like an energy match. So, like energy like an energy match. So, instead of love languages, I look at it instead of love languages, I look at it instead of love languages, I look at it as understanding each other's operating as understanding each other's operating as understanding each other's operating instructions. We don't get a manual like instructions. We don't get a manual like instructions. We don't get a manual like when you get buy a car or a piece of when you get buy a car or a piece of when you get buy a car or a piece of technology, right? comes with operating technology, right? comes with operating technology, right? comes with operating instructions so you know exactly how it instructions so you know exactly how it instructions so you know exactly how it works like don't push this button do works like don't push this button do works like don't push this button do push this button this makes it run more push this button this makes it run more push this button this makes it run more smoothly this will destroy it right so smoothly this will destroy it right so smoothly this will destroy it right so you understand those things so we don't you understand those things so we don't you understand those things so we don't know that about the other person like we know that about the other person like we know that about the other person like we make so many assumptions um you know if make so many assumptions um you know if make so many assumptions um you know if this person is coming to me to talk this person is coming to me to talk this person is coming to me to talk about this here's what I would want in about this here's what I would want in about this here's what I would want in that situation so we do that and the that situation so we do that and the that situation so we do that and the person's like no I came to talk to person's like no I came to talk to person's like no I came to talk to you about it I just wanted to vent I you about it I just wanted to vent I you about it I just wanted to vent I don't I didn't come for you to fix it don't I didn't come for you to fix it don't I didn't come for you to fix it right but maybe You like it when people right but maybe You like it when people right but maybe You like it when people fix it. So you have to learn the fix it. So you have to learn the fix it. So you have to learn the other person's operating instructions. other person's operating instructions. other person's operating instructions. So we talk about this idea of love So we talk about this idea of love So we talk about this idea of love languages. People like all those things. languages. People like all those things. languages. People like all those things. As you said, operating instructions is As you said, operating instructions is As you said, operating instructions is something so much deeper and more something so much deeper and more something so much deeper and more intimate, which is I understand that intimate, which is I understand that intimate, which is I understand that um being late means this to you, right? um being late means this to you, right? um being late means this to you, right? I understand I understand I understand that it helps you when you're anxious if that it helps you when you're anxious if that it helps you when you're anxious if my voice gets quieter. my voice gets quieter. my voice gets quieter. instead of, you know, I understand that instead of, you know, I understand that instead of, you know, I understand that you need a hug in this moment. Um, I you need a hug in this moment. Um, I you need a hug in this moment. Um, I understand that when we're going on a understand that when we're going on a understand that when we're going on a trip, you like to pack this way and I trip, you like to pack this way and I trip, you like to pack this way and I like to pack this way and let's do it like to pack this way and let's do it like to pack this way and let's do it our own ways, right? But or you know, our own ways, right? But or you know, our own ways, right? But or you know, just like I understand these things just like I understand these things just like I understand these things about you and you understand these about you and you understand these about you and you understand these things about me and so if we understand things about me and so if we understand things about me and so if we understand them, we know how the other person them, we know how the other person them, we know how the other person operates and we're going to operate operates and we're going to operate operates and we're going to operate ourselves with an eye toward that. And ourselves with an eye toward that. And ourselves with an eye toward that. And there's something so loving there's something so loving there's something so loving about understanding somebody's operating about understanding somebody's operating about understanding somebody's operating instructions and honoring them. And we instructions and honoring them. And we instructions and honoring them. And we don't try to figure out the other don't try to figure out the other don't try to figure out the other person. We try to think like why are person. We try to think like why are person. We try to think like why are they acting that way? We don't get they acting that way? We don't get they acting that way? We don't get curious and ask, "Hey, why are you curious and ask, "Hey, why are you curious and ask, "Hey, why are you acting that way? What's going on?" And acting that way? What's going on?" And acting that way? What's going on?" And you learn then, oh well, this is why. you learn then, oh well, this is why. you learn then, oh well, this is why. And then now you know that in those And then now you know that in those And then now you know that in those situations, here's how they can go more situations, here's how they can go more situations, here's how they can go more smoothly. I rarely ask uh guests on this smoothly. I rarely ask uh guests on this smoothly. I rarely ask uh guests on this podcast to editorialize about other podcast to editorialize about other podcast to editorialize about other guests, but here it feels uh guests, but here it feels uh guests, but here it feels uh appropriate. Um, Bill Eddie was on this appropriate. Um, Bill Eddie was on this appropriate. Um, Bill Eddie was on this podcast. He's a therapist and lawyer and podcast. He's a therapist and lawyer and podcast. He's a therapist and lawyer and he wrote the book uh I think it was like he wrote the book uh I think it was like he wrote the book uh I think it was like five types of people that will ruin your five types of people that will ruin your five types of people that will ruin your life. And one of the um cardinal life. And one of the um cardinal life. And one of the um cardinal features of a person that he claimed features of a person that he claimed features of a person that he claimed will ruin your life is somebody one of will ruin your life is somebody one of will ruin your life is somebody one of the early warning signs, let's not say the early warning signs, let's not say the early warning signs, let's not say cardinal features, but is um somebody cardinal features, but is um somebody cardinal features, but is um somebody who has a story who has a story who has a story about their past failures that's always about their past failures that's always about their past failures that's always about how they were wronged by somebody about how they were wronged by somebody about how they were wronged by somebody else. Yes. like the victim stance like else. Yes. like the victim stance like else. Yes. like the victim stance like there's no other word for it. People who there's no other word for it. People who there's no other word for it. People who are constantly talking about how they are constantly talking about how they are constantly talking about how they were a victim of somebody else. There is were a victim of somebody else. There is were a victim of somebody else. There is a word for it. It's called helprejecting a word for it. It's called helprejecting a word for it. It's called helprejecting complainers. Help rejecting complainers. Help rejecting complainers. Help rejecting complainers. So, a help rejecting complainer is a So, a help rejecting complainer is a So, a help rejecting complainer is a person who is always telling you, you person who is always telling you, you person who is always telling you, you know, this went wrong and it was know, this went wrong and it was know, this went wrong and it was somebody else's fault and they're somebody else's fault and they're somebody else's fault and they're seemingly coming to you for advice or seemingly coming to you for advice or seemingly coming to you for advice or guidance and no matter what you say like guidance and no matter what you say like guidance and no matter what you say like how about this or have you tried this or how about this or have you tried this or how about this or have you tried this or have you thought about this? No, that have you thought about this? No, that have you thought about this? No, that won't work because no, I've tried that won't work because no, I've tried that won't work because no, I've tried that that's not going to help. No, because that's not going to help. No, because that's not going to help. No, because people are like this and that won't people are like this and that won't people are like this and that won't help. So, they don't actually want help. So, they don't actually want help. So, they don't actually want help. it serves them in some way to be to it serves them in some way to be to it serves them in some way to be to complain and be the victim and be complain and be the victim and be complain and be the victim and be wronged. And so it's almost like, you wronged. And so it's almost like, you wronged. And so it's almost like, you know, that's that makes them feel know, that's that makes them feel know, that's that makes them feel better. Um, they don't want to look at better. Um, they don't want to look at better. Um, they don't want to look at themselves. They don't want to look at themselves. They don't want to look at themselves. They don't want to look at their role in things. So beware of help their role in things. So beware of help their role in things. So beware of help rejecting complainers because they're rejecting complainers because they're rejecting complainers because they're always going to come to you and you're always going to come to you and you're always going to come to you and you're going to at first feel bad for them. going to at first feel bad for them. going to at first feel bad for them. You're going to be like, "Wow, they've You're going to be like, "Wow, they've You're going to be like, "Wow, they've really had a hard time. Wow, you know, I really had a hard time. Wow, you know, I really had a hard time. Wow, you know, I wonder if I could help them this And wonder if I could help them this And wonder if I could help them this And then you start to realize they don't then you start to realize they don't then you start to realize they don't want help. They don't want to be helped. want help. They don't want to be helped. want help. They don't want to be helped. They will reject any help that comes They will reject any help that comes They will reject any help that comes their way because if they get help, they their way because if they get help, they their way because if they get help, they can't complain anymore. I'm guessing you can't complain anymore. I'm guessing you can't complain anymore. I'm guessing you see this sometimes in therapy. Oh, and see this sometimes in therapy. Oh, and see this sometimes in therapy. Oh, and in the world. In the world. We've been in the world. In the world. We've been in the world. In the world. We've been making a fair number of assumptions making a fair number of assumptions making a fair number of assumptions about relationship structure. There so about relationship structure. There so about relationship structure. There so many different permutations these days many different permutations these days many different permutations these days that we don't have to explore them all. that we don't have to explore them all. that we don't have to explore them all. But um do you think that some people are um do you think that some people are um do you think that some people are just not well suited for um romantic just not well suited for um romantic just not well suited for um romantic relationships? Um I've known a few relationships? Um I've known a few relationships? Um I've known a few people in my lifetime, a former uh people in my lifetime, a former uh people in my lifetime, a former uh adviser who he passed away as I adviser who he passed away as I adviser who he passed away as I mentioned earlier, but who um had tried mentioned earlier, but who um had tried mentioned earlier, but who um had tried romantic relationships and decided they romantic relationships and decided they romantic relationships and decided they weren't for him. Um most everyone I know weren't for him. Um most everyone I know weren't for him. Um most everyone I know in my life is either partnered or Yeah, in my life is either partnered or Yeah, in my life is either partnered or Yeah, pretty much. pretty much. pretty much. um thank goodness h happily so um but um thank goodness h happily so um but um thank goodness h happily so um but are there people for whom like they just are there people for whom like they just are there people for whom like they just opt out of the game for reasons that are opt out of the game for reasons that are opt out of the game for reasons that are healthy as opposed to fear of rejection healthy as opposed to fear of rejection healthy as opposed to fear of rejection or otherwise or otherwise or otherwise I think that we are wired to want to I think that we are wired to want to I think that we are wired to want to love and be loved whatever that means it love and be loved whatever that means it love and be loved whatever that means it could there's all kinds of love there's could there's all kinds of love there's could there's all kinds of love there's all kinds of ways to love um I think all kinds of ways to love um I think all kinds of ways to love um I think that people don't know how to love and that people don't know how to love and that people don't know how to love and be loved if they haven't seen it. So, be loved if they haven't seen it. So, be loved if they haven't seen it. So, generally, you learn that because you've generally, you learn that because you've generally, you learn that because you've had it modeled for you. Or if you had it modeled for you. Or if you had it modeled for you. Or if you haven't had it modeled for you, you by haven't had it modeled for you, you by haven't had it modeled for you, you by trial and error start to learn these trial and error start to learn these trial and error start to learn these things. Maybe you go to therapy and you things. Maybe you go to therapy and you things. Maybe you go to therapy and you learn more about it. Um, but I think no learn more about it. Um, but I think no learn more about it. Um, but I think no matter what people come to therapy for, matter what people come to therapy for, matter what people come to therapy for, no matter what we call the presenting no matter what we call the presenting no matter what we call the presenting problem, you know, they're coming problem, you know, they're coming problem, you know, they're coming because whatever they want to say it is, because whatever they want to say it is, because whatever they want to say it is, deep down something got kind of ruptured deep down something got kind of ruptured deep down something got kind of ruptured in the love or being loved area of their in the love or being loved area of their in the love or being loved area of their life. And really, that's the core of it. life. And really, that's the core of it. life. And really, that's the core of it. And we have to solve that problem so And we have to solve that problem so And we have to solve that problem so that the problem they came in for, you that the problem they came in for, you that the problem they came in for, you know, it's kind of like you're know, it's kind of like you're know, it's kind of like you're dealing with content which is like dealing with content which is like dealing with content which is like here's the problem and process which is here's the problem and process which is here's the problem and process which is what's going on underneath. And if we what's going on underneath. And if we what's going on underneath. And if we can solve the process, then you solve can solve the process, then you solve can solve the process, then you solve content in multiple areas of your life. content in multiple areas of your life. content in multiple areas of your life. It's not just this one problem that you It's not just this one problem that you It's not just this one problem that you came in with, but generally if you learn came in with, but generally if you learn came in with, but generally if you learn at the core what the issue is that gets at the core what the issue is that gets at the core what the issue is that gets in the kind of love be loved area. You in the kind of love be loved area. You in the kind of love be loved area. You learn how to navigate through the world learn how to navigate through the world learn how to navigate through the world differently in your professional life differently in your professional life differently in your professional life and your romantic life and your platonic and your romantic life and your platonic and your romantic life and your platonic friendship life and your family life. Um friendship life and your family life. Um friendship life and your family life. Um so it's not just therapy isn't just so it's not just therapy isn't just so it's not just therapy isn't just about solving like that one discreet about solving like that one discreet about solving like that one discreet problem. Sometimes it is, but many times problem. Sometimes it is, but many times problem. Sometimes it is, but many times it's about if we can get to the deeper it's about if we can get to the deeper it's about if we can get to the deeper process issue, then you will solve so process issue, then you will solve so process issue, then you will solve so many different problems simultaneously. many different problems simultaneously. many different problems simultaneously. Throughout today's conversation, I feel Throughout today's conversation, I feel Throughout today's conversation, I feel like um what seems to be in um what seems to be in um what seems to be in contrast is kind of our stories about contrast is kind of our stories about contrast is kind of our stories about ourselves and other people and life ourselves and other people and life ourselves and other people and life versus just really being present. Yeah, versus just really being present. Yeah, versus just really being present. Yeah, this image of the Teflon pan is really this image of the Teflon pan is really this image of the Teflon pan is really um kind of looping in my head because um kind of looping in my head because um kind of looping in my head because this idea that you know positive thing this idea that you know positive thing this idea that you know positive thing happens it slips right off. Negative happens it slips right off. Negative happens it slips right off. Negative thing sticks. What does that mean? It's thing sticks. What does that mean? It's thing sticks. What does that mean? It's like we create a story about the like we create a story about the like we create a story about the negative thing and that the story negative thing and that the story negative thing and that the story about the positive thing was a very about the positive thing was a very about the positive thing was a very brief story. It was like one of brief story. It was like one of brief story. It was like one of those three sentence poems or something those three sentence poems or something those three sentence poems or something and then it's gone. Um versus presence. and then it's gone. Um versus presence. and then it's gone. Um versus presence. It's like the more um presence we can It's like the more um presence we can It's like the more um presence we can bring to something, the more positive bring to something, the more positive bring to something, the more positive meaningful experience we can extract meaningful experience we can extract meaningful experience we can extract from it. I really believe this. I um I from it. I really believe this. I um I from it. I really believe this. I um I learned this in science actually um learned this in science actually um learned this in science actually um because I had a absolutely spectacular because I had a absolutely spectacular because I had a absolutely spectacular neuroanatomy professor when I was an neuroanatomy professor when I was an neuroanatomy professor when I was an undergraduate and he said when you look undergraduate and he said when you look undergraduate and he said when you look down the microscope if you're looking down the microscope if you're looking down the microscope if you're looking for something you'll find it but you're for something you'll find it but you're for something you'll find it but you're going to miss all this context of like going to miss all this context of like going to miss all this context of like the inputs to that structure and you the inputs to that structure and you the inputs to that structure and you lose the pattern recognition that's you lose the pattern recognition that's you lose the pattern recognition that's going to serve you going forward. So I going to serve you going forward. So I going to serve you going forward. So I learned I had this be I had so much time learned I had this be I had so much time learned I had this be I had so much time back then. I would just sit at night as back then. I would just sit at night as back then. I would just sit at night as a graduate student after I left, you a graduate student after I left, you a graduate student after I left, you know, my undergrad and went on to lab know, my undergrad and went on to lab know, my undergrad and went on to lab and I would just like stare at brain and I would just like stare at brain and I would just like stare at brain tissue and you learn that and tissue and you learn that and tissue and you learn that and about it in conscious and unconscious about it in conscious and unconscious about it in conscious and unconscious ways and then later when you're doing an ways and then later when you're doing an ways and then later when you're doing an experiment, you see things like, oh, you experiment, you see things like, oh, you experiment, you see things like, oh, you know, there's a there's a deficit here. know, there's a there's a deficit here. know, there's a there's a deficit here. There there's a real effect here. And There there's a real effect here. And There there's a real effect here. And and you and you learn that through and you and you learn that through and you and you learn that through presence you um you're like experiencing presence you um you're like experiencing presence you um you're like experiencing things so much differently than if you things so much differently than if you things so much differently than if you go looking for something. science if you go looking for something. science if you go looking for something. science if you go looking for something it's actually go looking for something it's actually go looking for something it's actually bad science right and I've tried to bad science right and I've tried to bad science right and I've tried to transport that onto relationship in some transport that onto relationship in some transport that onto relationship in some ways like if like in relation to things ways like if like in relation to things ways like if like in relation to things and people and dogs and all the things and people and dogs and all the things and people and dogs and all the things in life if you're really present like in life if you're really present like in life if you're really present like the story is writing itself but you're the story is writing itself but you're the story is writing itself but you're not um scripting it out I don't know I not um scripting it out I don't know I not um scripting it out I don't know I don't think I have a language for this don't think I have a language for this don't think I have a language for this Rick Rubin talked a little bit about Rick Rubin talked a little bit about Rick Rubin talked a little bit about this in his book the creative act like this in his book the creative act like this in his book the creative act like we need to be on the front end of the of we need to be on the front end of the of we need to be on the front end of the of the vehicle experiencing space and time the vehicle experiencing space and time the vehicle experiencing space and time as it's happening as opposed to sitting as it's happening as opposed to sitting as it's happening as opposed to sitting next to it or in it and kind of creating next to it or in it and kind of creating next to it or in it and kind of creating a narrative about what's happening a narrative about what's happening a narrative about what's happening around us. Does that make sense? Right. around us. Does that make sense? Right. around us. Does that make sense? Right. So, most of us, all of us are, myself So, most of us, all of us are, myself So, most of us, all of us are, myself included, you all of us, we're included, you all of us, we're included, you all of us, we're unreliable narrators because we're only unreliable narrators because we're only unreliable narrators because we're only telling the story through our own lens. telling the story through our own lens. telling the story through our own lens. And so, it's really important for people And so, it's really important for people And so, it's really important for people to kind of be expansive about what the to kind of be expansive about what the to kind of be expansive about what the story might be about themselves. Like, story might be about themselves. Like, story might be about themselves. Like, someone might have a story, I'm someone might have a story, I'm someone might have a story, I'm unlovable, or I can't trust anyone or unlovable, or I can't trust anyone or unlovable, or I can't trust anyone or nothing will ever work out for me. nothing will ever work out for me. nothing will ever work out for me. that's their story that they're carrying that's their story that they're carrying that's their story that they're carrying around from childhood or from you know around from childhood or from you know around from childhood or from you know some experience that they had in life some experience that they had in life some experience that they had in life and they don't realize that they're and they don't realize that they're and they don't realize that they're carrying that story around. everything carrying that story around. everything carrying that story around. everything that they experience is viewed through that they experience is viewed through that they experience is viewed through that lens. And so, of course, they're that lens. And so, of course, they're that lens. And so, of course, they're not finding, you know, they're not finding, you know, they're not finding, you know, they're not finding people they trust because their finding people they trust because their finding people they trust because their whole world view is I can't trust anyone whole world view is I can't trust anyone whole world view is I can't trust anyone even though the person might be even though the person might be even though the person might be trustworthy or they feel unlovable. So, trustworthy or they feel unlovable. So, trustworthy or they feel unlovable. So, of course, they can't take in the love of course, they can't take in the love of course, they can't take in the love that they're getting because again, what that they're getting because again, what that they're getting because again, what are they paying attention to this are they paying attention to this are they paying attention to this predominant storyline? So, they need to predominant storyline? So, they need to predominant storyline? So, they need to rewrite the story. I created this rewrite the story. I created this rewrite the story. I created this workbook that's a like a step-by-step workbook that's a like a step-by-step workbook that's a like a step-by-step guide. I'm not sort of doing this to guide. I'm not sort of doing this to guide. I'm not sort of doing this to plug the workbook. I'm saying it's a plug the workbook. I'm saying it's a plug the workbook. I'm saying it's a very methodical process. You have to very methodical process. You have to very methodical process. You have to break down the story. And my background break down the story. And my background break down the story. And my background is that, you know, I come from a is that, you know, I come from a is that, you know, I come from a writing background. So, I feel like I'm writing background. So, I feel like I'm writing background. So, I feel like I'm almost like an editor in the therapy almost like an editor in the therapy almost like an editor in the therapy room when people come in and they bring room when people come in and they bring room when people come in and they bring this story and my job is to help them this story and my job is to help them this story and my job is to help them edit the story so that this faulty edit the story so that this faulty edit the story so that this faulty narrative that was never true or narrative that was never true or narrative that was never true or someone, you know, whoever told them someone, you know, whoever told them someone, you know, whoever told them that story, whether they explicitly said that story, whether they explicitly said that story, whether they explicitly said you're not lovable or showed them you're not lovable or showed them you're not lovable or showed them through their actions that they then through their actions that they then through their actions that they then felt not lovable, that story was told by felt not lovable, that story was told by felt not lovable, that story was told by another narrator. So that narrator was another narrator. So that narrator was another narrator. So that narrator was unreliable gave you this story that now unreliable gave you this story that now unreliable gave you this story that now you take as gospel and you move through you take as gospel and you move through you take as gospel and you move through life with that story. So let's examine life with that story. So let's examine life with that story. So let's examine that story and can we look for examples that story and can we look for examples that story and can we look for examples of counter examples of when that story of counter examples of when that story of counter examples of when that story is not true because generally there are is not true because generally there are is not true because generally there are stories of you being lovable. There are stories of you being lovable. There are stories of you being lovable. There are stories of people being trustworthy. stories of people being trustworthy. stories of people being trustworthy. There are stories of things working out There are stories of things working out There are stories of things working out for you. So, we have to really rewrite for you. So, we have to really rewrite for you. So, we have to really rewrite those narratives and say, you know, what those narratives and say, you know, what those narratives and say, you know, what is true and what is an artifact of is true and what is an artifact of is true and what is an artifact of somebody else's story that we're somebody else's story that we're somebody else's story that we're carrying around and why are we like carrying around and why are we like carrying around and why are we like writing the next chapter with somebody writing the next chapter with somebody writing the next chapter with somebody else's narrative that we never owned else's narrative that we never owned else's narrative that we never owned anyway? Yeah. It seems that like one of the Yeah. It seems that like one of the Yeah. It seems that like one of the challenges of being human is unless challenges of being human is unless challenges of being human is unless somebody is a narcissist where they somebody is a narcissist where they somebody is a narcissist where they basically dismiss anything that doesn't basically dismiss anything that doesn't basically dismiss anything that doesn't make them feel good. um in which case make them feel good. um in which case make them feel good. um in which case they miss out on so much of life and they miss out on so much of life and they miss out on so much of life and everyone can't stand them anyway. everyone can't stand them anyway. everyone can't stand them anyway. Um if you're a permeable person like Um if you're a permeable person like Um if you're a permeable person like you you're paying attention to what you you're paying attention to what you you're paying attention to what people say you're trying to integrate people say you're trying to integrate people say you're trying to integrate that you're trying to do better be that you're trying to do better be that you're trying to do better be better. Um the hard part is being better. Um the hard part is being better. Um the hard part is being semi-permeable. You have to know what to semi-permeable. You have to know what to semi-permeable. You have to know what to let in, what to reject, what to accept, let in, what to reject, what to accept, let in, what to reject, what to accept, what to work on. I mean it's a what to work on. I mean it's a what to work on. I mean it's a challenging thing this process of being challenging thing this process of being challenging thing this process of being a person in relation to others. a person in relation to others. a person in relation to others. Right. Well well right. And and again Right. Well well right. And and again Right. Well well right. And and again the story, think about like how much we the story, think about like how much we the story, think about like how much we tell stories about ourselves and other tell stories about ourselves and other tell stories about ourselves and other people. That example I gave you earlier people. That example I gave you earlier people. That example I gave you earlier about the person who said, "Well, he about the person who said, "Well, he about the person who said, "Well, he doesn't prioritize me because he comes doesn't prioritize me because he comes doesn't prioritize me because he comes late and work is more important to him." late and work is more important to him." late and work is more important to him." And in fact, he was prioritizing her. So And in fact, he was prioritizing her. So And in fact, he was prioritizing her. So we tell all kinds of stories and we tell all kinds of stories and we tell all kinds of stories and we make meaning of interactions with people make meaning of interactions with people make meaning of interactions with people and generally we don't have enough and generally we don't have enough and generally we don't have enough information and we need to say, "Can we information and we need to say, "Can we information and we need to say, "Can we expand this story? What would that story expand this story? What would that story expand this story? What would that story look like if I got curious?" and ask look like if I got curious?" and ask look like if I got curious?" and ask more about it or even just things that more about it or even just things that more about it or even just things that happened in our own lives. Can I can I happened in our own lives. Can I can I happened in our own lives. Can I can I examine that story for myself? Is that examine that story for myself? Is that examine that story for myself? Is that the story I want to tell myself about the story I want to tell myself about the story I want to tell myself about that experience that didn't go the way I that experience that didn't go the way I that experience that didn't go the way I wanted or can I look at it a different wanted or can I look at it a different wanted or can I look at it a different way? Like am I a failure or am I way? Like am I a failure or am I way? Like am I a failure or am I actually growing? Right? You can look at actually growing? Right? You can look at actually growing? Right? You can look at the same story the same way. I'm a the same story the same way. I'm a the same story the same way. I'm a failure that didn't work out or oh failure that didn't work out or oh failure that didn't work out or oh that's really interesting. I learned that's really interesting. I learned that's really interesting. I learned something really important and I'm something really important and I'm something really important and I'm really a courageous person for trying really a courageous person for trying really a courageous person for trying that and now I learned something. that and now I learned something. that and now I learned something. totally different experiences of the totally different experiences of the totally different experiences of the same event. And I think sometimes the same event. And I think sometimes the same event. And I think sometimes the way we get to that story in the moment way we get to that story in the moment way we get to that story in the moment is to look at our senses. So we have is to look at our senses. So we have is to look at our senses. So we have five senses. We don't tend to pay much five senses. We don't tend to pay much five senses. We don't tend to pay much attention to them. We just think through attention to them. We just think through attention to them. We just think through everything. So can you say in a moment, everything. So can you say in a moment, everything. So can you say in a moment, right? Like even about your partner when right? Like even about your partner when right? Like even about your partner when you're upset with your partner, can you you're upset with your partner, can you you're upset with your partner, can you say like with each sense like here's one say like with each sense like here's one say like with each sense like here's one thing I see about my partner that I thing I see about my partner that I thing I see about my partner that I really like even though I'm upset about really like even though I'm upset about really like even though I'm upset about something they just did. Right. Here's something they just did. Right. Here's something they just did. Right. Here's something I hear. I like the tone of something I hear. I like the tone of something I hear. I like the tone of their voice or I like the way they their voice or I like the way they their voice or I like the way they laugh. Um, you know, I like the way they laugh. Um, you know, I like the way they laugh. Um, you know, I like the way they smell. Um, you know, whatever it is. Um, smell. Um, you know, whatever it is. Um, smell. Um, you know, whatever it is. Um, you know, I like the way you can just you know, I like the way you can just you know, I like the way you can just reach out. And by the way, touch is so reach out. And by the way, touch is so reach out. And by the way, touch is so important. What I have couples do important. What I have couples do important. What I have couples do sometimes when things are getting a sometimes when things are getting a sometimes when things are getting a little bit uh escalated in the therapy little bit uh escalated in the therapy little bit uh escalated in the therapy room is I'll say, "Can you take each room is I'll say, "Can you take each room is I'll say, "Can you take each other's hands right now?" And this is other's hands right now?" And this is other's hands right now?" And this is the last thing they want to do in that the last thing they want to do in that the last thing they want to do in that moment. I say, "Can you just take each moment. I say, "Can you just take each moment. I say, "Can you just take each other's hands?" Calmness, right? Their other's hands?" Calmness, right? Their other's hands?" Calmness, right? Their nervous system is calming down. And all nervous system is calming down. And all nervous system is calming down. And all of a sudden, they feel, "Oh, yeah. I of a sudden, they feel, "Oh, yeah. I of a sudden, they feel, "Oh, yeah. I forgot what that touch feels like." And forgot what that touch feels like." And forgot what that touch feels like." And they feel connected now. So, can we use they feel connected now. So, can we use they feel connected now. So, can we use our other senses? Sometimes when we get our other senses? Sometimes when we get our other senses? Sometimes when we get really in our head and use it to kind of really in our head and use it to kind of really in our head and use it to kind of expand the story and connect and uh expand the story and connect and uh expand the story and connect and uh whether it's connecting with yourself, whether it's connecting with yourself, whether it's connecting with yourself, sometimes, you know, with anxiety, we do sometimes, you know, with anxiety, we do sometimes, you know, with anxiety, we do that. You know, something I can see, that. You know, something I can see, that. You know, something I can see, hear, taste, touch, smell. Um, we can do hear, taste, touch, smell. Um, we can do hear, taste, touch, smell. Um, we can do that with a partner, too. I feel like that with a partner, too. I feel like that with a partner, too. I feel like the whole landscape around the whole landscape around the whole landscape around relationships has changed so much in the relationships has changed so much in the relationships has changed so much in the last 20, 30 years. It seems like in some last 20, 30 years. It seems like in some last 20, 30 years. It seems like in some ways for the better. Like there's a lot ways for the better. Like there's a lot ways for the better. Like there's a lot more discussion about the sorts of more discussion about the sorts of more discussion about the sorts of things that uh you're explaining and things that uh you're explaining and things that uh you're explaining and um better understanding of self, how to um better understanding of self, how to um better understanding of self, how to show up better, better choice um and so show up better, better choice um and so show up better, better choice um and so on. Um, I was thinking about the uh at on. Um, I was thinking about the uh at on. Um, I was thinking about the uh at the same time this example you the same time this example you the same time this example you mentioned before of like uh someone in mentioned before of like uh someone in mentioned before of like uh someone in their teens or 20s will a couple will their teens or 20s will a couple will their teens or 20s will a couple will break up and then somebody's posting all break up and then somebody's posting all break up and then somebody's posting all these things about them. That that kind these things about them. That that kind these things about them. That that kind of quote unquote feedback because it's of quote unquote feedback because it's of quote unquote feedback because it's not really feedback. It's more um not really feedback. It's more um not really feedback. It's more um signaling and posturing about what they signaling and posturing about what they signaling and posturing about what they aren't as opposed to what the other aren't as opposed to what the other aren't as opposed to what the other person is um has got to create person is um has got to create person is um has got to create pretty detrimental stories in the in the pretty detrimental stories in the in the pretty detrimental stories in the in the person that it's about, right? because person that it's about, right? because person that it's about, right? because they either they have the choice of they either they have the choice of they either they have the choice of either believing those things. Um or either believing those things. Um or either believing those things. Um or disbelieving them. Um but it's not disbelieving them. Um but it's not disbelieving them. Um but it's not really an opportunity for growth in the really an opportunity for growth in the really an opportunity for growth in the same way that sitting down with somebody same way that sitting down with somebody same way that sitting down with somebody and saying like, "Hey, these were some and saying like, "Hey, these were some and saying like, "Hey, these were some things that you did well and here are things that you did well and here are things that you did well and here are some things that didn't go well." Um, some things that didn't go well." Um, some things that didn't go well." Um, and I guess how much of the story for um and I guess how much of the story for um and I guess how much of the story for um for men and women, young uh men and for men and women, young uh men and for men and women, young uh men and women nowadays and older, do you women nowadays and older, do you women nowadays and older, do you think like uh is being think like uh is being think like uh is being uh written through the like what we hear uh written through the like what we hear uh written through the like what we hear about the opposite sex, right? about the opposite sex, right? about the opposite sex, right? like that like um in the last I would like that like um in the last I would like that like um in the last I would say 1015 years there it hasn't really say 1015 years there it hasn't really say 1015 years there it hasn't really been a moment of really trying to prop been a moment of really trying to prop been a moment of really trying to prop young boys up and men of it's like young boys up and men of it's like young boys up and men of it's like maleness is great like that's not maleness is great like that's not maleness is great like that's not something you hear very often. Yeah. And something you hear very often. Yeah. And something you hear very often. Yeah. And I certainly understand why there was a I certainly understand why there was a I certainly understand why there was a need and an effort to balance um need and an effort to balance um need and an effort to balance um opportunities, right? But uh a lot of opportunities, right? But uh a lot of opportunities, right? But uh a lot of young guys grew up hearing that maleness young guys grew up hearing that maleness young guys grew up hearing that maleness having a Y chromosome is a bad thing, having a Y chromosome is a bad thing, having a Y chromosome is a bad thing, that testosterone is bad or something that testosterone is bad or something that testosterone is bad or something like that. uh you know and I've been like that. uh you know and I've been like that. uh you know and I've been asked to comment on this more and more asked to comment on this more and more asked to comment on this more and more recently in the press and you know I recently in the press and you know I recently in the press and you know I only know my experience and what I only know my experience and what I only know my experience and what I observe but observe but observe but um I mean you take any group and um I mean you take any group and um I mean you take any group and tell them that they're bad and that tell them that they're bad and that tell them that they're bad and that hasn't really worked out well for any hasn't really worked out well for any hasn't really worked out well for any group and or for society. When my group and or for society. When my group and or for society. When my son was in preschool, um there was a son was in preschool, um there was a son was in preschool, um there was a shirt that girls would wear, little, you shirt that girls would wear, little, you shirt that girls would wear, little, you know, preschool girls, and it said, know, preschool girls, and it said, know, preschool girls, and it said, "Boys are stupid. Let's throw rocks at "Boys are stupid. Let's throw rocks at "Boys are stupid. Let's throw rocks at them." And it was supposed to be somehow them." And it was supposed to be somehow them." And it was supposed to be somehow girl power, empowering, but you don't girl power, empowering, but you don't girl power, empowering, but you don't empower by putting down another group, empower by putting down another group, empower by putting down another group, right? You lift up, but you don't bring right? You lift up, but you don't bring right? You lift up, but you don't bring down. And my son was so confused by down. And my son was so confused by down. And my son was so confused by that. I remember he was like, "Why? What that. I remember he was like, "Why? What that. I remember he was like, "Why? What does that mean?" And can you imagine if does that mean?" And can you imagine if does that mean?" And can you imagine if some boy showed up at preschool that some boy showed up at preschool that some boy showed up at preschool that said, "Girls are stupid. Let's throw said, "Girls are stupid. Let's throw said, "Girls are stupid. Let's throw rocks at them." Yeah. He'd be in a rocks at them." Yeah. He'd be in a rocks at them." Yeah. He'd be in a different preschool pretty quick, right? different preschool pretty quick, right? different preschool pretty quick, right? I mean, you know, it's um so I think I mean, you know, it's um so I think I mean, you know, it's um so I think it's interesting to think about it's interesting to think about it's interesting to think about um how it became that um it's very hard um how it became that um it's very hard um how it became that um it's very hard for young men to navigate what does for young men to navigate what does for young men to navigate what does masculinity in a positive way look like? masculinity in a positive way look like? masculinity in a positive way look like? And they get all kinds of messages, you And they get all kinds of messages, you And they get all kinds of messages, you know, all men are bad. Um, men should be know, all men are bad. Um, men should be know, all men are bad. Um, men should be more like women. Men need to um, you more like women. Men need to um, you more like women. Men need to um, you know, be this way or that way. But no, know, be this way or that way. But no, know, be this way or that way. But no, if they are more communicative, then if they are more communicative, then if they are more communicative, then they're weak. But if they aren't they're weak. But if they aren't they're weak. But if they aren't communic, you know, like there's communic, you know, like there's communic, you know, like there's no kind of right way uh to be. And I no kind of right way uh to be. And I no kind of right way uh to be. And I think that um I think it's very think that um I think it's very think that um I think it's very confusing for young men. if a if a confusing for young men. if a if a confusing for young men. if a if a young like a teenager or someone in young like a teenager or someone in young like a teenager or someone in college wants to kiss a girl, right? college wants to kiss a girl, right? college wants to kiss a girl, right? like on a date um and they don't do it like on a date um and they don't do it like on a date um and they don't do it because like it for like they don't know because like it for like they don't know because like it for like they don't know what to do like do I need to say can I what to do like do I need to say can I what to do like do I need to say can I kiss you right which feels a little bit kiss you right which feels a little bit kiss you right which feels a little bit like takes away from the moment but at like takes away from the moment but at like takes away from the moment but at the same time they don't want to assume the same time they don't want to assume the same time they don't want to assume that she wants to be kissed but like it that she wants to be kissed but like it that she wants to be kissed but like it seems pretty obvious to him that like seems pretty obvious to him that like seems pretty obvious to him that like they're standing out in front of their they're standing out in front of their they're standing out in front of their cars in front of the restaurant and like cars in front of the restaurant and like cars in front of the restaurant and like maybe she wants a good night kit you maybe she wants a good night kit you maybe she wants a good night kit you know and it's just so confusing know and it's just so confusing know and it's just so confusing um and I think that um you know um and I think that um you know um and I think that um you know there's definitely I think a positive there's definitely I think a positive there's definitely I think a positive correction in you know what we call correction in you know what we call correction in you know what we call toxic masculinity um the ways that toxic masculinity um the ways that toxic masculinity um the ways that men didn't really assume the personhood men didn't really assume the personhood men didn't really assume the personhood of women. But I also think that it's of women. But I also think that it's of women. But I also think that it's gotten to a place where it's so gotten to a place where it's so gotten to a place where it's so confusing for both young men and young confusing for both young men and young confusing for both young men and young women to understand sort women to understand sort women to understand sort of how do we how can we be with each of how do we how can we be with each of how do we how can we be with each other? How can we relate to each other? How can we relate to each other? How can we relate to each other? um where we won't be criticized, cancelled, where we won't be criticized, cancelled, where we won't be criticized, cancelled, uh you know, we don't know what's right. uh you know, we don't know what's right. uh you know, we don't know what's right. Like, is it do I do I put myself out Like, is it do I do I put myself out Like, is it do I do I put myself out there? Do I not put myself out there? Um there? Do I not put myself out there? Um there? Do I not put myself out there? Um will I get in trouble? And so it, you will I get in trouble? And so it, you will I get in trouble? And so it, you know, obviously it's a good thing that know, obviously it's a good thing that know, obviously it's a good thing that people are having conversations and that people are having conversations and that people are having conversations and there's more communication around like there's more communication around like there's more communication around like what is okay, what do you want, is this what is okay, what do you want, is this what is okay, what do you want, is this okay? But at a certain level, it becomes okay? But at a certain level, it becomes okay? But at a certain level, it becomes people are afraid to do anything. Yeah. people are afraid to do anything. Yeah. people are afraid to do anything. Yeah. Talk about lack of presence. It sounds Talk about lack of presence. It sounds Talk about lack of presence. It sounds like they have to like write the story like they have to like write the story like they have to like write the story all the way to the 10 different outcomes all the way to the 10 different outcomes all the way to the 10 different outcomes for a given action, you know, evaluating for a given action, you know, evaluating for a given action, you know, evaluating if then they're no longer reading the if then they're no longer reading the if then they're no longer reading the other person's signals. I mean, it other person's signals. I mean, it other person's signals. I mean, it sounds incredibly complicated, right? It sounds incredibly complicated, right? It sounds incredibly complicated, right? It it is very complicated. I think it is very complicated. I think it is very complicated. I think there's progress, too. I mean, I think there's progress, too. I mean, I think there's progress, too. I mean, I think it's much better than having these it's much better than having these it's much better than having these situations where men just assumed like situations where men just assumed like situations where men just assumed like it was okay to do certain things it was okay to do certain things it was okay to do certain things whether, you know, the woman consented whether, you know, the woman consented whether, you know, the woman consented or not. But I also feel like um the or not. But I also feel like um the or not. But I also feel like um the education that they're getting around education that they're getting around education that they're getting around this, which again is again it's so this, which again is again it's so this, which again is again it's so complicated because it's positive that complicated because it's positive that complicated because it's positive that they're getting this education, but they they're getting this education, but they they're getting this education, but they don't know what it looks like in don't know what it looks like in don't know what it looks like in practice because the way that you know practice because the way that you know practice because the way that you know even when you think of like corporate even when you think of like corporate even when you think of like corporate training and you have to watch those training and you have to watch those training and you have to watch those videos, right? And and you know what is videos, right? And and you know what is videos, right? And and you know what is okay and what is not okay. They give the okay and what is not okay. They give the okay and what is not okay. They give the most obvious examples of what is not most obvious examples of what is not most obvious examples of what is not okay. But then there's just sort of like okay. But then there's just sort of like okay. But then there's just sort of like how like say you're at work and there's how like say you're at work and there's how like say you're at work and there's someone that you you're a woman and someone that you you're a woman and someone that you you're a woman and you're at work and there's a guy that you're at work and there's a guy that you're at work and there's a guy that you're attracted to because a lot of you're attracted to because a lot of you're attracted to because a lot of people meet at work, right? Because it's people meet at work, right? Because it's people meet at work, right? Because it's hard where do you meet people when hard where do you meet people when hard where do you meet people when you're an adult. Where do you spend all you're an adult. Where do you spend all you're an adult. Where do you spend all your time? You spend a lot of your days your time? You spend a lot of your days your time? You spend a lot of your days five days a week at work. So you might five days a week at work. So you might five days a week at work. So you might meet someone through work and then meet someone through work and then meet someone through work and then there's this sort of and maybe it's not there's this sort of and maybe it's not there's this sort of and maybe it's not someone you directly report to or someone you directly report to or someone you directly report to or reports to you. They're in like a reports to you. They're in like a reports to you. They're in like a different department. There's like a different department. There's like a different department. There's like a cute guy. What do you do? People don't cute guy. What do you do? People don't cute guy. What do you do? People don't know. So women are confused too. What is know. So women are confused too. What is know. So women are confused too. What is okay? What is not okay? In the ways that okay? What is not okay? In the ways that okay? What is not okay? In the ways that organically people used to be able to organically people used to be able to organically people used to be able to say like, "Hey, that guy, you know, I'm say like, "Hey, that guy, you know, I'm say like, "Hey, that guy, you know, I'm going to go talk to him, right?" But going to go talk to him, right?" But going to go talk to him, right?" But people don't know what to do. Wow. people don't know what to do. Wow. people don't know what to do. Wow. Tricky landscape, but you're offering Tricky landscape, but you're offering Tricky landscape, but you're offering tools for people at least, not at least, tools for people at least, not at least, tools for people at least, not at least, but to communicate better and certainly but to communicate better and certainly but to communicate better and certainly to understand themselves better so they to understand themselves better so they to understand themselves better so they know what they're bringing to the table. know what they're bringing to the table. know what they're bringing to the table. Well, I think that it's about Well, I think that it's about Well, I think that it's about understanding that whatever we see in understanding that whatever we see in understanding that whatever we see in TVs and movies, you know, it's it TVs and movies, you know, it's it TVs and movies, you know, it's it doesn't look like that. You know, doesn't look like that. You know, doesn't look like that. You know, there's always like no somebody doesn't there's always like no somebody doesn't there's always like no somebody doesn't know what to do in a certain moment or know what to do in a certain moment or know what to do in a certain moment or something doesn't go the way that you something doesn't go the way that you something doesn't go the way that you imagine it will go or sex is can be imagine it will go or sex is can be imagine it will go or sex is can be ridiculous at times and you know, all ridiculous at times and you know, all ridiculous at times and you know, all these like weird things happen. I don't these like weird things happen. I don't these like weird things happen. I don't mean not consent. I'm talking about like mean not consent. I'm talking about like mean not consent. I'm talking about like it's just it doesn't look like it does it's just it doesn't look like it does it's just it doesn't look like it does in the movies all the Well, and in the movies all the Well, and in the movies all the Well, and sometimes there's great chemistry and sometimes there's great chemistry and sometimes there's great chemistry and guess what? Sometimes there's not. Like guess what? Sometimes there's not. Like guess what? Sometimes there's not. Like this chemistry thing is a real thing and this chemistry thing is a real thing and this chemistry thing is a real thing and sometimes it develops over time and sometimes it develops over time and sometimes it develops over time and sometimes it doesn't. The the idea that sometimes it doesn't. The the idea that sometimes it doesn't. The the idea that there wouldn't be much uh room for um ex there wouldn't be much uh room for um ex there wouldn't be much uh room for um ex healthy exploration, healthy exploration, healthy exploration, error, and adventure error, and adventure error, and adventure kind of breaks my heart because that's kind of breaks my heart because that's kind of breaks my heart because that's what I was referring to about things, what I was referring to about things, what I was referring to about things, you know. Um but young people are smart. you know. Um but young people are smart. you know. Um but young people are smart. they can figure it out. And and they can figure it out. And and they can figure it out. And and they also like to throw off the um uh the also like to throw off the um uh the also like to throw off the um uh the kind of like rules and standards of the kind of like rules and standards of the kind of like rules and standards of the uh of the adult generation. So, I trust uh of the adult generation. So, I trust uh of the adult generation. So, I trust they'll come up with a better they'll come up with a better they'll come up with a better alternative for themselves, right? Um I alternative for themselves, right? Um I alternative for themselves, right? Um I want to make sure that I ask you about want to make sure that I ask you about want to make sure that I ask you about grief. Mhm. When a client is grieving a grief. Mhm. When a client is grieving a grief. Mhm. When a client is grieving a breakup or a loss of some sort, um do a breakup or a loss of some sort, um do a breakup or a loss of some sort, um do you tell them to feel their feelings or you tell them to feel their feelings or you tell them to feel their feelings or do you tell them to compartmentalize and do you tell them to compartmentalize and do you tell them to compartmentalize and only feel their feelings certain times a only feel their feelings certain times a only feel their feelings certain times a day or do you day or do you day or do you um you know ever have to say, "Hey, um you know ever have to say, "Hey, um you know ever have to say, "Hey, listen, you know, it's time to bury listen, you know, it's time to bury listen, you know, it's time to bury this thing." Um, I'm laughing because this thing." Um, I'm laughing because this thing." Um, I'm laughing because there's no one way to grieve a there's no one way to grieve a there's no one way to grieve a loss and even the same loss like um you loss and even the same loss like um you loss and even the same loss like um you know siblings can lose a parent and know siblings can lose a parent and know siblings can lose a parent and they'll have very different ways of they'll have very different ways of they'll have very different ways of grieving the loss of the exact same grieving the loss of the exact same grieving the loss of the exact same person. um you know there there's just no right um you know there there's just no right um you know there there's just no right way or one way and I think you really way or one way and I think you really way or one way and I think you really have to honor that person's process and have to honor that person's process and have to honor that person's process and what I mean by that is it doesn't mean what I mean by that is it doesn't mean what I mean by that is it doesn't mean sort of you know just spend the rest of sort of you know just spend the rest of sort of you know just spend the rest of your life um like dwelling and not your life um like dwelling and not your life um like dwelling and not living right but I think people have living right but I think people have living right but I think people have this misconception about grief that this misconception about grief that this misconception about grief that somehow you're going to get over it and somehow you're going to get over it and somehow you're going to get over it and um often we carry those losses with us um often we carry those losses with us um often we carry those losses with us throughout our lives. Like you lose throughout our lives. Like you lose throughout our lives. Like you lose someone important to you, you're going someone important to you, you're going someone important to you, you're going to feel that loss and you might feel it to feel that loss and you might feel it to feel that loss and you might feel it in different ways at different times. If in different ways at different times. If in different ways at different times. If someone was important to you and you someone was important to you and you someone was important to you and you lost that person and you hadn't thought lost that person and you hadn't thought lost that person and you hadn't thought about them in a while and then you're in about them in a while and then you're in about them in a while and then you're in an elevator and you hear this music, an elevator and you hear this music, an elevator and you hear this music, this song and all of a sudden it's like this song and all of a sudden it's like this song and all of a sudden it's like someone just stuck a knife in your heart someone just stuck a knife in your heart someone just stuck a knife in your heart even though you were doing fine. So um even though you were doing fine. So um even though you were doing fine. So um people you know I think that we are people you know I think that we are people you know I think that we are the accumulation of all the different the accumulation of all the different the accumulation of all the different people who have been in our lives for people who have been in our lives for people who have been in our lives for better or worse and um everybody makes better or worse and um everybody makes better or worse and um everybody makes some kind of impression on us that some kind of impression on us that some kind of impression on us that sticks with us. So I think it's really sticks with us. So I think it's really sticks with us. So I think it's really important for people to understand important for people to understand important for people to understand um what the loss is about because the um what the loss is about because the um what the loss is about because the loss can represent lots of different loss can represent lots of different loss can represent lots of different things. You lose a parent, maybe it's things. You lose a parent, maybe it's things. You lose a parent, maybe it's the loss of your youth. you're like, the loss of your youth. you're like, the loss of your youth. you're like, "Oh, no. I'm now the older generation." "Oh, no. I'm now the older generation." "Oh, no. I'm now the older generation." So, part of it is the parent, but part So, part of it is the parent, but part So, part of it is the parent, but part of it is this kind of I'm closer to of it is this kind of I'm closer to of it is this kind of I'm closer to death. And what does that mean? Um, you death. And what does that mean? Um, you death. And what does that mean? Um, you know, you lose a marriage and it could know, you lose a marriage and it could know, you lose a marriage and it could mean, oh, look, just like my parents, mean, oh, look, just like my parents, mean, oh, look, just like my parents, they got divorced and I failed, even they got divorced and I failed, even they got divorced and I failed, even though that's not necessarily the though that's not necessarily the though that's not necessarily the meaning of it. So, we make meaning of meaning of it. So, we make meaning of meaning of it. So, we make meaning of the loss, too. So, it's what does this the loss, too. So, it's what does this the loss, too. So, it's what does this loss mean to you? How do you make sense loss mean to you? How do you make sense loss mean to you? How do you make sense of it? of it? of it? um how do you sit with the loss and then um how do you sit with the loss and then um how do you sit with the loss and then how do you again not move on but move how do you again not move on but move how do you again not move on but move forward? I love that concept. Uh we forward? I love that concept. Uh we forward? I love that concept. Uh we integrate the things better for integrate the things better for integrate the things better for better or worse into us but um moving better or worse into us but um moving better or worse into us but um moving forward is something I think everyone forward is something I think everyone forward is something I think everyone would probably want one would hope. would probably want one would hope. would probably want one would hope. Yeah. I know you're not um here to pro to I know you're not um here to pro to I know you're not um here to pro to promote anything, but um you caught my promote anything, but um you caught my promote anything, but um you caught my attention with this workbook because I attention with this workbook because I attention with this workbook because I think um I and a number of people think um I and a number of people think um I and a number of people probably want to think about how to um probably want to think about how to um probably want to think about how to um uh put some of this into action. Um and uh put some of this into action. Um and uh put some of this into action. Um and you've given us a lot of great tools to you've given us a lot of great tools to you've given us a lot of great tools to do that, a lot of different ways to do that, a lot of different ways to do that, a lot of different ways to think about things. I certainly am um think about things. I certainly am um think about things. I certainly am um taking notes. Uh can you tell me about taking notes. Uh can you tell me about taking notes. Uh can you tell me about the notebook? um and what the notebook? um and what the notebook? um and what the notebook is and what who can make notebook is and what who can make notebook is and what who can make use of it. Yeah, this what by the way use of it. Yeah, this what by the way use of it. Yeah, this what by the way folks this wasn't preceded into the folks this wasn't preceded into the folks this wasn't preceded into the conversation. We'll talk about the conversation. We'll talk about the conversation. We'll talk about the notebook later. I just want to know for notebook later. I just want to know for notebook later. I just want to know for people who want to understand how to how people who want to understand how to how people who want to understand how to how to do good work. It sounds like a to do good work. It sounds like a to do good work. It sounds like a great tool, right? Um, so the workbook great tool, right? Um, so the workbook great tool, right? Um, so the workbook came about because um, I wrote this book came about because um, I wrote this book came about because um, I wrote this book called Maybe You Should Talk to Someone called Maybe You Should Talk to Someone called Maybe You Should Talk to Someone and it's the stories of it's my story and it's the stories of it's my story and it's the stories of it's my story going to therapy and then it's the story going to therapy and then it's the story going to therapy and then it's the story of these four other patients that I had of these four other patients that I had of these four other patients that I had and um, when I working with them and um, and um, when I working with them and um, and um, when I working with them and um, and people said, "Wow, there was so much and people said, "Wow, there was so much and people said, "Wow, there was so much that made me think or feel or resonate that made me think or feel or resonate that made me think or feel or resonate with, but I need some structured like a with, but I need some structured like a with, but I need some structured like a sort of a step-by-step guide to how I sort of a step-by-step guide to how I sort of a step-by-step guide to how I can make those kinds of changes, too." can make those kinds of changes, too." can make those kinds of changes, too." and maybe they don't have access to and maybe they don't have access to and maybe they don't have access to therapy or they don't want to go to therapy or they don't want to go to therapy or they don't want to go to therapy, they want to work on it in a therapy, they want to work on it in a therapy, they want to work on it in a different way. And I really wanted I different way. And I really wanted I different way. And I really wanted I feel like therapy is this thing where feel like therapy is this thing where feel like therapy is this thing where certain people, you know, it's sort of certain people, you know, it's sort of certain people, you know, it's sort of like one-on-one or if you have a couple, like one-on-one or if you have a couple, like one-on-one or if you have a couple, it's like, you know, three people in the it's like, you know, three people in the it's like, you know, three people in the room and how do you bring that out so room and how do you bring that out so room and how do you bring that out so other people can use those tools? So, I other people can use those tools? So, I other people can use those tools? So, I created basically a workbook that's a created basically a workbook that's a created basically a workbook that's a companion to maybe you should talk to companion to maybe you should talk to companion to maybe you should talk to someone. And it's I really focused someone. And it's I really focused someone. And it's I really focused on stories because I feel like the on stories because I feel like the on stories because I feel like the narratives that we carry around shape so narratives that we carry around shape so narratives that we carry around shape so much of how we think, feel, and act much of how we think, feel, and act much of how we think, feel, and act every day. So, it's a it's a guide every day. So, it's a it's a guide every day. So, it's a it's a guide that really it's what I would do with that really it's what I would do with that really it's what I would do with someone in the therapy room if I were someone in the therapy room if I were someone in the therapy room if I were helping them to rewrite their story and helping them to rewrite their story and helping them to rewrite their story and to look at is this a faulty narrative? to look at is this a faulty narrative? to look at is this a faulty narrative? What does this look like? What are the What does this look like? What are the What does this look like? What are the true stories? What resonates with me now true stories? What resonates with me now true stories? What resonates with me now at this part of my life? Where do these at this part of my life? Where do these at this part of my life? Where do these stories come from? Who told me these stories come from? Who told me these stories come from? Who told me these stories? Um, can I try this out in real stories? Um, can I try this out in real stories? Um, can I try this out in real life? Here's an exercise to do this life? Here's an exercise to do this life? Here's an exercise to do this week. So, I think that more of us week. So, I think that more of us week. So, I think that more of us sometimes need that kind of guidance. sometimes need that kind of guidance. sometimes need that kind of guidance. It's one thing to theoretically think It's one thing to theoretically think It's one thing to theoretically think about something. And as a therapist, I'm about something. And as a therapist, I'm about something. And as a therapist, I'm just very direct and active anyway. As I just very direct and active anyway. As I just very direct and active anyway. As I said, you know, the insight is the booby said, you know, the insight is the booby said, you know, the insight is the booby prize of therapy that I want people to prize of therapy that I want people to prize of therapy that I want people to have more than insight. I want them to have more than insight. I want them to have more than insight. I want them to have a plan with action and I want them have a plan with action and I want them have a plan with action and I want them to have small, manageable steps because to have small, manageable steps because to have small, manageable steps because I feel like if you get overwhelmed and I feel like if you get overwhelmed and I feel like if you get overwhelmed and the step is too big, that's really the step is too big, that's really the step is too big, that's really the only reason that people don't succeed at only reason that people don't succeed at only reason that people don't succeed at a change they want to make. It's that a change they want to make. It's that a change they want to make. It's that you need the steps to be manageable. So, you need the steps to be manageable. So, you need the steps to be manageable. So, I really break it down for people. You I really break it down for people. You I really break it down for people. You know, how can we do this? It's kind of know, how can we do this? It's kind of know, how can we do this? It's kind of like weekly therapy. It's like, how can like weekly therapy. It's like, how can like weekly therapy. It's like, how can we do this week and work on that? we do this week and work on that? we do this week and work on that? And then you can kind of reflect on it. And then you can kind of reflect on it. And then you can kind of reflect on it. And there's all these different And there's all these different And there's all these different exercises that take you at the pace that exercises that take you at the pace that exercises that take you at the pace that works for you. It's great. I I'm a huge works for you. It's great. I I'm a huge works for you. It's great. I I'm a huge fan of workbooks and online courses. I'm fan of workbooks and online courses. I'm fan of workbooks and online courses. I'm taking an online course right now um taking an online course right now um taking an online course right now um just for my own enrichment. I'm going to just for my own enrichment. I'm going to just for my own enrichment. I'm going to get your notebook. Um I think it's a get your notebook. Um I think it's a get your notebook. Um I think it's a fabulous idea. I think there's so many fabulous idea. I think there's so many fabulous idea. I think there's so many books about the changes we can make and books about the changes we can make and books about the changes we can make and in any domain of health, wellness, and in any domain of health, wellness, and in any domain of health, wellness, psychology, fitness, whatever. And we psychology, fitness, whatever. And we psychology, fitness, whatever. And we read it. we might incorporate one or two read it. we might incorporate one or two read it. we might incorporate one or two little snippets and then it goes on the little snippets and then it goes on the little snippets and then it goes on the shelf and then we're proud to have it on shelf and then we're proud to have it on shelf and then we're proud to have it on our shelf because it says something our shelf because it says something our shelf because it says something about how we view life and it's cool to about how we view life and it's cool to about how we view life and it's cool to see those books elsewhere and all that's see those books elsewhere and all that's see those books elsewhere and all that's wonderful. Um but I think workbooks are wonderful. Um but I think workbooks are wonderful. Um but I think workbooks are like a real thing. Um so we'll put a like a real thing. Um so we'll put a like a real thing. Um so we'll put a link to that again. Uh this came up link to that again. Uh this came up link to that again. Uh this came up spontaneously but I know a number of spontaneously but I know a number of spontaneously but I know a number of people will want um to know that. I have people will want um to know that. I have people will want um to know that. I have one more question. You write this one more question. You write this one more question. You write this column. Is it a weekly column? Every two column. Is it a weekly column? Every two column. Is it a weekly column? Every two weeks I write Ask the Therapist. Yeah. weeks I write Ask the Therapist. Yeah. weeks I write Ask the Therapist. Yeah. Are there things thematically that are Are there things thematically that are Are there things thematically that are coming up more these days? Like you're coming up more these days? Like you're coming up more these days? Like you're getting a thousand letters about blank getting a thousand letters about blank getting a thousand letters about blank and then two about something else? I and then two about something else? I and then two about something else? I mean, what where are things mean, what where are things mean, what where are things batching these days? And there can be batching these days? And there can be batching these days? And there can be more than one uh b uh bin, excuse me, more than one uh b uh bin, excuse me, more than one uh b uh bin, excuse me, bin to how it's batching. Yeah. Um so I bin to how it's batching. Yeah. Um so I bin to how it's batching. Yeah. Um so I think the same things come up. I've been think the same things come up. I've been think the same things come up. I've been doing this for so many years. I wrote it doing this for so many years. I wrote it doing this for so many years. I wrote it for six years at the Atlantic and I'm for six years at the Atlantic and I'm for six years at the Atlantic and I'm writing at the New York Times. And it's writing at the New York Times. And it's writing at the New York Times. And it's interesting because people talk about the same because people talk about the same because people talk about the same issues differently, but it's the same issues differently, but it's the same issues differently, but it's the same issue. So someone might say, um, you issue. So someone might say, um, you issue. So someone might say, um, you know, a lot comes up around should I cut know, a lot comes up around should I cut know, a lot comes up around should I cut off this person? Um, whether that's a off this person? Um, whether that's a off this person? Um, whether that's a family member or a friend. Um, you know, family member or a friend. Um, you know, family member or a friend. Um, you know, should I, you know, this person did should I, you know, this person did should I, you know, this person did this? And boundaries are a big thing. this? And boundaries are a big thing. this? And boundaries are a big thing. And everyone thinks everyone's a And everyone thinks everyone's a And everyone thinks everyone's a narcissist, which they're not. Everyone narcissist, which they're not. Everyone narcissist, which they're not. Everyone thinks everyone is, you know, thinks everyone is, you know, thinks everyone is, you know, gaslighting them, which generally gaslighting them, which generally gaslighting them, which generally they're not. It's all dope. I mean, I'm they're not. It's all dope. I mean, I'm they're not. It's all dope. I mean, I'm just I'm just kidding. They're these by just I'm just kidding. They're these by just I'm just kidding. They're these by But but I mean like the language is But but I mean like the language is But but I mean like the language is different is what I'm saying. But I different is what I'm saying. But I different is what I'm saying. But I think that what they're really think that what they're really think that what they're really struggling with and what we all struggle struggling with and what we all struggle struggling with and what we all struggle with are are, you know, relating. It's with are are, you know, relating. It's with are are, you know, relating. It's hard. Humans are unpredictable. Humans hard. Humans are unpredictable. Humans hard. Humans are unpredictable. Humans are well, in some ways they're very are well, in some ways they're very are well, in some ways they're very predictable, but I think they're hard predictable, but I think they're hard predictable, but I think they're hard for another person to understand in that for another person to understand in that for another person to understand in that way. going back to the operating way. going back to the operating way. going back to the operating instructions that sometimes you think instructions that sometimes you think instructions that sometimes you think this is going to be the expected this is going to be the expected this is going to be the expected response and you get something response and you get something response and you get something completely different. Um they can't completely different. Um they can't completely different. Um they can't understand why a friend or a family understand why a friend or a family understand why a friend or a family member or a co-orker or whatever would member or a co-orker or whatever would member or a co-orker or whatever would um would do or say or think something. um would do or say or think something. um would do or say or think something. Um I think at the end of the day people Um I think at the end of the day people Um I think at the end of the day people really know what the answer to the really know what the answer to the really know what the answer to the question is but they want permission. question is but they want permission. question is but they want permission. Um, so many times people say like, Um, so many times people say like, Um, so many times people say like, you know, what do you think about this? you know, what do you think about this? you know, what do you think about this? Or I really want to do this, but the Or I really want to do this, but the Or I really want to do this, but the people in my family think this. And so people in my family think this. And so people in my family think this. And so they're almost asking for permission they're almost asking for permission they're almost asking for permission that it's okay to want something. It's that it's okay to want something. It's that it's okay to want something. It's okay. We are so cautious about desire in okay. We are so cautious about desire in okay. We are so cautious about desire in our culture that sometimes we think that our culture that sometimes we think that our culture that sometimes we think that if I have a desire it's indulgent if I have a desire it's indulgent if I have a desire it's indulgent as opposed to you should you know have as opposed to you should you know have as opposed to you should you know have desires live a big life. I always say to desires live a big life. I always say to desires live a big life. I always say to people when you're making a decision people when you're making a decision people when you're making a decision choose the bigger life. That's how you choose the bigger life. That's how you choose the bigger life. That's how you make the decision. And I heard that make the decision. And I heard that make the decision. And I heard that somewhere. It's not mine originally, but somewhere. It's not mine originally, but somewhere. It's not mine originally, but I think it's so true that, you know, I think it's so true that, you know, I think it's so true that, you know, it's okay to have these desires, but it's okay to have these desires, but it's okay to have these desires, but then we get these messages from our then we get these messages from our then we get these messages from our culture or our friend group or our culture or our friend group or our culture or our friend group or our families that no, it's not okay. families that no, it's not okay. families that no, it's not okay. And so, a lot of people want permission And so, a lot of people want permission And so, a lot of people want permission that it's okay that you don't want to go that it's okay that you don't want to go that it's okay that you don't want to go to medical school, you know, like it's to medical school, you know, like it's to medical school, you know, like it's okay. Um, you know, it's okay that you okay. Um, you know, it's okay that you okay. Um, you know, it's okay that you don't want to have children. That's don't want to have children. That's don't want to have children. That's okay. um you know so I think sometimes people um you know so I think sometimes people um you know so I think sometimes people want permission but I think what they're want permission but I think what they're want permission but I think what they're really I think most of the letters are really I think most of the letters are really I think most of the letters are about um I'm having trouble relating and about um I'm having trouble relating and about um I'm having trouble relating and I don't know if I'm crazy they're crazy I don't know if I'm crazy they're crazy I don't know if I'm crazy they're crazy what's happening and so they need sort what's happening and so they need sort what's happening and so they need sort of that person who's going to zoom out of that person who's going to zoom out of that person who's going to zoom out and see it from a more objective place and see it from a more objective place and see it from a more objective place and help them to see again going back to and help them to see again going back to and help them to see again going back to narrative both sides of the narrative so narrative both sides of the narrative so narrative both sides of the narrative so I'm not just in my column I don't just I'm not just in my column I don't just I'm not just in my column I don't just say here's what you should do I do say here's what you should do I do say here's what you should do I do that but I first say I want you have that but I first say I want you have that but I first say I want you have some context around this. So, here's how some context around this. So, here's how some context around this. So, here's how you're thinking about it and that's you're thinking about it and that's you're thinking about it and that's understandable. Here's the other side of understandable. Here's the other side of understandable. Here's the other side of the story that you're not really paying the story that you're not really paying the story that you're not really paying attention to. Now that you have this attention to. Now that you have this attention to. Now that you have this wider lens, here's how I think this wider lens, here's how I think this wider lens, here's how I think this might be managed. might be managed. might be managed. Love it. I love this concept of make the Love it. I love this concept of make the Love it. I love this concept of make the choice that is going to bring the bigger choice that is going to bring the bigger choice that is going to bring the bigger life. Yeah. because it's as you pointed life. Yeah. because it's as you pointed life. Yeah. because it's as you pointed out so easy for people to stay stuck in out so easy for people to stay stuck in out so easy for people to stay stuck in what is unpleasant but hasn't killed what is unpleasant but hasn't killed what is unpleasant but hasn't killed them yet or they're waiting for them yet or they're waiting for them yet or they're waiting for something like I will buy a house when I something like I will buy a house when I something like I will buy a house when I will look for a partner when as if there will look for a partner when as if there will look for a partner when as if there are these prerequisites that need to are these prerequisites that need to are these prerequisites that need to happen because that's the conventional happen because that's the conventional happen because that's the conventional view of the order in which you should view of the order in which you should view of the order in which you should live your life you know like I won't I live your life you know like I won't I live your life you know like I won't I won't buy a house until I'm married as won't buy a house until I'm married as won't buy a house until I'm married as opposed to Why why can't you buy a house opposed to Why why can't you buy a house opposed to Why why can't you buy a house that you like if you have the money to that you like if you have the money to that you like if you have the money to do that, right? Um you know, why do you do that, right? Um you know, why do you do that, right? Um you know, why do you have to wait for marriage for that? Or I have to wait for marriage for that? Or I have to wait for marriage for that? Or I won't look for a partner until I have won't look for a partner until I have won't look for a partner until I have this kind of job. You know that you have this kind of job. You know that you have this kind of job. You know that you have to have all these little pieces in this to have all these little pieces in this to have all these little pieces in this order. And there are so many different order. And there are so many different order. And there are so many different ways to live your life. And sometimes, ways to live your life. And sometimes, ways to live your life. And sometimes, by the way, you might want to live your by the way, you might want to live your by the way, you might want to live your life in that conventional order, but it life in that conventional order, but it life in that conventional order, but it just doesn't work out that way for you. just doesn't work out that way for you. just doesn't work out that way for you. So you might have to switch up the So you might have to switch up the So you might have to switch up the order. And that's okay. I love a vote in order. And that's okay. I love a vote in order. And that's okay. I love a vote in favor of people enjoying their life favor of people enjoying their life favor of people enjoying their life more. and hopefully deriving more more. and hopefully deriving more more. and hopefully deriving more self-respect by doing it. You know that self-respect by doing it. You know that self-respect by doing it. You know that this aestheticism of like we're not this aestheticism of like we're not this aestheticism of like we're not we're going to deprive ourselves of we're going to deprive ourselves of we're going to deprive ourselves of things in order to respect ourselves. things in order to respect ourselves. things in order to respect ourselves. You know, even though I value discipline You know, even though I value discipline You know, even though I value discipline and um I think learning to enjoy life is um I think learning to enjoy life is um I think learning to enjoy life is also important, right? And and I think also important, right? And and I think also important, right? And and I think that you know when we talk about we're that you know when we talk about we're that you know when we talk about we're not talking about hedenism. We're not talking about hedenism. We're not talking about hedenism. We're talking about reflecting on what will talking about reflecting on what will talking about reflecting on what will make a meaningful purposeful life for make a meaningful purposeful life for make a meaningful purposeful life for you and then being very intentional you and then being very intentional you and then being very intentional about going after that goal. about going after that goal. about going after that goal. So much here. Um Lori, thank you so much So much here. Um Lori, thank you so much So much here. Um Lori, thank you so much uh for the work you do with your uh for the work you do with your uh for the work you do with your patients slashclient slash we don't have patients slashclient slash we don't have patients slashclient slash we don't have a better word for it. Um, and also your a better word for it. Um, and also your a better word for it. Um, and also your willingness to get out and teach and willingness to get out and teach and willingness to get out and teach and literally every two weeks, you know, literally every two weeks, you know, literally every two weeks, you know, field questions from the general public. field questions from the general public. field questions from the general public. It's not easy to do, I imagine. And um, It's not easy to do, I imagine. And um, It's not easy to do, I imagine. And um, clearly you're thinking about clearly you're thinking about clearly you're thinking about things past, present, and future. And things past, present, and future. And things past, present, and future. And um, you know, people really need these um, you know, people really need these um, you know, people really need these tools and not everyone will make it into tools and not everyone will make it into tools and not everyone will make it into your office, unfortunately, and have the your office, unfortunately, and have the your office, unfortunately, and have the uh the experience of working the uh the experience of working the uh the experience of working one-on-one with you. But I think that one-on-one with you. But I think that one-on-one with you. But I think that the workbook, I'm so glad that came up the workbook, I'm so glad that came up the workbook, I'm so glad that came up so that people have an opportunity to so that people have an opportunity to so that people have an opportunity to put these things into action and you've put these things into action and you've put these things into action and you've given us a ton to work with here. I given us a ton to work with here. I given us a ton to work with here. I listed out many things. I won't I won't listed out many things. I won't I won't listed out many things. I won't I won't um list them out here. We'll timestamp um list them out here. We'll timestamp um list them out here. We'll timestamp this episode in detail so people can go this episode in detail so people can go this episode in detail so people can go back and find them. But um yeah, I've back and find them. But um yeah, I've back and find them. But um yeah, I've learned a ton. I'm going to put this learned a ton. I'm going to put this learned a ton. I'm going to put this to action and um hopefully uh you'll to action and um hopefully uh you'll to action and um hopefully uh you'll come back again and talk with us about come back again and talk with us about come back again and talk with us about what's new because I know this is an what's new because I know this is an what's new because I know this is an evolving field and as the landscape of evolving field and as the landscape of evolving field and as the landscape of society changes, we're going to need of society changes, we're going to need of society changes, we're going to need new tools. But it sounds like the new tools. But it sounds like the new tools. But it sounds like the fundamentals are really in there. It fundamentals are really in there. It fundamentals are really in there. It involves self-reflection. involves self-reflection. involves self-reflection. I love this thing about a list of the I love this thing about a list of the I love this thing about a list of the things that make us difficult to be with things that make us difficult to be with things that make us difficult to be with as opposed to the list of the things we as opposed to the list of the things we as opposed to the list of the things we want in other people. Um and that teflon want in other people. Um and that teflon want in other people. Um and that teflon pan is something I'm going to think pan is something I'm going to think pan is something I'm going to think about a lot. Yeah. Well, thanks so much about a lot. Yeah. Well, thanks so much about a lot. Yeah. Well, thanks so much for this conversation. and I love having for this conversation. and I love having for this conversation. and I love having these longer conversations and really these longer conversations and really these longer conversations and really exploring what it means to be human. exploring what it means to be human. exploring what it means to be human. Well, thank you. You've certainly Well, thank you. You've certainly Well, thank you. You've certainly enriched my thinking about it and I'm enriched my thinking about it and I'm enriched my thinking about it and I'm sure everyone listening as well. Thanks sure everyone listening as well. Thanks sure everyone listening as well. Thanks so much. Thank you for joining me for so much. Thank you for joining me for so much. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Lorie Gotautib. today's discussion with Lorie Gotautib. today's discussion with Lorie Gotautib. I hope you found it to be as interesting I hope you found it to be as interesting I hope you found it to be as interesting and as actionable as I did. To learn and as actionable as I did. To learn and as actionable as I did. To learn more about Lori Gotautlib's work and to more about Lori Gotautlib's work and to more about Lori Gotautlib's work and to find links to her excellent book and find links to her excellent book and find links to her excellent book and other resources, please see the show other resources, please see the show other resources, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from note captions. If you're learning from note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please and or enjoying this podcast, please and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols: An Operating book is called Protocols: An Operating book is called Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're Manual for the Human Body. And if you're Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Lori Gotautlib. today's discussion with Lori Gotautlib. today's discussion with Lori Gotautlib. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]