Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to talk about the psychology are going to talk about the psychology are going to talk about the psychology and the biology of desire, love, and the biology of desire, love, and the biology of desire, love, and attachment. One of the most robust attachment. One of the most robust attachment. One of the most robust findings in the field of psychology is findings in the field of psychology is findings in the field of psychology is this notion of attachment styles, and this notion of attachment styles, and this notion of attachment styles, and this was something that was discovered this was something that was discovered this was something that was discovered through a beautiful set of studies that through a beautiful set of studies that through a beautiful set of studies that were done by Mary Ainsworth in the were done by Mary Ainsworth in the were done by Mary Ainsworth in the 1980s, in which she developed a 1980s, in which she developed a 1980s, in which she developed a laboratory condition called the strange laboratory condition called the strange laboratory condition called the strange situation task. The strange situation task. The strange situation task. The strange situation task involves a parent, typically a task involves a parent, typically a task involves a parent, typically a mother in the studies that were done, mother in the studies that were done, mother in the studies that were done, but a parent or other caregiver but a parent or other caregiver but a parent or other caregiver bringing their child, their actual bringing their child, their actual bringing their child, their actual child, into a laboratory, child, into a laboratory, child, into a laboratory, and there's a room with a stranger. And the there's a room with a stranger. And the there's a room with a stranger. And the mother enters the room with the child, mother enters the room with the child, mother enters the room with the child, and there's some toys in the room, and there's some toys in the room, and there's some toys in the room, and typically the mother and the stranger typically the mother and the stranger typically the mother and the stranger will talk. Obviously, the stranger is will talk. Obviously, the stranger is will talk. Obviously, the stranger is part of the experiment, is not just some part of the experiment, is not just some part of the experiment, is not just some random person off the street. And the random person off the street. And the random person off the street. And the child is allowed to move about the room. child is allowed to move about the room. child is allowed to move about the room. They can play with toys or not. But then They can play with toys or not. But then They can play with toys or not. But then at some point, the mother leaves, at some point, the mother leaves, at some point, the mother leaves, and then at some point later, designated and then at some point later, designated and then at some point later, designated by the experimenter, the mother comes by the experimenter, the mother comes by the experimenter, the mother comes back. And what is measured in these studies And what is measured in these studies And what is measured in these studies is both how the child, the toddler, is both how the child, the toddler, is both how the child, the toddler, reacts to the mother leaving and how the reacts to the mother leaving and how the reacts to the mother leaving and how the child reacts to the mother returning at child reacts to the mother returning at child reacts to the mother returning at the end of the experiment. So, there are the end of the experiment. So, there are the end of the experiment. So, there are a lot of variations of this, but the a lot of variations of this, but the a lot of variations of this, but the basic findings basic findings basic findings are that toddlers, children, are that toddlers, children, are that toddlers, children, fall into four different categories of fall into four different categories of fall into four different categories of attachment style. The first style is the attachment style. The first style is the attachment style. The first style is the so-called secure attachment style. The so-called secure attachment style. The so-called secure attachment style. The secure attachment style secure attachment style secure attachment style is one in which the child will engage is one in which the child will engage is one in which the child will engage with the stranger, with the with the stranger, with the with the stranger, with the experimenter, while the parent is experimenter, while the parent is experimenter, while the parent is present in the room, present in the room, present in the room, but that when the parent or other but that when the parent or other but that when the parent or other caregiver leaves, the child does get caregiver leaves, the child does get caregiver leaves, the child does get visibly upset. However, when the visibly upset. However, when the visibly upset. However, when the caregiver, meaning the mother or father or other meaning the mother or father or other meaning the mother or father or other caregiver, returns, caregiver, returns, caregiver, returns, the child visibly expresses happiness the child visibly expresses happiness the child visibly expresses happiness that the caregiver has returned. And the that the caregiver has returned. And the that the caregiver has returned. And the interpretation of this is that the interpretation of this is that the interpretation of this is that the secure child feels confident that the secure child feels confident that the secure child feels confident that the caregiver is available caregiver is available caregiver is available and will be responsive to their needs and will be responsive to their needs and will be responsive to their needs and their communications. These children and their communications. These children and their communications. These children are also very good at exploring novel are also very good at exploring novel are also very good at exploring novel environments after the parent is gone environments after the parent is gone environments after the parent is gone and while the parent is there. The and while the parent is there. The and while the parent is there. The second category is the so-called anxious second category is the so-called anxious second category is the so-called anxious avoidant or insecurely attached. They do avoidant or insecurely attached. They do avoidant or insecurely attached. They do not exhibit distress on separation and not exhibit distress on separation and not exhibit distress on separation and they generally tend to have they generally tend to have they generally tend to have some tendency to approach the some tendency to approach the some tendency to approach the caregiver when they return, but the caregiver when they return, but the caregiver when they return, but there doesn't seem to be a general there doesn't seem to be a general there doesn't seem to be a general expression of joy. The third category is expression of joy. The third category is expression of joy. The third category is the so-called anxious the so-called anxious the so-called anxious ambivalent/resistant insecure category. The anxious insecure category. The anxious insecure category. The anxious ambivalent resistant insecure ambivalent resistant insecure ambivalent resistant insecure toddlers, really, toddlers, really, toddlers, really, show distress even before separation show distress even before separation show distress even before separation from their mother or other caregiver. from their mother or other caregiver. from their mother or other caregiver. And they tend to be very clingy and And they tend to be very clingy and And they tend to be very clingy and difficult to comfort when the caregiver difficult to comfort when the caregiver difficult to comfort when the caregiver returns. And the third category of returns. And the third category of returns. And the third category of attachment style is the so-called attachment style is the so-called attachment style is the so-called disorganized or disoriented or D, for disorganized or disoriented or D, for disorganized or disoriented or D, for the letter D, the letter D, the letter D, babies. It seems like these children babies. It seems like these children babies. It seems like these children just don't really know how to react to a just don't really know how to react to a just don't really know how to react to a separation and they just uh start to separation and they just uh start to separation and they just uh start to manifest behaviors and emotional tones manifest behaviors and emotional tones manifest behaviors and emotional tones that aren't observed in other that aren't observed in other that aren't observed in other situations. Now, situations. Now, situations. Now, what's interesting about this from the what's interesting about this from the what's interesting about this from the perspective of desire, love, and perspective of desire, love, and perspective of desire, love, and attachment is that the categorizations attachment is that the categorizations attachment is that the categorizations of children into one of these four of children into one of these four of children into one of these four different categories as toddlers different categories as toddlers different categories as toddlers is strongly predictive of their is strongly predictive of their is strongly predictive of their attachment style in romantic attachment style in romantic attachment style in romantic partnerships later in life, partnerships later in life, partnerships later in life, Which is to me both amazing and Which is to me both amazing and Which is to me both amazing and surprising and not surprising all at the surprising and not surprising all at the surprising and not surprising all at the same time. The good news is that these same time. The good news is that these same time. The good news is that these templates can shift over time. And one templates can shift over time. And one templates can shift over time. And one of the more powerful ways to shift those of the more powerful ways to shift those of the more powerful ways to shift those templates over time is purely by the templates over time is purely by the templates over time is purely by the knowledge that they exist and the knowledge that they exist and the knowledge that they exist and the understanding that those templates are understanding that those templates are understanding that those templates are malleable. So, I mentioned that the malleable. So, I mentioned that the malleable. So, I mentioned that the neural circuits for child parent or neural circuits for child parent or neural circuits for child parent or child caregiver attachment child caregiver attachment child caregiver attachment are repurposed for romantic attachment are repurposed for romantic attachment are repurposed for romantic attachment later in life. But, later in life. But, later in life. But, what are these neural circuits? What do what are these neural circuits? What do what are these neural circuits? What do they do? I mean, they do? I mean, they do? I mean, it's so it's so it's so attractive, if you will, to think about attractive, if you will, to think about attractive, if you will, to think about a brain area that controls love or a brain area that controls love or a brain area that controls love or a brain area that controls desire or a brain area that controls desire or a brain area that controls desire or a brain area that controls attachment, but brain area that controls attachment, but brain area that controls attachment, but it simply doesn't work that way. it simply doesn't work that way. it simply doesn't work that way. Instead, there are multiple brain areas Instead, there are multiple brain areas Instead, there are multiple brain areas that through their coordinated action that through their coordinated action that through their coordinated action create a sort of a song that we call create a sort of a song that we call create a sort of a song that we call desire or a song that we call love or a desire or a song that we call love or a desire or a song that we call love or a song that we call attachment. Not a song that we call attachment. Not a song that we call attachment. Not a literal song, but rather different brain literal song, but rather different brain literal song, but rather different brain areas being active in different areas being active in different areas being active in different sequences and with different intensities sequences and with different intensities sequences and with different intensities can make us feel as if we are in the can make us feel as if we are in the can make us feel as if we are in the mode that we call desire or in the mode that we call desire or in the mode that we call desire or in the mode of love or in the mode of attachment. of love or in the mode of attachment. of love or in the mode of attachment. But, beneath all of that is this element But, beneath all of that is this element But, beneath all of that is this element of autonomic arousal. So, the way to of autonomic arousal. So, the way to of autonomic arousal. So, the way to think about the autonomic nervous system think about the autonomic nervous system think about the autonomic nervous system is it's kind of a seesaw. We can be is it's kind of a seesaw. We can be is it's kind of a seesaw. We can be alert and calm or we can be very, very alert and calm or we can be very, very alert and calm or we can be very, very alert. We can be in a state of panic. We alert. We can be in a state of panic. We alert. We can be in a state of panic. We can be fast asleep, so we can be can be fast asleep, so we can be can be fast asleep, so we can be extremely calm or we can just be kind of extremely calm or we can just be kind of extremely calm or we can just be kind of sleepy semi-calm um and but still also alert. semi-calm um and but still also alert. semi-calm um and but still also alert. So, think about it like a seesaw. So, think about it like a seesaw. So, think about it like a seesaw. And that seesaw has a hinge and that And that seesaw has a hinge and that And that seesaw has a hinge and that hinge defines how tight or loose that hinge defines how tight or loose that hinge defines how tight or loose that seesaw is, how readily it can tilt back seesaw is, how readily it can tilt back seesaw is, how readily it can tilt back and forth. and forth. and forth. Our autonomic tone is how tight that Our autonomic tone is how tight that Our autonomic tone is how tight that hinge is. And there are biological hinge is. And there are biological hinge is. And there are biological mechanisms to explain this, but here I mechanisms to explain this, but here I mechanisms to explain this, but here I just want to stay with the analogy of just want to stay with the analogy of just want to stay with the analogy of the seesaw for now. the seesaw for now. the seesaw for now. The between child between child between child and caregiver early in life and caregiver early in life and caregiver early in life take the child and the caregiver from take the child and the caregiver from take the child and the caregiver from one end of the seesaw to the other. From one end of the seesaw to the other. From one end of the seesaw to the other. From being very alert in a state of play, for being very alert in a state of play, for being very alert in a state of play, for instance, to being nursed and being very instance, to being nursed and being very instance, to being nursed and being very soothed until we go to sleep. And of soothed until we go to sleep. And of soothed until we go to sleep. And of course, we each have a seesaw. The course, we each have a seesaw. The course, we each have a seesaw. The parent and the child has a seesaw and parent and the child has a seesaw and parent and the child has a seesaw and they're interacting. What do I mean by they're interacting. What do I mean by they're interacting. What do I mean by that? Well, there are beautiful studies that? Well, there are beautiful studies that? Well, there are beautiful studies and beautiful not in the sense that they and beautiful not in the sense that they and beautiful not in the sense that they focused on a pleasant topic, but focused on a pleasant topic, but focused on a pleasant topic, but beautiful because they were done so beautiful because they were done so beautiful because they were done so beautifully well that looked at, for beautifully well that looked at, for beautifully well that looked at, for instance, the response of mothers instance, the response of mothers instance, the response of mothers and their physiologies and the response and their physiologies and the response and their physiologies and the response of children and their physiologies of children and their physiologies of children and their physiologies during the bombing of cities during the bombing of cities during the bombing of cities during World War II. So, an unpleasant World War II. So, an unpleasant World War II. So, an unpleasant situation, but what was situation, but what was situation, but what was revealed during the course of these revealed during the course of these revealed during the course of these studies was that if the mothers were studies was that if the mothers were studies was that if the mothers were very stressed during an onslaught of very stressed during an onslaught of very stressed during an onslaught of bombing of the city, the children's bombing of the city, the children's bombing of the city, the children's physiologies tended to be stressed also physiologies tended to be stressed also physiologies tended to be stressed also and persisted in being stressed long and persisted in being stressed long and persisted in being stressed long after that stressful episode after that stressful episode after that stressful episode was done. was done. was done. They actually followed that these They actually followed that these They actually followed that these children well out children well out children well out for many decades afterwards. for many decades afterwards. for many decades afterwards. Conversely, if the parent and in this Conversely, if the parent and in this Conversely, if the parent and in this case again, it was mothers that case again, it was mothers that case again, it was mothers that were explored in these studies, were explored in these studies, were explored in these studies, had turned this whole business of going had turned this whole business of going had turned this whole business of going into the bomb shelters into somewhat of into the bomb shelters into somewhat of into the bomb shelters into somewhat of a game, all right, taking it seriously, a game, all right, taking it seriously, a game, all right, taking it seriously, but essentially telling the children, but essentially telling the children, but essentially telling the children, "Okay, it's time to go," but not "Okay, it's time to go," but not "Okay, it's time to go," but not expressing much stress or distress, the expressing much stress or distress, the expressing much stress or distress, the children also didn't develop much stress children also didn't develop much stress children also didn't develop much stress or distress or trauma. or distress or trauma. or distress or trauma. Now, there were exceptions to this, of Now, there were exceptions to this, of Now, there were exceptions to this, of course, but in general, that was the course, but in general, that was the course, but in general, that was the rule that the autonomic nervous systems rule that the autonomic nervous systems rule that the autonomic nervous systems of children tend to mimic the autonomic of children tend to mimic the autonomic of children tend to mimic the autonomic nervous systems of the primary nervous systems of the primary nervous systems of the primary caregiver. So, if I were to offer a set caregiver. So, if I were to offer a set caregiver. So, if I were to offer a set of tools around these topics of desire, of tools around these topics of desire, of tools around these topics of desire, love, and attachment, I would say first love, and attachment, I would say first love, and attachment, I would say first of all, you might want to think about of all, you might want to think about of all, you might want to think about whether or not you fall into the secure, whether or not you fall into the secure, whether or not you fall into the secure, insecure, or other attachment styles. insecure, or other attachment styles. insecure, or other attachment styles. Second, I think it is vitally important Second, I think it is vitally important Second, I think it is vitally important for all of us, but certainly for people for all of us, but certainly for people for all of us, but certainly for people that are in relationships or seeking that are in relationships or seeking that are in relationships or seeking relationships, to be able to at least relationships, to be able to at least relationships, to be able to at least have some recognition of where our have some recognition of where our have some recognition of where our autonomic nervous system tends to reside autonomic nervous system tends to reside autonomic nervous system tends to reside both in terms of when we are with both in terms of when we are with both in terms of when we are with somebody and when they leave. When we somebody and when they leave. When we somebody and when they leave. When we are apart for long periods of time, can are apart for long periods of time, can are apart for long periods of time, can we calm ourselves? Can we self-soothe? we calm ourselves? Can we self-soothe? we calm ourselves? Can we self-soothe? Or are we very much dependent on the Or are we very much dependent on the Or are we very much dependent on the presence of another in order to feel presence of another in order to feel presence of another in order to feel soothed? Now, soothed? Now, soothed? Now, I absolutely want to emphasize that I absolutely want to emphasize that I absolutely want to emphasize that there is nothing wrong. In fact, there's there is nothing wrong. In fact, there's there is nothing wrong. In fact, there's everything right with feeling great in everything right with feeling great in everything right with feeling great in the presence of somebody else. That is the presence of somebody else. That is the presence of somebody else. That is actually a hallmark of strong and actually a hallmark of strong and actually a hallmark of strong and quality attachments. A key element of quality attachments. A key element of quality attachments. A key element of healthy interdependence is that yes, our healthy interdependence is that yes, our healthy interdependence is that yes, our autonomic nervous system is adjusted by autonomic nervous system is adjusted by autonomic nervous system is adjusted by the presence of another, but that also the presence of another, but that also the presence of another, but that also that we can adjust our own autonomic that we can adjust our own autonomic that we can adjust our own autonomic nervous system even in the absence of nervous system even in the absence of nervous system even in the absence of that person. So, if the autonomic that person. So, if the autonomic that person. So, if the autonomic nervous system is one key component of nervous system is one key component of nervous system is one key component of desire, love, and attachment, desire, love, and attachment, desire, love, and attachment, what are the other two? what are the other two? what are the other two? Not surprisingly, the dopamine system Not surprisingly, the dopamine system Not surprisingly, the dopamine system in the brain is associated with desire, in the brain is associated with desire, in the brain is associated with desire, love, and attachment, and mainly with love, and attachment, and mainly with love, and attachment, and mainly with desire, although to some extent love. desire, although to some extent love. desire, although to some extent love. Dopamine is a neurochemical sometimes Dopamine is a neurochemical sometimes Dopamine is a neurochemical sometimes associated with reward, but as some of associated with reward, but as some of associated with reward, but as some of you have heard me say uh before, it is you have heard me say uh before, it is you have heard me say uh before, it is mainly a molecule of motivation, mainly a molecule of motivation, mainly a molecule of motivation, craving, and pursuit. And that craving, and pursuit. And that craving, and pursuit. And that motivation, craving, and pursuit that motivation, craving, and pursuit that motivation, craving, and pursuit that relates to dopamine is not unique to relates to dopamine is not unique to relates to dopamine is not unique to attachment or love or sex or mating, attachment or love or sex or mating, attachment or love or sex or mating, etc. It is a universal generic currency etc. It is a universal generic currency etc. It is a universal generic currency in the brain for pursuing something. I in the brain for pursuing something. I in the brain for pursuing something. I want to just discuss the two neural want to just discuss the two neural want to just discuss the two neural circuits that use dopamine, that use circuits that use dopamine, that use circuits that use dopamine, that use serotonin and oxytocin, and that serotonin and oxytocin, and that serotonin and oxytocin, and that collaborate with the autonomic nervous collaborate with the autonomic nervous collaborate with the autonomic nervous system to drive what we call desire, system to drive what we call desire, system to drive what we call desire, love, and attachment. And love, and attachment. And love, and attachment. And the three circuits are autonomic nervous the three circuits are autonomic nervous the three circuits are autonomic nervous system, we talked about that one. system, we talked about that one. system, we talked about that one. Then there's the nervous system Then there's the nervous system Then there's the nervous system components or the neural circuits for components or the neural circuits for components or the neural circuits for empathy, for being able to see and empathy, for being able to see and empathy, for being able to see and respond to and indeed match the respond to and indeed match the respond to and indeed match the emotional tone or the autonomic tone of emotional tone or the autonomic tone of emotional tone or the autonomic tone of another. And then there's the third category, and And then there's the third category, and And then there's the third category, and this might surprise some of you, it this might surprise some of you, it this might surprise some of you, it certainly surprised me, but the data certainly surprised me, but the data certainly surprised me, but the data point to the fact that the third neural point to the fact that the third neural point to the fact that the third neural circuit that's very important for circuit that's very important for circuit that's very important for establishing bonds is one associated establishing bonds is one associated establishing bonds is one associated with positive delusions. with positive delusions. with positive delusions. So given that the neural circuits for So given that the neural circuits for So given that the neural circuits for empathy are absolutely crucial for empathy are absolutely crucial for empathy are absolutely crucial for falling in love and maintaining stable falling in love and maintaining stable falling in love and maintaining stable attachments, I'd like to talk about those neural I'd like to talk about those neural I'd like to talk about those neural circuits and what they are. circuits and what they are. circuits and what they are. Now, often when we hear empathy, we Now, often when we hear empathy, we Now, often when we hear empathy, we think oh, empathy is really about think oh, empathy is really about think oh, empathy is really about listening to and really understanding listening to and really understanding listening to and really understanding what somebody else is feeling, maybe what somebody else is feeling, maybe what somebody else is feeling, maybe even feeling what they're feeling. even feeling what they're feeling. even feeling what they're feeling. And indeed that's the case, but what do And indeed that's the case, but what do And indeed that's the case, but what do we mean by that, right? What is it to we mean by that, right? What is it to we mean by that, right? What is it to feel what another feels? Well, what it feel what another feels? Well, what it feel what another feels? Well, what it means is that their seesaw is driving means is that their seesaw is driving means is that their seesaw is driving your seesaw. your seesaw. your seesaw. Or your seesaw is somehow driving their Or your seesaw is somehow driving their Or your seesaw is somehow driving their seesaw. That's a form of empathic seesaw. That's a form of empathic seesaw. That's a form of empathic matching, and there are indeed neural matching, and there are indeed neural matching, and there are indeed neural circuits for that. The neural circuits for that. The neural circuits for that. The neural circuits for empathy, for empathy, for empathy, again, there are many, but mainly two again, there are many, but mainly two again, there are many, but mainly two structures that you should know about, structures that you should know about, structures that you should know about, the prefrontal cortex, which is how we the prefrontal cortex, which is how we the prefrontal cortex, which is how we perceive things outside of us and make perceive things outside of us and make perceive things outside of us and make decisions on the basis of those decisions on the basis of those decisions on the basis of those perceptions, how we organize those perceptions, how we organize those perceptions, how we organize those decisions, and an area of the brain called the and an area of the brain called the and an area of the brain called the insula, i n s u l a, the insula is a insula, i n s u l a, the insula is a insula, i n s u l a, the insula is a really interesting brain area that really interesting brain area that really interesting brain area that allows us to interocept, to pay allows us to interocept, to pay allows us to interocept, to pay attention to what's going on inside our attention to what's going on inside our attention to what's going on inside our body, and to split some of our attention body, and to split some of our attention body, and to split some of our attention to exterocept. And the insula to exterocept. And the insula to exterocept. And the insula is essentially splitting one's attention is essentially splitting one's attention is essentially splitting one's attention between how we feel between how we feel between how we feel ourselves, how our body feels, what ourselves, how our body feels, what ourselves, how our body feels, what we're thinking, with the thinking and we're thinking, with the thinking and we're thinking, with the thinking and the body's bodily sensations of the body's bodily sensations of the body's bodily sensations of the other. Okay, so we have the autonomic other. Okay, so we have the autonomic other. Okay, so we have the autonomic nervous system, and then we have this nervous system, and then we have this nervous system, and then we have this thing that we're calling empathy, which thing that we're calling empathy, which thing that we're calling empathy, which is really about autonomic matching. And is really about autonomic matching. And is really about autonomic matching. And again, the insula and the prefrontal again, the insula and the prefrontal again, the insula and the prefrontal cortex are neural circuits that are cortex are neural circuits that are cortex are neural circuits that are crucial for autonomic matching because crucial for autonomic matching because crucial for autonomic matching because they allow us to say, "What's out there, they allow us to say, "What's out there, they allow us to say, "What's out there, and do I want to match to it or not?" and do I want to match to it or not?" and do I want to match to it or not?" Okay? And then the third category is Okay? And then the third category is Okay? And then the third category is the neural circuit associated with the neural circuit associated with the neural circuit associated with self-delusion. What do we mean by self-delusion. What do we mean by self-delusion. What do we mean by positive delusion? Positive delusion positive delusion? Positive delusion positive delusion? Positive delusion is belief that is belief that is belief that "Only this person can make me feel this "Only this person can make me feel this "Only this person can make me feel this way." Now, positive delusion is way." Now, positive delusion is way." Now, positive delusion is critical. If you look at the stability critical. If you look at the stability critical. If you look at the stability of relationships over time, what you of relationships over time, what you of relationships over time, what you find is that there are some key features find is that there are some key features find is that there are some key features of interactions between individuals that of interactions between individuals that of interactions between individuals that predict that a relationship will last. predict that a relationship will last. predict that a relationship will last. And those are many, but mainly fall And those are many, but mainly fall And those are many, but mainly fall under this category of positive under this category of positive under this category of positive delusions. I'll return to those and what delusions. I'll return to those and what delusions. I'll return to those and what those exactly look like, but there are those exactly look like, but there are those exactly look like, but there are also just a handful of things that also just a handful of things that also just a handful of things that predict that a relationship will fail predict that a relationship will fail predict that a relationship will fail over time. This is largely the work over time. This is largely the work over time. This is largely the work of the Gottmans. It's actually a husband of the Gottmans. It's actually a husband of the Gottmans. It's actually a husband and wife team up at the University of and wife team up at the University of and wife team up at the University of Washington in Seattle. And they've Washington in Seattle. And they've Washington in Seattle. And they've identified what are called the four identified what are called the four identified what are called the four horsemen of relationships. Those four horsemen of relationships. Those four horsemen of relationships. Those four behaviors, what they call the four behaviors, what they call the four behaviors, what they call the four horsemen of the apocalypse, horsemen of the apocalypse, horsemen of the apocalypse, uh for relationships, are one, uh for relationships, are one, uh for relationships, are one, criticism, two, defensiveness, three, criticism, two, defensiveness, three, criticism, two, defensiveness, three, stonewalling, and four, contempt. With stonewalling, and four, contempt. With stonewalling, and four, contempt. With contempt being um the most powerful contempt being um the most powerful contempt being um the most powerful predictor uh breaking up. Um criticism, of course, uh breaking up. Um criticism, of course, uh breaking up. Um criticism, of course, does not mean that there's does not mean that there's does not mean that there's uh no place for criticism in stable uh no place for criticism in stable uh no place for criticism in stable relationships. Of course, there is. It relationships. Of course, there is. It relationships. Of course, there is. It has to do with how frequent and how has to do with how frequent and how has to do with how frequent and how intensely that criticism is voiced. intensely that criticism is voiced. intensely that criticism is voiced. Defensiveness, of course, is defensiveness, uh we know of course, is defensiveness, uh we know of course, is defensiveness, uh we know as the sort of lack of ability to hear the sort of lack of ability to hear the sort of lack of ability to hear another or to adopt their stance. So, another or to adopt their stance. So, another or to adopt their stance. So, lack of empathy, I think, is a one lack of empathy, I think, is a one lack of empathy, I think, is a one way to interpret defensiveness. way to interpret defensiveness. way to interpret defensiveness. Stonewalling, which is actually another Stonewalling, which is actually another Stonewalling, which is actually another form of lack of empathy. It's a turning form of lack of empathy. It's a turning form of lack of empathy. It's a turning off of this neural circuit that's so off of this neural circuit that's so off of this neural circuit that's so critical for desire, love, and critical for desire, love, and critical for desire, love, and attachment. The stonewalling essentially attachment. The stonewalling essentially attachment. The stonewalling essentially means the emotional response or the means the emotional response or the means the emotional response or the request of another is completely cut request of another is completely cut request of another is completely cut off. And then contempt, and contempt has off. And then contempt, and contempt has off. And then contempt, and contempt has actually been referred to as the actually been referred to as the actually been referred to as the sulfuric acid of relationship. I didn't sulfuric acid of relationship. I didn't sulfuric acid of relationship. I didn't say that, but Gottman and colleagues say that, but Gottman and colleagues say that, but Gottman and colleagues have, that it is such a powerful have, that it is such a powerful have, that it is such a powerful predictor of divorce and breakups predictor of divorce and breakups predictor of divorce and breakups in the future. Contempt, of course, by in the future. Contempt, of course, by in the future. Contempt, of course, by definition is the feeling that a person definition is the feeling that a person definition is the feeling that a person or thing is beneath consideration, or thing is beneath consideration, or thing is beneath consideration, worthlessness, or deserving scorn. worthlessness, or deserving scorn. worthlessness, or deserving scorn. It runs counter to all of the neural It runs counter to all of the neural It runs counter to all of the neural circuits, all three of the neural circuits, all three of the neural circuits, all three of the neural circuits that we talked about before. It circuits that we talked about before. It circuits that we talked about before. It certainly is certainly is certainly is it is the antithesis of empathy. It is it is the antithesis of empathy. It is it is the antithesis of empathy. It is anything but a positive delusion. It's anything but a positive delusion. It's anything but a positive delusion. It's really looking at the other individual, really looking at the other individual, really looking at the other individual, either accurately or inaccurately, as either accurately or inaccurately, as either accurately or inaccurately, as somebody that you kind of despise. And somebody that you kind of despise. And somebody that you kind of despise. And then it is an absolute inversion of the then it is an absolute inversion of the then it is an absolute inversion of the autonomic seesaw matching that I was autonomic seesaw matching that I was autonomic seesaw matching that I was talking about before. It's a talking about before. It's a talking about before. It's a dissociating of your seesaw from their dissociating of your seesaw from their dissociating of your seesaw from their seesaw. They're very excited about seesaw. They're very excited about seesaw. They're very excited about something, you're unexcited by it. And something, you're unexcited by it. And something, you're unexcited by it. And therefore it's not surprising that is so therefore it's not surprising that is so therefore it's not surprising that is so strongly predictive of breakups, and in strongly predictive of breakups, and in strongly predictive of breakups, and in the case of married couples, of divorce. the case of married couples, of divorce. the case of married couples, of divorce. I wanted now talk about an article that I wanted now talk about an article that I wanted now talk about an article that came out a little over 10 years ago came out a little over 10 years ago came out a little over 10 years ago that talked about the universality that talked about the universality that talked about the universality of love and the ability to fall in love. of love and the ability to fall in love. of love and the ability to fall in love. An article was published in the New York An article was published in the New York An article was published in the New York Times in 2015 that related to some Times in 2015 that related to some Times in 2015 that related to some psychological studies that were done, as psychological studies that were done, as psychological studies that were done, as well as some clinical work, as well as well as some clinical work, as well as well as some clinical work, as well as some what I would call some what I would call some what I would call pop psychology or things that fall pop psychology or things that fall pop psychology or things that fall outside the domains of academic outside the domains of academic outside the domains of academic science. And the science. And the science. And the whole basis of this article was the whole basis of this article was the whole basis of this article was 36 questions that lead to love. And it 36 questions that lead to love. And it 36 questions that lead to love. And it involved a listing out, indeed, of 36 involved a listing out, indeed, of 36 involved a listing out, indeed, of 36 questions, a divided into set one, set questions, a divided into set one, set questions, a divided into set one, set two, and set three, that progress from two, and set three, that progress from two, and set three, that progress from somewhat ordinary questions about life somewhat ordinary questions about life somewhat ordinary questions about life experience and self-report to more, let's call them and self-report to more, let's call them and self-report to more, let's call them deep questions about people's values and deep questions about people's values and deep questions about people's values and things that are emotionally close to and things that are emotionally close to and things that are emotionally close to them. And I'll just give an example of a them. And I'll just give an example of a them. And I'll just give an example of a few of these. Some of the questions in few of these. Some of the questions in few of these. Some of the questions in set number one were, for instance, what set number one were, for instance, what set number one were, for instance, what would constitute a perfect day for you? would constitute a perfect day for you? would constitute a perfect day for you? For what in your life do you feel most For what in your life do you feel most For what in your life do you feel most grateful? Kind of standard questionnaire grateful? Kind of standard questionnaire grateful? Kind of standard questionnaire stuff. In set two, stuff. In set two, stuff. In set two, what is your most treasured memory? What what is your most treasured memory? What what is your most treasured memory? What is your most terrible memory? So, these is your most terrible memory? So, these is your most terrible memory? So, these are as you can tell are drilling a are as you can tell are drilling a are as you can tell are drilling a little bit deeper into one's um personal little bit deeper into one's um personal little bit deeper into one's um personal experience and emotional system. And experience and emotional system. And experience and emotional system. And then set three, questions 25 through 36, then set three, questions 25 through 36, then set three, questions 25 through 36, are things, are things, are things, you know, what is a very embarrassing you know, what is a very embarrassing you know, what is a very embarrassing moment in your life? When did you last moment in your life? When did you last moment in your life? When did you last cry in front of another person and by cry in front of another person and by cry in front of another person and by yourself? What is something that's too yourself? What is something that's too yourself? What is something that's too serious to be joked about? So, it's serious to be joked about? So, it's serious to be joked about? So, it's going deeper into one's emotional going deeper into one's emotional going deeper into one's emotional system. Now, the reason this article got system. Now, the reason this article got system. Now, the reason this article got so much traction and the reason I'm so much traction and the reason I'm so much traction and the reason I'm bringing it up today is that there was bringing it up today is that there was bringing it up today is that there was a statement that was made in and around a statement that was made in and around a statement that was made in and around this article that if two people this article that if two people this article that if two people went on a date or simply sat down and went on a date or simply sat down and went on a date or simply sat down and asked each other these questions, that asked each other these questions, that asked each other these questions, that by the end of that exchange where one by the end of that exchange where one by the end of that exchange where one person asks 36 questions and the other person asks 36 questions and the other person asks 36 questions and the other person answers all 36 and then the other person answers all 36 and then the other person answers all 36 and then the other person asks all 36 and the other person asks all 36 and the other person asks all 36 and the other person answers all 36, that they would fall in answers all 36, that they would fall in answers all 36, that they would fall in love. Right? Which seems like kind of a love. Right? Which seems like kind of a love. Right? Which seems like kind of a ridiculous thing. ridiculous thing. ridiculous thing. And yet, And yet, And yet, it is the case that people who go it is the case that people who go it is the case that people who go through this exercise through this exercise through this exercise report feeling report feeling report feeling as if they know the other person quite as if they know the other person quite as if they know the other person quite well and feeling certain well and feeling certain well and feeling certain levels of attachment or even love and levels of attachment or even love and levels of attachment or even love and desire for the other person that they desire for the other person that they desire for the other person that they would not have predicted would not have predicted would not have predicted had they not gone through that process. had they not gone through that process. had they not gone through that process. So, what's What's on in this exchange of So, what's What's on in this exchange of So, what's What's on in this exchange of questions and answers of a questions and answers of a questions and answers of a progressively more emotional and deep progressively more emotional and deep progressively more emotional and deep level. We know, based on recent studies, level. We know, based on recent studies, level. We know, based on recent studies, and I've covered this before on this and I've covered this before on this and I've covered this before on this podcast, but I'll mention again that podcast, but I'll mention again that podcast, but I'll mention again that when individuals listen to the same when individuals listen to the same when individuals listen to the same narrative, their heart rates tend to synchronize, their heart rates tend to synchronize, their heart rates tend to synchronize, or at least follow a very similar or at least follow a very similar or at least follow a very similar pattern, even if they're not in the same pattern, even if they're not in the same pattern, even if they're not in the same room listening to a given narrative. So, room listening to a given narrative. So, room listening to a given narrative. So, I'm not all that surprised that people I'm not all that surprised that people I'm not all that surprised that people find that they fall in love, in quotes, find that they fall in love, in quotes, find that they fall in love, in quotes, um after answering these questions to um after answering these questions to um after answering these questions to one another, because essentially the way one another, because essentially the way one another, because essentially the way these questions are laid out is they these questions are laid out is they these questions are laid out is they establish a narrative. They establish a establish a narrative. They establish a establish a narrative. They establish a very personal narrative, and the other very personal narrative, and the other very personal narrative, and the other person is listening very closely. So, I person is listening very closely. So, I person is listening very closely. So, I don't want to seem overly reductionist. don't want to seem overly reductionist. don't want to seem overly reductionist. You know, I'll never propose that all of You know, I'll never propose that all of You know, I'll never propose that all of our sensation, perception, action, and our sensation, perception, action, and our sensation, perception, action, and experience in life boils down to uh us experience in life boils down to uh us experience in life boils down to uh us just being bags of chemicals and the just being bags of chemicals and the just being bags of chemicals and the action of those chemicals, or any aspect action of those chemicals, or any aspect action of those chemicals, or any aspect of our nervous system. And yet, of our nervous system. And yet, of our nervous system. And yet, in looking across the psychological in looking across the psychological in looking across the psychological literature of development of attachment, literature of development of attachment, literature of development of attachment, in the psychological literature of adult in the psychological literature of adult in the psychological literature of adult and romantic attachment, and what makes and romantic attachment, and what makes and romantic attachment, and what makes and breaks those attachments, it's very and breaks those attachments, it's very and breaks those attachments, it's very clear to me, and I think courses through clear to me, and I think courses through clear to me, and I think courses through the literature at multiple levels, that the literature at multiple levels, that the literature at multiple levels, that autonomic coordination is a hallmark autonomic coordination is a hallmark autonomic coordination is a hallmark feature of desire, feature of desire, feature of desire, a hallmark feature of what we call love, a hallmark feature of what we call love, a hallmark feature of what we call love, and a hallmark feature of what we call and a hallmark feature of what we call and a hallmark feature of what we call attachment. You hear a lot out there attachment. You hear a lot out there attachment. You hear a lot out there that, you know, in order to form a that, you know, in order to form a that, you know, in order to form a really strong relationship, uh you have really strong relationship, uh you have really strong relationship, uh you have to have a good relationship with to have a good relationship with to have a good relationship with yourself, or you have to love yourself, or you have to love yourself, or you have to love yourself, or uh you often hear, for instance, that, you often hear, for instance, that, you often hear, for instance, that, you know, it's exactly when you're not know, it's exactly when you're not know, it's exactly when you're not looking for a relationship that you're looking for a relationship that you're looking for a relationship that you're going to find one. You hear this stuff, going to find one. You hear this stuff, going to find one. You hear this stuff, right? But, none of that is really right? But, none of that is really right? But, none of that is really grounded in any studies. There's a grounded in any studies. There's a grounded in any studies. There's a particular study that I found uh this particular study that I found uh this particular study that I found uh this was published in Frontiers in was published in Frontiers in was published in Frontiers in Psychology, but it's a experimental Psychology, but it's a experimental Psychology, but it's a experimental study that involves um neuroimaging. study that involves um neuroimaging. study that involves um neuroimaging. Uh the title of this study is Uh the title of this study is Uh the title of this study is manipulation of self-expansion alters manipulation of self-expansion alters manipulation of self-expansion alters responses to attractive alternative responses to attractive alternative responses to attractive alternative partners. And I love the design of this partners. And I love the design of this partners. And I love the design of this study. What they did in this study is study. What they did in this study is study. What they did in this study is they took couples they took couples they took couples and they evaluated members of that and they evaluated members of that and they evaluated members of that relationship for what's called relationship for what's called relationship for what's called self-expansion. Now, self-expansion is a self-expansion. Now, self-expansion is a self-expansion. Now, self-expansion is a metric that metric that metric that involves one's perception of self as involves one's perception of self as involves one's perception of self as seen through the relationship to the seen through the relationship to the seen through the relationship to the other. In other words, that one of the other. In other words, that one of the other. In other words, that one of the reasons why many people enter reasons why many people enter reasons why many people enter relationships is that it makes us feel relationships is that it makes us feel relationships is that it makes us feel good about ourselves and more capable. good about ourselves and more capable. good about ourselves and more capable. And I would see that as a healthy And I would see that as a healthy And I would see that as a healthy interdependence, not necessarily interdependence, not necessarily interdependence, not necessarily codependence. In any event, In any event, In any event, this study looked at this study looked at this study looked at whether or not people have high levels whether or not people have high levels whether or not people have high levels of self-expansion of self-expansion of self-expansion through the actions or statements of through the actions or statements of through the actions or statements of their significant other and how that their significant other and how that their significant other and how that influences their perception of people influences their perception of people influences their perception of people outside the relationship, meaning how outside the relationship, meaning how outside the relationship, meaning how attractive they perceive people outside attractive they perceive people outside attractive they perceive people outside the relationship to be. Turns out to be the relationship to be. Turns out to be the relationship to be. Turns out to be strongly influenced by strongly influenced by strongly influenced by A, whether or not their self-expansion A, whether or not their self-expansion A, whether or not their self-expansion is very strongly driven by the other is very strongly driven by the other is very strongly driven by the other person that they are involved with, that person that they are involved with, that person that they are involved with, that they're in the romantic relationship they're in the romantic relationship they're in the romantic relationship with, and whether or not that's being with, and whether or not that's being with, and whether or not that's being expressed to them. So, here's how the expressed to them. So, here's how the expressed to them. So, here's how the study went. study went. study went. First of all, they rated or categorized First of all, they rated or categorized First of all, they rated or categorized individuals on the basis of the individuals on the basis of the individuals on the basis of the self-expansion metric. Some people have self-expansion metric. Some people have self-expansion metric. Some people have more of a potential to experience more of a potential to experience more of a potential to experience self-expansion through others, right? self-expansion through others, right? self-expansion through others, right? Some of us feel great about ourselves Some of us feel great about ourselves Some of us feel great about ourselves and we're kind of topped off at the and we're kind of topped off at the and we're kind of topped off at the others don't feel so great about others don't feel so great about others don't feel so great about themselves, but they can feel much themselves, but they can feel much themselves, but they can feel much better in response to praise and better in response to praise and better in response to praise and particular praise or self-expansion type particular praise or self-expansion type particular praise or self-expansion type behaviors or statements from people that behaviors or statements from people that behaviors or statements from people that we really care about. And uh still other we really care about. And uh still other we really care about. And uh still other people are a mixture of the two, they're people are a mixture of the two, they're people are a mixture of the two, they're kind of moderate levels of both. kind of moderate levels of both. kind of moderate levels of both. So, they rated them on this scale. And So, they rated them on this scale. And So, they rated them on this scale. And then they had people experience then they had people experience then they had people experience self-expansion narratives. They heard their significant narratives. They heard their significant narratives. They heard their significant other say really terrific things about other say really terrific things about other say really terrific things about them and about the relationship in them and about the relationship in them and about the relationship in particular, that the relationship particular, that the relationship particular, that the relationship that they have was exciting, novel, and that they have was exciting, novel, and that they have was exciting, novel, and challenging. So, that was one form of challenging. So, that was one form of challenging. So, that was one form of self-expansion, and they went into some self-expansion, and they went into some self-expansion, and they went into some detail as to why that was the case in detail as to why that was the case in detail as to why that was the case in their particular relationship. Or they their particular relationship. Or they their particular relationship. Or they heard a narrative from their heard a narrative from their heard a narrative from their significant other about significant other about significant other about strong feelings of love between the two strong feelings of love between the two strong feelings of love between the two that had been experienced previously in that had been experienced previously in that had been experienced previously in the relationship. So, in the one case the relationship. So, in the one case the relationship. So, in the one case it's sort of directed more towards them, it's sort of directed more towards them, it's sort of directed more towards them, and in the other case it's more about and in the other case it's more about and in the other case it's more about the relationship itself. And then they the relationship itself. And then they the relationship itself. And then they did brain imaging of one person in the did brain imaging of one person in the did brain imaging of one person in the relationship while that person assessed relationship while that person assessed relationship while that person assessed the attractiveness of people outside the attractiveness of people outside the attractiveness of people outside the relationship. And what they found was relationship. And what they found was relationship. And what they found was that people who were primed for this that people who were primed for this that people who were primed for this self-expansion had self-expansion had self-expansion had lower activation of brain areas lower activation of brain areas lower activation of brain areas associated with assessing others' associated with assessing others' associated with assessing others' attractiveness than did the people who attractiveness than did the people who attractiveness than did the people who experienced a lot of self-expansion. experienced a lot of self-expansion. experienced a lot of self-expansion. Now, the takeaway from that, at least Now, the takeaway from that, at least Now, the takeaway from that, at least the way I read the study, is the way I read the study, is the way I read the study, is if you're with somebody who really if you're with somebody who really if you're with somebody who really benefits from or experiences a lot of benefits from or experiences a lot of benefits from or experiences a lot of self-expansion, unless you really want them to pay unless you really want them to pay unless you really want them to pay attention to the attractiveness of other attention to the attractiveness of other attention to the attractiveness of other people, it stands to reason that they would benefit stands to reason that they would benefit stands to reason that they would benefit from more self-expansion type gestures from more self-expansion type gestures from more self-expansion type gestures or statements. Okay? Not so much or statements. Okay? Not so much or statements. Okay? Not so much centered on the relationship. We have centered on the relationship. We have centered on the relationship. We have such a great relationship, there's so such a great relationship, there's so such a great relationship, there's so much love, it's so great. That, too, but much love, it's so great. That, too, but much love, it's so great. That, too, but in the context of this study and these in the context of this study and these in the context of this study and these findings, that findings, that findings, that the person is really terrific, that the person is really terrific, that the person is really terrific, that the relationship that they've created relationship that they've created relationship that they've created together is really exciting, novel, and together is really exciting, novel, and together is really exciting, novel, and challenging, that there's a narrative challenging, that there's a narrative challenging, that there's a narrative around the relationship that really has around the relationship that really has around the relationship that really has a lot to do with the dynamics between a lot to do with the dynamics between a lot to do with the dynamics between the individuals in particular, that the individuals in particular, that the individuals in particular, that the person who really likes self-expansion person who really likes self-expansion person who really likes self-expansion is vital to that dynamic. Okay? So, it's is vital to that dynamic. Okay? So, it's is vital to that dynamic. Okay? So, it's not looking down at the relationship as not looking down at the relationship as not looking down at the relationship as a set of equals. There is sort of this a set of equals. There is sort of this a set of equals. There is sort of this bias written into this of that this bias written into this of that this bias written into this of that this person is really essential for the person is really essential for the person is really essential for the relationship. I'm not saying this is relationship. I'm not saying this is relationship. I'm not saying this is something that anyone has to do. I'm not something that anyone has to do. I'm not something that anyone has to do. I'm not saying this is right or wrong. This is saying this is right or wrong. This is saying this is right or wrong. This is just what the data say. just what the data say. just what the data say. But, what's remarkable is that in the But, what's remarkable is that in the But, what's remarkable is that in the absence of those statements, absence of those statements, absence of those statements, people who have or that rate high on people who have or that rate high on people who have or that rate high on this scale of self-expansion rate this scale of self-expansion rate this scale of self-expansion rate attractive alternative partners as more attractive alternative partners as more attractive alternative partners as more attractive. Now, that's interesting to attractive. Now, that's interesting to attractive. Now, that's interesting to me because it means that their actual me because it means that their actual me because it means that their actual perception of others is changing. perception of others is changing. perception of others is changing. They're still seeing all these They're still seeing all these They're still seeing all these attractive people. It's just that if attractive people. It's just that if attractive people. It's just that if they're feeling filled up uh in air they're feeling filled up uh in air they're feeling filled up uh in air quotes uh psychologically filled up, quotes uh psychologically filled up, quotes uh psychologically filled up, emotionally filled up, emotionally filled up, emotionally filled up, autonomically filled uh enhanced uh autonomically filled uh enhanced uh autonomically filled uh enhanced uh in the in the language that we're using in the in the language that we're using in the in the language that we're using today by the self-expansion narrative, today by the self-expansion narrative, today by the self-expansion narrative, well, then the same set of attractive well, then the same set of attractive well, then the same set of attractive faces appear less attractive to a given faces appear less attractive to a given faces appear less attractive to a given individual. Now, whether or not this predicts Now, whether or not this predicts Now, whether or not this predicts cheating or loyalty, cheating or loyalty, cheating or loyalty, uh I certainly can't say. Uh that'll be uh I certainly can't say. Uh that'll be uh I certainly can't say. Uh that'll be very hard to assess in it in very hard to assess in it in very hard to assess in it in neuroimaging, but I find this study, neuroimaging, but I find this study, neuroimaging, but I find this study, again, the title Manipulation of again, the title Manipulation of again, the title Manipulation of Self-Expansion Alters Responses to Self-Expansion Alters Responses to Self-Expansion Alters Responses to Attractive Alternative Partners to be Attractive Alternative Partners to be Attractive Alternative Partners to be absolutely fascinating because, again, absolutely fascinating because, again, absolutely fascinating because, again, it points to the fact that it points to the fact that it points to the fact that the interactions with our significant the interactions with our significant the interactions with our significant others shapes our autonomic arousal, others shapes our autonomic arousal, others shapes our autonomic arousal, shapes our perception of self, and shapes our perception of self, and shapes our perception of self, and thereby shapes our perception of other thereby shapes our perception of other thereby shapes our perception of other potential partners in the outside world, potential partners in the outside world, potential partners in the outside world, or shuts us down to the potential of or shuts us down to the potential of or shuts us down to the potential of other people in the outside world. And other people in the outside world. And other people in the outside world. And so, this really does point to the idea so, this really does point to the idea so, this really does point to the idea that while it is important to link our while it is important to link our while it is important to link our autonomic nervous systems to autonomic nervous systems to autonomic nervous systems to establish desire, love, and attachment, establish desire, love, and attachment, establish desire, love, and attachment, that we want to have a stable internal that we want to have a stable internal that we want to have a stable internal representation of ourselves, a stable representation of ourselves, a stable representation of ourselves, a stable autonomic nervous system to some degree autonomic nervous system to some degree autonomic nervous system to some degree or another, so that we can be in stable or another, so that we can be in stable or another, so that we can be in stable romantic partnership with another romantic partnership with another romantic partnership with another individual if that's what we're really individual if that's what we're really individual if that's what we're really trying to do. In the Huberman Lab trying to do. In the Huberman Lab trying to do. In the Huberman Lab podcast, I discuss both science and podcast, I discuss both science and podcast, I discuss both science and science-based tools, and so I'd be science-based tools, and so I'd be science-based tools, and so I'd be remiss if I didn't actually cover some remiss if I didn't actually cover some remiss if I didn't actually cover some of the tools that relate to those deeper of the tools that relate to those deeper of the tools that relate to those deeper biological mechanisms. biological mechanisms. biological mechanisms. Now, the hormones testosterone and estrogen the hormones testosterone and estrogen the hormones testosterone and estrogen are almost always the first biological are almost always the first biological are almost always the first biological chemicals and hormones that are chemicals and hormones that are chemicals and hormones that are mentioned and described and explored mentioned and described and explored mentioned and described and explored when thinking about desire when thinking about desire when thinking about desire and love and attachment, too, for that and love and attachment, too, for that and love and attachment, too, for that matter, since love and attachment stem matter, since love and attachment stem matter, since love and attachment stem from desire. The simple stereotyped from desire. The simple stereotyped from desire. The simple stereotyped version of the hormones testosterone and version of the hormones testosterone and version of the hormones testosterone and estrogen are that testosterone drives estrogen are that testosterone drives estrogen are that testosterone drives libido, or increases it, aka sex drive, libido, or increases it, aka sex drive, libido, or increases it, aka sex drive, and that estrogen somehow blunts it or and that estrogen somehow blunts it or and that estrogen somehow blunts it or is not involved in libido and sex drive, is not involved in libido and sex drive, is not involved in libido and sex drive, and that is simply not the case. Yes, and that is simply not the case. Yes, and that is simply not the case. Yes, testosterone and some of its other testosterone and some of its other testosterone and some of its other forms, like dihydrotestosterone, forms, like dihydrotestosterone, forms, like dihydrotestosterone, are strongly related to libido and sex are strongly related to libido and sex are strongly related to libido and sex drive and the pursuit drive and the pursuit drive and the pursuit and ability to mate. However, and ability to mate. However, and ability to mate. However, the hormone estrogen is also strongly the hormone estrogen is also strongly the hormone estrogen is also strongly associated with libido and mating associated with libido and mating associated with libido and mating behavior. So much so that behavior. So much so that behavior. So much so that for people that for people that for people that either chemically or for some other either chemically or for some other either chemically or for some other reason have very low estrogen, libido reason have very low estrogen, libido reason have very low estrogen, libido can severely suffer. So it's a can severely suffer. So it's a can severely suffer. So it's a coordinated dance of estrogen and coordinated dance of estrogen and coordinated dance of estrogen and testosterone in both males and females testosterone in both males and females testosterone in both males and females that leads to libido or sex drive. With that leads to libido or sex drive. With that leads to libido or sex drive. With that said, that said, that said, there are things that can shift libido there are things that can shift libido there are things that can shift libido in both men and women in the direction in both men and women in the direction in both men and women in the direction of more desire or more desire to mate, of more desire or more desire to mate, of more desire or more desire to mate, either to seek mates or to mate with either to seek mates or to mate with either to seek mates or to mate with existing partners. Now, a common existing partners. Now, a common existing partners. Now, a common misconception is that because dopamine misconception is that because dopamine misconception is that because dopamine is involved in motivation and drive, is involved in motivation and drive, is involved in motivation and drive, that simply increasing dopamine through that simply increasing dopamine through that simply increasing dopamine through any number of different mechanisms or any number of different mechanisms or any number of different mechanisms or tools will increase libido and sex tools will increase libido and sex tools will increase libido and sex drive. And that's simply not the case either. And that's simply not the case either. And that's simply not the case either. It is true that some level of dopamine It is true that some level of dopamine It is true that some level of dopamine or increase in dopamine is required for or increase in dopamine is required for or increase in dopamine is required for increases in libido. However, because of increases in libido. However, because of increases in libido. However, because of dopamine's relationship to the autonomic dopamine's relationship to the autonomic dopamine's relationship to the autonomic nervous system and because the autonomic nervous system and because the autonomic nervous system and because the autonomic nervous system nervous system nervous system is so intimately involved, no pun is so intimately involved, no pun is so intimately involved, no pun intended, in sexual activity, in seeking intended, in sexual activity, in seeking intended, in sexual activity, in seeking and actual mating behavior as I and actual mating behavior as I and actual mating behavior as I described earlier, described earlier, described earlier, it's actually the case that if people it's actually the case that if people it's actually the case that if people drive their dopamine system too high, drive their dopamine system too high, drive their dopamine system too high, they will be in states of arousal they will be in states of arousal they will be in states of arousal that are that are that are high enough such that they seek and want high enough such that they seek and want high enough such that they seek and want sexual activity, but they can't actually sexual activity, but they can't actually sexual activity, but they can't actually engage the parasympathetic arm of the engage the parasympathetic arm of the engage the parasympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system sufficient to autonomic nervous system sufficient to autonomic nervous system sufficient to become physically aroused. So, this is a become physically aroused. So, this is a become physically aroused. So, this is a an important point to make because I an important point to make because I an important point to make because I think that a lot of people are under the think that a lot of people are under the think that a lot of people are under the impression that if they just drive up impression that if they just drive up impression that if they just drive up testosterone, increase dopamine, and testosterone, increase dopamine, and testosterone, increase dopamine, and generally get themselves into high generally get themselves into high generally get themselves into high states of autonomic arousal, that that's states of autonomic arousal, that that's states of autonomic arousal, that that's going to increase their libido. going to increase their libido. going to increase their libido. But, that's simply not the way the But, that's simply not the way the But, that's simply not the way the system works. It's that seesaw and that system works. It's that seesaw and that system works. It's that seesaw and that seesawing back and forth that is the arc seesawing back and forth that is the arc seesawing back and forth that is the arc of arousal that we talked about earlier. of arousal that we talked about earlier. of arousal that we talked about earlier. Now, there are substances, legal, Now, there are substances, legal, Now, there are substances, legal, over-the-counter substances uh that fall over-the-counter substances uh that fall over-the-counter substances uh that fall under the categorization of supplements under the categorization of supplements under the categorization of supplements that do indeed that do indeed that do indeed increase libido and arousal. increase libido and arousal. increase libido and arousal. I want to be clear, however, that these I want to be clear, however, that these I want to be clear, however, that these are by no means required. Um many people are by no means required. Um many people are by no means required. Um many people have healthy libidos or have healthy libidos or have healthy libidos or have libidos that are healthy for uh have libidos that are healthy for uh have libidos that are healthy for uh their life and what they need and their life and what they need and their life and what they need and want. Um and as always in any and want. Um and as always in any and want. Um and as always in any discussion about supplementation, you discussion about supplementation, you discussion about supplementation, you absolutely have to check with your absolutely have to check with your absolutely have to check with your physician. I don't just say that to physician. I don't just say that to physician. I don't just say that to protect us, I say that to protect you. protect us, I say that to protect you. protect us, I say that to protect you. Your health and well-being is dependent Your health and well-being is dependent Your health and well-being is dependent on you doing certain things and not on you doing certain things and not on you doing certain things and not doing others, and everybody is doing others, and everybody is doing others, and everybody is different. Nonetheless, there are different. Nonetheless, there are different. Nonetheless, there are studies that point to specific studies that point to specific studies that point to specific substances that are sold over the substances that are sold over the substances that are sold over the counter that at least in the United counter that at least in the United counter that at least in the United States are legal and that have been States are legal and that have been States are legal and that have been shown to be statistically significant in to be statistically significant in to be statistically significant in increasing measures of libido. There are increasing measures of libido. There are increasing measures of libido. There are many such substances, but three many such substances, but three many such substances, but three that in particular have good that in particular have good that in particular have good peer-reviewed research to support them peer-reviewed research to support them peer-reviewed research to support them are maca, m a c a, which is actually a root, m a c a, which is actually a root, m a c a, which is actually a root, tongkat ali, also sometimes called tongkat ali, also sometimes called tongkat ali, also sometimes called longjack, I didn't name them, forgive longjack, I didn't name them, forgive longjack, I didn't name them, forgive me, and tribulus. me, and tribulus. me, and tribulus. Or tribulus, it's sometimes called. I'm Or tribulus, it's sometimes called. I'm Or tribulus, it's sometimes called. I'm going to talk about each of these in going to talk about each of these in going to talk about each of these in sequence. But, on the whole, on the whole, on the whole, the studies on maca are quite convincing the studies on maca are quite convincing the studies on maca are quite convincing that consumption of 2 to 3 g per day of maca, consumption of 2 to 3 g per day of maca, consumption of 2 to 3 g per day of maca, which generally is sold as a powder or a which generally is sold as a powder or a which generally is sold as a powder or a capsule, typically consumed early in the day typically consumed early in the day typically consumed early in the day because it can be somewhat of a because it can be somewhat of a because it can be somewhat of a stimulant, meaning it can increase stimulant, meaning it can increase stimulant, meaning it can increase alertness, and you wouldn't want it to alertness, and you wouldn't want it to alertness, and you wouldn't want it to interfere uh with sleep by taking it too interfere uh with sleep by taking it too interfere uh with sleep by taking it too late in the day. But, in studies that late in the day. But, in studies that late in the day. But, in studies that include both men and women of durations include both men and women of durations include both men and women of durations anywhere from 8 to 12 weeks anywhere from 8 to 12 weeks anywhere from 8 to 12 weeks of athletes and non-athletes and of athletes and non-athletes and of athletes and non-athletes and different variations of maca, turns out different variations of maca, turns out different variations of maca, turns out there's black maca, red maca, yellow there's black maca, red maca, yellow there's black maca, red maca, yellow maca, there are a bunch of different maca, there are a bunch of different maca, there are a bunch of different forms of maca, but that they can forms of maca, but that they can forms of maca, but that they can increase subjective reports of sexual increase subjective reports of sexual increase subjective reports of sexual desire independent of hormone systems, meaning independent of hormone systems, meaning independent of hormone systems, meaning it does not seem, at least based on the it does not seem, at least based on the it does not seem, at least based on the existing literature, that maca increases existing literature, that maca increases existing literature, that maca increases testosterone or changes estrogen, at testosterone or changes estrogen, at testosterone or changes estrogen, at least not on the time scales that these least not on the time scales that these least not on the time scales that these studies were done or with the measures studies were done or with the measures studies were done or with the measures that were performed in these studies. that were performed in these studies. that were performed in these studies. Another substance that has been shown to Another substance that has been shown to Another substance that has been shown to increase libido across a range of human increase libido across a range of human increase libido across a range of human populations is so-called tongkat ali. populations is so-called tongkat ali. populations is so-called tongkat ali. This is an herb, there's a Malaysian This is an herb, there's a Malaysian This is an herb, there's a Malaysian version and an Indonesian version. Um my version and an Indonesian version. Um my version and an Indonesian version. Um my understanding is that the Indonesian understanding is that the Indonesian understanding is that the Indonesian variety of tongkat ali is the one that variety of tongkat ali is the one that variety of tongkat ali is the one that is most potent for is most potent for is most potent for uh its effects on libido. uh its effects on libido. uh its effects on libido. Previously, I've talked about tongkat Previously, I've talked about tongkat Previously, I've talked about tongkat ali taken in 400 mg per day capsules as ali taken in 400 mg per day capsules as ali taken in 400 mg per day capsules as a means to increase the amount of free, a means to increase the amount of free, a means to increase the amount of free, meaning unbound, testosterone. So, meaning unbound, testosterone. So, meaning unbound, testosterone. So, testosterone has a both bound form and testosterone has a both bound form and testosterone has a both bound form and an unbound form. Very briefly, the bound an unbound form. Very briefly, the bound an unbound form. Very briefly, the bound form is bound to albumin in the blood or form is bound to albumin in the blood or form is bound to albumin in the blood or to so-called sex hormone-binding to so-called sex hormone-binding to so-called sex hormone-binding globulin. Uh when it's bound, it can't globulin. Uh when it's bound, it can't globulin. Uh when it's bound, it can't be biologically active at many cells. Uh be biologically active at many cells. Uh be biologically active at many cells. Uh it is important that some of it be bound it is important that some of it be bound it is important that some of it be bound in order to get a sort of time release in order to get a sort of time release in order to get a sort of time release and proper distribution of and proper distribution of and proper distribution of testosterone through the body, but it is testosterone through the body, but it is testosterone through the body, but it is the unbound free testosterone that can the unbound free testosterone that can the unbound free testosterone that can really have its most potent effects. And really have its most potent effects. And really have its most potent effects. And there's some evidence that tongkat ali there's some evidence that tongkat ali there's some evidence that tongkat ali can increase the amount of unbound, can increase the amount of unbound, can increase the amount of unbound, so-called free, testosterone by lowering so-called free, testosterone by lowering so-called free, testosterone by lowering sex hormone-binding globulin, although sex hormone-binding globulin, although sex hormone-binding globulin, although it is almost certain that it has other it is almost certain that it has other it is almost certain that it has other routes of mechanism, as well. routes of mechanism, as well. routes of mechanism, as well. Nonetheless, there are some reports of Nonetheless, there are some reports of Nonetheless, there are some reports of tongkat ali increasing tongkat ali increasing tongkat ali increasing libido. The question always comes up libido. The question always comes up libido. The question always comes up around discussion of supplements, do you around discussion of supplements, do you around discussion of supplements, do you need to cycle these things? The only way need to cycle these things? The only way need to cycle these things? The only way to determine that is really to do your to determine that is really to do your to determine that is really to do your blood work, monitor liver enzymes, blood work, monitor liver enzymes, blood work, monitor liver enzymes, monitor hormone levels, and so forth. monitor hormone levels, and so forth. monitor hormone levels, and so forth. So, I simply can't say whether or not So, I simply can't say whether or not So, I simply can't say whether or not you um need to or you don't need to you um need to or you don't need to you um need to or you don't need to cycle them. Typically, uh tongkat ali cycle them. Typically, uh tongkat ali cycle them. Typically, uh tongkat ali and maca are not cycled in any regular and maca are not cycled in any regular and maca are not cycled in any regular kind of way that I'm aware of, but um kind of way that I'm aware of, but um kind of way that I'm aware of, but um again, you really need to check with again, you really need to check with again, you really need to check with your doctor if you're going to initiate your doctor if you're going to initiate your doctor if you're going to initiate taking any of these things. Um and you taking any of these things. Um and you taking any of these things. Um and you certainly should do your best to monitor certainly should do your best to monitor certainly should do your best to monitor your blood work as well as subjective your blood work as well as subjective your blood work as well as subjective measures in evaluating whether or not measures in evaluating whether or not measures in evaluating whether or not they're working for you, safe for you, they're working for you, safe for you, they're working for you, safe for you, and so forth. The third and final and so forth. The third and final and so forth. The third and final substance {slash} supplement that I want substance {slash} supplement that I want substance {slash} supplement that I want to touch on as it relates to libido to touch on as it relates to libido to touch on as it relates to libido is called tribulus terrestris. So, is called tribulus terrestris. So, is called tribulus terrestris. So, that's t r i b u l u s terrestris, t e r that's t r i b u l u s terrestris, t e r that's t r i b u l u s terrestris, t e r e s r e s r e s t r i s t r i s t r i s This is a This is a This is a commonly sold over-the-counter commonly sold over-the-counter commonly sold over-the-counter supplement for increasing testosterone supplement for increasing testosterone supplement for increasing testosterone for you know, fitness purposes and so you know, fitness purposes and so you know, fitness purposes and so on. Whether or not it actually does that on. Whether or not it actually does that on. Whether or not it actually does that to a meaningful degree to a meaningful degree to a meaningful degree is unclear, but I'm aware of four is unclear, but I'm aware of four is unclear, but I'm aware of four peer-reviewed studies peer-reviewed studies peer-reviewed studies that were focused on both males and that were focused on both males and that were focused on both males and females ranging anywhere from ranging anywhere from ranging anywhere from 18 years old all the way up to 65 plus 18 years old all the way up to 65 plus 18 years old all the way up to 65 plus fairly broad age range fairly broad age range fairly broad age range where people took anywhere from where people took anywhere from where people took anywhere from uh 750 mg per day divided into three equal 750 mg per day divided into three equal 750 mg per day divided into three equal doses. So, 750 total per day divided doses. So, 750 total per day divided doses. So, 750 total per day divided into three equal doses of Tribulus into three equal doses of Tribulus into three equal doses of Tribulus or placebo for 120 days. or placebo for 120 days. or placebo for 120 days. This particular study was focused on This particular study was focused on This particular study was focused on females and according to the female sexual and according to the female sexual and according to the female sexual function index questionnaire, function index questionnaire, function index questionnaire, no significant difference between any of no significant difference between any of no significant difference between any of the groups. However, the groups. However, the groups. However, free and bioavailable testosterone free and bioavailable testosterone free and bioavailable testosterone increased in the group taking Tribulus increased in the group taking Tribulus increased in the group taking Tribulus terrestris. Total testosterone did not terrestris. Total testosterone did not terrestris. Total testosterone did not reach statistical significance. So, this reach statistical significance. So, this reach statistical significance. So, this is sort of the inverse of what we see is sort of the inverse of what we see is sort of the inverse of what we see with maca where there do seem to be with maca where there do seem to be with maca where there do seem to be increases in testosterone which would increases in testosterone which would increases in testosterone which would predict that there would be increase in predict that there would be increase in predict that there would be increase in libido. In this case, in this was libido. In this case, in this was libido. In this case, in this was postmenopausal women, there was no postmenopausal women, there was no postmenopausal women, there was no increase in libido. There was an increase in libido. There was an increase in libido. There was an increase in testosterone. I mention it increase in testosterone. I mention it increase in testosterone. I mention it only because there might be instances in only because there might be instances in only because there might be instances in which people want to increase their people want to increase their people want to increase their testosterone. It does seem that testosterone. It does seem that testosterone. It does seem that Tribulus, at least in that population, Tribulus, at least in that population, Tribulus, at least in that population, is capable of doing that. Now, there's a is capable of doing that. Now, there's a is capable of doing that. Now, there's a separate study that was done, a separate study that was done, a separate study that was done, a double-blind study, double-blind study, double-blind study, lasting anywhere from 1 to 6 months that lasting anywhere from 1 to 6 months that lasting anywhere from 1 to 6 months that had a clear and significant increase in had a clear and significant increase in had a clear and significant increase in libido. Now, this was taking 6 g so, libido. Now, this was taking 6 g so, libido. Now, this was taking 6 g so, that's 6,000 mg of Tribulus root for 60 that's 6,000 mg of Tribulus root for 60 that's 6,000 mg of Tribulus root for 60 days and it did seem to increase various and it did seem to increase various and it did seem to increase various aspects of sexual function. I think more aspects of sexual function. I think more aspects of sexual function. I think more studies are certainly needed, but these studies are certainly needed, but these studies are certainly needed, but these three substances {slash} supplements, three substances {slash} supplements, three substances {slash} supplements, maca, tongkat ali in particular maca, tongkat ali in particular maca, tongkat ali in particular Indonesian tongkat ali and tribulus can Indonesian tongkat ali and tribulus can Indonesian tongkat ali and tribulus can indeed create significant increases in indeed create significant increases in indeed create significant increases in sexual desire and in some cases by sexual desire and in some cases by sexual desire and in some cases by adjusting the testosterone and estrogen adjusting the testosterone and estrogen adjusting the testosterone and estrogen system, in some cases not by adjusting system, in some cases not by adjusting system, in some cases not by adjusting the testosterone and estrogen system. the testosterone and estrogen system. the testosterone and estrogen system. Again, pointing to the complexity of Again, pointing to the complexity of Again, pointing to the complexity of neurochemicals and features that adjust neurochemicals and features that adjust neurochemicals and features that adjust things like libido aka desire. So, we things like libido aka desire. So, we things like libido aka desire. So, we covered a lot of material today related covered a lot of material today related covered a lot of material today related to desire, love and attachment. And yet, to desire, love and attachment. And yet, to desire, love and attachment. And yet, I acknowledge that it is not exhaustive I acknowledge that it is not exhaustive I acknowledge that it is not exhaustive of the vast landscape that is the of the vast landscape that is the of the vast landscape that is the psychology and biology of desire, love psychology and biology of desire, love psychology and biology of desire, love and attachment. Nonetheless, and attachment. Nonetheless, and attachment. Nonetheless, I hope that you found the information I hope that you found the information I hope that you found the information interesting and hopefully actionable in interesting and hopefully actionable in interesting and hopefully actionable in some cases toward the relationships of some cases toward the relationships of some cases toward the relationships of your past, of present and potentially your past, of present and potentially your past, of present and potentially for the relationships of your future. for the relationships of your future. for the relationships of your future. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion about desire, love and discussion about desire, love and discussion about desire, love and attachment. And last but certainly not attachment. And last but certainly not attachment. And last but certainly not least, thank you [music] for your least, thank you [music] for your least, thank you [music] for your interest in science.