Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an ask me anything or AMA episode, which is ask me anything or AMA episode, which is ask me anything or AMA episode, which is part of our premium subscriber content. part of our premium subscriber content. part of our premium subscriber content. Our premium channel was launched in Our premium channel was launched in Our premium channel was launched in order to raise support for the standard order to raise support for the standard order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which Huberman Lab podcast channel, which Huberman Lab podcast channel, which still comes out once a week every Monday still comes out once a week every Monday still comes out once a week every Monday and of course is zero cost to consumer. and of course is zero cost to consumer. and of course is zero cost to consumer. The premium channel is also designed to The premium channel is also designed to The premium channel is also designed to support exciting research being done at support exciting research being done at support exciting research being done at major universities like Stanford and major universities like Stanford and major universities like Stanford and elsewhere. Research that's done on elsewhere. Research that's done on elsewhere. Research that's done on humans that should lead to protocols for humans that should lead to protocols for humans that should lead to protocols for mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance in the near future. If you'd performance in the near future. If you'd performance in the near future. If you'd like to check out the premium channel like to check out the premium channel like to check out the premium channel subscription model, you can go to subscription model, you can go to subscription model, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium and there you can subscribe for $10 a and there you can subscribe for $10 a and there you can subscribe for $10 a month or $100 a year. We also have a month or $100 a year. We also have a month or $100 a year. We also have a lifetime subscriber option. For those of lifetime subscriber option. For those of lifetime subscriber option. For those of you that are already Huberman Lab you that are already Huberman Lab you that are already Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers and you're podcast premium subscribers and you're podcast premium subscribers and you're watching and or hearing this, please go watching and or hearing this, please go watching and or hearing this, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium podcast feed. and download the premium podcast feed. and download the premium podcast feed. And for those of you that are not And for those of you that are not And for those of you that are not already Huberman Lab premium podcast already Huberman Lab premium podcast already Huberman Lab premium podcast subscribers, you will be able to hear subscribers, you will be able to hear subscribers, you will be able to hear the first 15 minutes or so of this the first 15 minutes or so of this the first 15 minutes or so of this episode and hopefully that will allow episode and hopefully that will allow episode and hopefully that will allow you to discern whether or not you would you to discern whether or not you would you to discern whether or not you would like to become a premium subscriber. like to become a premium subscriber. like to become a premium subscriber. Without further ado, let's get to Without further ado, let's get to Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. And as always, answering your questions. And as always, answering your questions. And as always, I will strive to be as clear as I will strive to be as clear as I will strive to be as clear as possible, as succinct as possible, and possible, as succinct as possible, and possible, as succinct as possible, and as thorough as possible while still as thorough as possible while still as thorough as possible while still answering as many questions per AMA answering as many questions per AMA answering as many questions per AMA episode as I can without these sessions episode as I can without these sessions episode as I can without these sessions becoming unreasonably long. I should becoming unreasonably long. I should becoming unreasonably long. I should also point out that if you asked a also point out that if you asked a also point out that if you asked a question and it was not answered this question and it was not answered this question and it was not answered this AMA, it may very well be answered in the AMA, it may very well be answered in the AMA, it may very well be answered in the next AMA. So, the first question, which next AMA. So, the first question, which next AMA. So, the first question, which had a lot of upvotes, meaning many had a lot of upvotes, meaning many had a lot of upvotes, meaning many people wanted the answer to this people wanted the answer to this people wanted the answer to this question, came from Jackson Lipford. And question, came from Jackson Lipford. And question, came from Jackson Lipford. And the question was about so-called the question was about so-called the question was about so-called ultradian rhythms. For those of you that ultradian rhythms. For those of you that ultradian rhythms. For those of you that are not familiar with ultradian rhythms, are not familiar with ultradian rhythms, are not familiar with ultradian rhythms, ultradian rhythms are any rhythms that ultradian rhythms are any rhythms that ultradian rhythms are any rhythms that are shorter than 24 hours. And typically are shorter than 24 hours. And typically are shorter than 24 hours. And typically when people ask about or talk about when people ask about or talk about when people ask about or talk about ultradian rhythms, they are referring to ultradian rhythms, they are referring to ultradian rhythms, they are referring to 90-minute rhythms. I've talked about 90-minute rhythms. I've talked about 90-minute rhythms. I've talked about these on the podcast before. And these on the podcast before. And these on the podcast before. And Jackson's question was, "How do you use Jackson's question was, "How do you use Jackson's question was, "How do you use ultradian rhythms in your daily work?" ultradian rhythms in your daily work?" ultradian rhythms in your daily work?" There's more to the question, but first There's more to the question, but first There's more to the question, but first off, I do use ultradian rhythms. That off, I do use ultradian rhythms. That off, I do use ultradian rhythms. That is, I leverage the fact that these do is, I leverage the fact that these do is, I leverage the fact that these do exist in all of us as a way to engage in exist in all of us as a way to engage in exist in all of us as a way to engage in focused bouts of mental work once or focused bouts of mental work once or focused bouts of mental work once or twice or sometimes three times per day. twice or sometimes three times per day. twice or sometimes three times per day. However, I use them in a way that's However, I use them in a way that's However, I use them in a way that's grounded in the research on ultradian grounded in the research on ultradian grounded in the research on ultradian rhythms for learning and memory in a way rhythms for learning and memory in a way rhythms for learning and memory in a way that might not be obvious just from that might not be obvious just from that might not be obvious just from their name that they are 90-minute their name that they are 90-minute their name that they are 90-minute rhythms. So, I'll get into the details rhythms. So, I'll get into the details rhythms. So, I'll get into the details of how to use ultradian rhythms to best of how to use ultradian rhythms to best of how to use ultradian rhythms to best capture neuroplasticity, that is the capture neuroplasticity, that is the capture neuroplasticity, that is the brain's ability to change in response to brain's ability to change in response to brain's ability to change in response to experience, and experience, and experience, and in a way that should allow you to get in a way that should allow you to get in a way that should allow you to get one or two or maybe even three focused one or two or maybe even three focused one or two or maybe even three focused bouts of learning per day, which can bouts of learning per day, which can bouts of learning per day, which can greatly accelerate learning of cognitive greatly accelerate learning of cognitive greatly accelerate learning of cognitive material, languages, mathematics, material, languages, mathematics, material, languages, mathematics, history for sake of school or work or history for sake of school or work or history for sake of school or work or maybe just a hobby or a personal maybe just a hobby or a personal maybe just a hobby or a personal interest of some sort, and for skill interest of some sort, and for skill interest of some sort, and for skill learning in the physical domain as well. learning in the physical domain as well. learning in the physical domain as well. Jackson then went on to ask, "You've Jackson then went on to ask, "You've Jackson then went on to ask, "You've mentioned before that you try to include mentioned before that you try to include mentioned before that you try to include at least one 90-minute focus block per at least one 90-minute focus block per at least one 90-minute focus block per day as part of your work and overall day as part of your work and overall day as part of your work and overall mission." And indeed, that is true. I mission." And indeed, that is true. I mission." And indeed, that is true. I try to get at least one of these focused try to get at least one of these focused try to get at least one of these focused ultradian rhythm blocks per day. That ultradian rhythm blocks per day. That ultradian rhythm blocks per day. That is, a period of about 90 minutes where is, a period of about 90 minutes where is, a period of about 90 minutes where I'm focused on learning something or I'm focused on learning something or I'm focused on learning something or doing something that's cognitively hard. doing something that's cognitively hard. doing something that's cognitively hard. Although, typically I aim for two of Although, typically I aim for two of Although, typically I aim for two of these sessions per day. He then goes on these sessions per day. He then goes on these sessions per day. He then goes on to ask, "What is the maximum number of to ask, "What is the maximum number of to ask, "What is the maximum number of blocks you can perform sustainably?" The blocks you can perform sustainably?" The blocks you can perform sustainably?" The answer to that is probably four. And I answer to that is probably four. And I answer to that is probably four. And I say probably because some people have say probably because some people have say probably because some people have schedules, lifestyles in which four schedules, lifestyles in which four schedules, lifestyles in which four 90-minute blocks of focused learning is 90-minute blocks of focused learning is 90-minute blocks of focused learning is possible per day, but that's highly possible per day, but that's highly possible per day, but that's highly unusual. For most people, it's going to unusual. For most people, it's going to unusual. For most people, it's going to be one or two, maybe three. Four, I be one or two, maybe three. Four, I be one or two, maybe three. Four, I would place in the really extraordinary would place in the really extraordinary would place in the really extraordinary end of things. Maybe if you're cramming end of things. Maybe if you're cramming end of things. Maybe if you're cramming for exams or you've managed to go on a for exams or you've managed to go on a for exams or you've managed to go on a writing retreat or a learning retreat of writing retreat or a learning retreat of writing retreat or a learning retreat of some sort where you can devote some sort where you can devote some sort where you can devote essentially all of your non-sleeping, essentially all of your non-sleeping, essentially all of your non-sleeping, non-eating time to learning. But most non-eating time to learning. But most non-eating time to learning. But most people simply can't organize their life people simply can't organize their life people simply can't organize their life that way. So, the short answer is that way. So, the short answer is that way. So, the short answer is for me, it's one or two per day is the for me, it's one or two per day is the for me, it's one or two per day is the target, and three would be the maximum. target, and three would be the maximum. target, and three would be the maximum. He then went on to ask, "Do you take He then went on to ask, "Do you take He then went on to ask, "Do you take vacations or extended breaks from these vacations or extended breaks from these vacations or extended breaks from these ultradian rhythm sessions?" And the ultradian rhythm sessions?" And the ultradian rhythm sessions?" And the short answer is no. Typically, I try and short answer is no. Typically, I try and short answer is no. Typically, I try and do this every day, and yes, even on the do this every day, and yes, even on the do this every day, and yes, even on the weekends. But on the weekend, the weekends. But on the weekend, the weekends. But on the weekend, the ultradian rhythm-focused learning about ultradian rhythm-focused learning about ultradian rhythm-focused learning about might just be reading a book for about might just be reading a book for about might just be reading a book for about 90 minutes or so, which might not be as 90 minutes or so, which might not be as 90 minutes or so, which might not be as cognitively difficult as it is for other cognitively difficult as it is for other cognitively difficult as it is for other sorts of work that I perform during the sorts of work that I perform during the sorts of work that I perform during the week. I occasionally miss a day entirely week. I occasionally miss a day entirely week. I occasionally miss a day entirely for whatever reason, travel, obligations for whatever reason, travel, obligations for whatever reason, travel, obligations related to family, etc. But in general, related to family, etc. But in general, related to family, etc. But in general, I try and do this every day. I do think I try and do this every day. I do think I try and do this every day. I do think that the circuits for focus are that the circuits for focus are that the circuits for focus are I guess the non-biological way to put it I guess the non-biological way to put it I guess the non-biological way to put it would be kept warm, but essentially, would be kept warm, but essentially, would be kept warm, but essentially, that accessing the circuits for focus is that accessing the circuits for focus is that accessing the circuits for focus is made easier by accessing them regularly. made easier by accessing them regularly. made easier by accessing them regularly. And that's because the circuits for And that's because the circuits for And that's because the circuits for focus are indeed themselves amenable to focus are indeed themselves amenable to focus are indeed themselves amenable to neuroplasticity. In other words, the neuroplasticity. In other words, the neuroplasticity. In other words, the more you force yourself to focus, the more you force yourself to focus, the more you force yourself to focus, the easier focusing gets. I'll now answer easier focusing gets. I'll now answer easier focusing gets. I'll now answer the last part of the question, and then the last part of the question, and then the last part of the question, and then I will go through and emphasize some I will go through and emphasize some I will go through and emphasize some tools that anyone can use in order to tools that anyone can use in order to tools that anyone can use in order to leverage ultradian rhythms toward leverage ultradian rhythms toward leverage ultradian rhythms toward learning bouts, either cognitive learning bouts, either cognitive learning bouts, either cognitive learning or physical skill learning or a learning or physical skill learning or a learning or physical skill learning or a combination of the two. combination of the two. combination of the two. The last part of the question Jackson The last part of the question Jackson The last part of the question Jackson asked was, "If you knew you needed to asked was, "If you knew you needed to asked was, "If you knew you needed to drastically increase the amount of focus drastically increase the amount of focus drastically increase the amount of focus you do daily, how would you schedule you do daily, how would you schedule you do daily, how would you schedule that focus and recover from it?" That's that focus and recover from it?" That's that focus and recover from it?" That's an excellent aspect to this question, an excellent aspect to this question, an excellent aspect to this question, and I will now give you the details of and I will now give you the details of and I will now give you the details of how I would use and schedule ultradian how I would use and schedule ultradian how I would use and schedule ultradian rhythms. I'll offer you a tool I've rhythms. I'll offer you a tool I've rhythms. I'll offer you a tool I've never talked about this tool on the never talked about this tool on the never talked about this tool on the Huberman Lab podcast, and I will dispel Huberman Lab podcast, and I will dispel Huberman Lab podcast, and I will dispel a common myth about ultradian rhythms a common myth about ultradian rhythms a common myth about ultradian rhythms that points to a, believe it or not, an that points to a, believe it or not, an that points to a, believe it or not, an easier way to leverage them for maximum easier way to leverage them for maximum easier way to leverage them for maximum benefit. Okay, so as I mentioned before, benefit. Okay, so as I mentioned before, benefit. Okay, so as I mentioned before, ultradian rhythms are these 90-minute ultradian rhythms are these 90-minute ultradian rhythms are these 90-minute cycles that we go through from the time cycles that we go through from the time cycles that we go through from the time that we are born until the time we die. that we are born until the time we die. that we are born until the time we die. Indeed, even during sleep, we are Indeed, even during sleep, we are Indeed, even during sleep, we are experiencing and more or less governed experiencing and more or less governed experiencing and more or less governed by these ultradian rhythms. by these ultradian rhythms. by these ultradian rhythms. This question and this answer is not so This question and this answer is not so This question and this answer is not so much about sleep, but just know that much about sleep, but just know that much about sleep, but just know that when you go to sleep at night until you when you go to sleep at night until you when you go to sleep at night until you wake up in the morning, every 90 minutes wake up in the morning, every 90 minutes wake up in the morning, every 90 minutes or so, your patterns of sleep, that is, or so, your patterns of sleep, that is, or so, your patterns of sleep, that is, the percentage or ratio, rather, of the percentage or ratio, rather, of the percentage or ratio, rather, of slow-wave sleep to light sleep to rapid slow-wave sleep to light sleep to rapid slow-wave sleep to light sleep to rapid eye movement sleep changes in a way such eye movement sleep changes in a way such eye movement sleep changes in a way such that each 90-minute cycle gates the next that each 90-minute cycle gates the next that each 90-minute cycle gates the next cycle. So, it flips the on switch for cycle. So, it flips the on switch for cycle. So, it flips the on switch for the next 90-minute cycle, then that the next 90-minute cycle, then that the next 90-minute cycle, then that 90-minute cycle ends, flips the on 90-minute cycle ends, flips the on 90-minute cycle ends, flips the on switch for the next one, and so on and switch for the next one, and so on and switch for the next one, and so on and so forth. I mention all that because so forth. I mention all that because so forth. I mention all that because during the daytime, the same thing is during the daytime, the same thing is during the daytime, the same thing is true, but most people don't know when true, but most people don't know when true, but most people don't know when the 90-minute ultradian cycles begin, the 90-minute ultradian cycles begin, the 90-minute ultradian cycles begin, because if you think about it, you could because if you think about it, you could because if you think about it, you could wake up wake up wake up on the basis of an alarm clock or noise on the basis of an alarm clock or noise on the basis of an alarm clock or noise in the room or simply because you in the room or simply because you in the room or simply because you naturally wake up in the middle of an naturally wake up in the middle of an naturally wake up in the middle of an ultradian 90-minute cycle. So, does that ultradian 90-minute cycle. So, does that ultradian 90-minute cycle. So, does that mean, for instance, that if you wake up mean, for instance, that if you wake up mean, for instance, that if you wake up 60 minutes into an ultradian cycle, that 60 minutes into an ultradian cycle, that 60 minutes into an ultradian cycle, that the next 30 minutes of your waking, the next 30 minutes of your waking, the next 30 minutes of your waking, right, because that 60 minutes needs to right, because that 60 minutes needs to right, because that 60 minutes needs to continue to 90 to complete a ultradian continue to 90 to complete a ultradian continue to 90 to complete a ultradian cycle, that the next 30 minutes after cycle, that the next 30 minutes after cycle, that the next 30 minutes after waking are related to the ultradian cycle that you related to the ultradian cycle that you related to the ultradian cycle that you were still in during sleep, or does it were still in during sleep, or does it were still in during sleep, or does it start a new ultradian cycle? start a new ultradian cycle? start a new ultradian cycle? And the answer is the former. That And the answer is the former. That And the answer is the former. That ultradian cycle continues even if you ultradian cycle continues even if you ultradian cycle continues even if you wake up in the middle of it. And so, a wake up in the middle of it. And so, a wake up in the middle of it. And so, a lot of people who want to leverage lot of people who want to leverage lot of people who want to leverage ultradian cycles for learning will say, ultradian cycles for learning will say, ultradian cycles for learning will say, "Well, how do I know when to start? When "Well, how do I know when to start? When "Well, how do I know when to start? When does it start? When I hit my stopwatch? does it start? When I hit my stopwatch? does it start? When I hit my stopwatch? Can I just set a clock and work for 90 Can I just set a clock and work for 90 Can I just set a clock and work for 90 minutes?" And the short answer is no. minutes?" And the short answer is no. minutes?" And the short answer is no. And that might seem unfortunate, but the And that might seem unfortunate, but the And that might seem unfortunate, but the good news is that you can figure out good news is that you can figure out good news is that you can figure out when your first proper ultradian cycle when your first proper ultradian cycle when your first proper ultradian cycle of the day begins simply by asking of the day begins simply by asking of the day begins simply by asking yourself, when are you most alert after yourself, when are you most alert after yourself, when are you most alert after waking? That is, if you were say to wake waking? That is, if you were say to wake waking? That is, if you were say to wake up at 7:00 a.m. and let's say that's the up at 7:00 a.m. and let's say that's the up at 7:00 a.m. and let's say that's the end of an ultradian cycle or perhaps end of an ultradian cycle or perhaps end of an ultradian cycle or perhaps you're in the middle of an ultradian you're in the middle of an ultradian you're in the middle of an ultradian cycle. Doesn't matter. cycle. Doesn't matter. cycle. Doesn't matter. What you need to watch for or pay What you need to watch for or pay What you need to watch for or pay attention to for a day or so is when you attention to for a day or so is when you attention to for a day or so is when you start to experience your greatest state start to experience your greatest state start to experience your greatest state of mental alertness in the morning. And of mental alertness in the morning. And of mental alertness in the morning. And here we can discard with all the issues here we can discard with all the issues here we can discard with all the issues and variables around caffeine or no and variables around caffeine or no and variables around caffeine or no caffeine, hydrating or no hydrating, caffeine, hydrating or no hydrating, caffeine, hydrating or no hydrating, exercise is one variable that we'll exercise is one variable that we'll exercise is one variable that we'll consider in a moment, but here's the consider in a moment, but here's the consider in a moment, but here's the deal. These ultradian cycles are deal. These ultradian cycles are deal. These ultradian cycles are actually triggered by fluctuations in actually triggered by fluctuations in actually triggered by fluctuations in the so-called glucocorticoid system, the so-called glucocorticoid system, the so-called glucocorticoid system, the system that regulates cortisol release. system that regulates cortisol release. system that regulates cortisol release. And as some of you have probably heard And as some of you have probably heard And as some of you have probably heard me say before, me say before, me say before, cortisol, even though it's often cortisol, even though it's often cortisol, even though it's often discussed as a terrible thing, it's you discussed as a terrible thing, it's you discussed as a terrible thing, it's you know, chronic stress, cortisol, know, chronic stress, cortisol, know, chronic stress, cortisol, etc., cortisol is essential cortisol, etc., cortisol is essential cortisol, etc., cortisol is essential for health. And every day we get a rise for health. And every day we get a rise for health. And every day we get a rise in cortisol in the morning that is in cortisol in the morning that is in cortisol in the morning that is associated with enhanced immune associated with enhanced immune associated with enhanced immune function, enhanced alertness, enhanced function, enhanced alertness, enhanced function, enhanced alertness, enhanced ability to focus, so on and so forth. In ability to focus, so on and so forth. In ability to focus, so on and so forth. In fact, the protocol that I'm always fact, the protocol that I'm always fact, the protocol that I'm always beating the drum about that people beating the drum about that people beating the drum about that people should get sunlight in their eyes as should get sunlight in their eyes as should get sunlight in their eyes as close to waking as possible, that close to waking as possible, that close to waking as possible, that actually enhances or increases the peak actually enhances or increases the peak actually enhances or increases the peak level of cortisol that's experienced level of cortisol that's experienced level of cortisol that's experienced early in the day. early in the day. early in the day. And that sets in motion a number of And that sets in motion a number of And that sets in motion a number of these ultradian cycles. So for instance, these ultradian cycles. So for instance, these ultradian cycles. So for instance, if you wake up at 7:00 a.m. and you find if you wake up at 7:00 a.m. and you find if you wake up at 7:00 a.m. and you find that for the first hour after waking you that for the first hour after waking you that for the first hour after waking you tend to be a little bit groggy tend to be a little bit groggy tend to be a little bit groggy or you happen to be groggy on a given or you happen to be groggy on a given or you happen to be groggy on a given day, but then you notice that your day, but then you notice that your day, but then you notice that your attention and alertness starts to peak attention and alertness starts to peak attention and alertness starts to peak somewhere around 9:30 a.m. or 10:00 somewhere around 9:30 a.m. or 10:00 somewhere around 9:30 a.m. or 10:00 a.m., you can be pretty sure that first you can be pretty sure that first you can be pretty sure that first ultradian cycle for learning is going to ultradian cycle for learning is going to ultradian cycle for learning is going to be optimal to start at about 9:30 or 10:00 optimal to start at about 9:30 or 10:00 optimal to start at about 9:30 or 10:00 a.m. How can I say about if it's indeed a.m. How can I say about if it's indeed a.m. How can I say about if it's indeed a 90-minute cycle? Well, this is really a 90-minute cycle? Well, this is really a 90-minute cycle? Well, this is really where the underlying neurobiology and where the underlying neurobiology and where the underlying neurobiology and these ultradian cycles converge to give these ultradian cycles converge to give these ultradian cycles converge to give you a specific protocol. The changes in you a specific protocol. The changes in you a specific protocol. The changes in cortisol that occur throughout the day cortisol that occur throughout the day cortisol that occur throughout the day involve, yes, a big peak early in the involve, yes, a big peak early in the involve, yes, a big peak early in the day if you're getting your sunlight and day if you're getting your sunlight and day if you're getting your sunlight and caffeine and maybe even some exercise caffeine and maybe even some exercise caffeine and maybe even some exercise early in the day. early in the day. early in the day. But, typically that peak comes early and But, typically that peak comes early and But, typically that peak comes early and then across the day the baseline jitters then across the day the baseline jitters then across the day the baseline jitters a little bit. It comes down, but it a little bit. It comes down, but it a little bit. It comes down, but it bounces around a little bit. It's not a bounces around a little bit. It's not a bounces around a little bit. It's not a flat line if we were to measure your flat line if we were to measure your flat line if we were to measure your glucocorticoid levels. glucocorticoid levels. glucocorticoid levels. Each one of those little bumps Each one of those little bumps Each one of those little bumps corresponds to a shift in these corresponds to a shift in these corresponds to a shift in these ultradian cycles. So, if you find that ultradian cycles. So, if you find that ultradian cycles. So, if you find that you are most alert at 9:30 or starting you are most alert at 9:30 or starting you are most alert at 9:30 or starting to become alert at 9:30 and then to become alert at 9:30 and then to become alert at 9:30 and then typically you have a peak of focus and typically you have a peak of focus and typically you have a peak of focus and concentration around 10:00 a.m. That is concentration around 10:00 a.m. That is concentration around 10:00 a.m. That is really valuable to know because the way really valuable to know because the way really valuable to know because the way that the molecules that control that the molecules that control that the molecules that control neuroplasticity, that is the changes in neuroplasticity, that is the changes in neuroplasticity, that is the changes in neurons and other cell types in the neurons and other cell types in the neurons and other cell types in the brain that allow your nervous system to brain that allow your nervous system to brain that allow your nervous system to learn and literally for new connections learn and literally for new connections learn and literally for new connections to form between neurons, which is to form between neurons, which is to form between neurons, which is basically the basis of learning, those basically the basis of learning, those basically the basis of learning, those fluctuate according to these ultradian fluctuate according to these ultradian fluctuate according to these ultradian cycles. What does this mean? This means cycles. What does this mean? This means cycles. What does this mean? This means if your peak in alertness and focus and if your peak in alertness and focus and if your peak in alertness and focus and energy, could even be experienced as energy, could even be experienced as energy, could even be experienced as physical energy, occurs at about 9:30 physical energy, occurs at about 9:30 physical energy, occurs at about 9:30 a.m., I would start your first ultradian a.m., I would start your first ultradian a.m., I would start your first ultradian cycle for learning somewhere around cycle for learning somewhere around cycle for learning somewhere around there. Certainly 9:30 a.m. would be there. Certainly 9:30 a.m. would be there. Certainly 9:30 a.m. would be ideal, but 10:00 a.m. would be fine as ideal, but 10:00 a.m. would be fine as ideal, but 10:00 a.m. would be fine as well. And then you have about 1 hour to well. And then you have about 1 hour to well. And then you have about 1 hour to get the maximum amount of learning in get the maximum amount of learning in get the maximum amount of learning in even within that ultradian cycle. This even within that ultradian cycle. This even within that ultradian cycle. This is where there's a lot of confusion out is where there's a lot of confusion out is where there's a lot of confusion out there. People think, "Oh, ultradian there. People think, "Oh, ultradian there. People think, "Oh, ultradian cycles are 90 minutes. Therefore, we cycles are 90 minutes. Therefore, we cycles are 90 minutes. Therefore, we should be in our peak level of focus should be in our peak level of focus should be in our peak level of focus throughout that 90 minutes." In reality, throughout that 90 minutes." In reality, throughout that 90 minutes." In reality, most people take about 10 or 15 minutes most people take about 10 or 15 minutes most people take about 10 or 15 minutes to break into a really deep trench of to break into a really deep trench of to break into a really deep trench of focus and then periodically throughout focus and then periodically throughout focus and then periodically throughout the next hour they'll pop out of that the next hour they'll pop out of that the next hour they'll pop out of that focus. They'll have to deliberately refocus. They'll have to deliberately refocus. They'll have to deliberately refocus. This is why, if possible, you want to This is why, if possible, you want to This is why, if possible, you want to turn off Wi-Fi connections and put your turn off Wi-Fi connections and put your turn off Wi-Fi connections and put your phone in the other room or turn it off. phone in the other room or turn it off. phone in the other room or turn it off. If you do need your phone or Wi-Fi, just If you do need your phone or Wi-Fi, just If you do need your phone or Wi-Fi, just be aware of how distracting those things be aware of how distracting those things be aware of how distracting those things can be to getting into a deep trench of can be to getting into a deep trench of can be to getting into a deep trench of focus. But, the point is this, focus. But, the point is this, focus. But, the point is this, these 90-minute cycles occur these 90-minute cycles occur these 90-minute cycles occur periodically throughout the day, but periodically throughout the day, but periodically throughout the day, but there is going to be one period early in there is going to be one period early in there is going to be one period early in the day, and here I'm referring to this the day, and here I'm referring to this the day, and here I'm referring to this period as starting at about 9:30 or period as starting at about 9:30 or period as starting at about 9:30 or 10:00 a.m., and then likely another one 10:00 a.m., and then likely another one 10:00 a.m., and then likely another one in the mid to late afternoon that are in the mid to late afternoon that are in the mid to late afternoon that are going to be ideal for focused learning. going to be ideal for focused learning. going to be ideal for focused learning. And that focused learning about And that focused learning about And that focused learning about ideally have you set your clock, a ideally have you set your clock, a ideally have you set your clock, a stopwatch, or something to measure 90 stopwatch, or something to measure 90 stopwatch, or something to measure 90 minutes, but do assume that there's minutes, but do assume that there's minutes, but do assume that there's going to be some jitter at the front end going to be some jitter at the front end going to be some jitter at the front end where you're not going to be able to where you're not going to be able to where you're not going to be able to focus as deeply as you would like. Then focus as deeply as you would like. Then focus as deeply as you would like. Then you'll get about an hour of deep focus, you'll get about an hour of deep focus, you'll get about an hour of deep focus, and then you really start to transition and then you really start to transition and then you really start to transition out of these ultradian cycles. out of these ultradian cycles. out of these ultradian cycles. How do you know when the afternoon How do you know when the afternoon How do you know when the afternoon ultradian cycle occurs? Well, just as in ultradian cycle occurs? Well, just as in ultradian cycle occurs? Well, just as in the morning, it occurs because there's a the morning, it occurs because there's a the morning, it occurs because there's a brief but significant increase in the brief but significant increase in the brief but significant increase in the glucocorticoid system in the mid to late glucocorticoid system in the mid to late glucocorticoid system in the mid to late afternoon. I wish I could tell you it's going to be I wish I could tell you it's going to be I wish I could tell you it's going to be 2:00 p.m. or it's going to be um you 2:00 p.m. or it's going to be um you 2:00 p.m. or it's going to be um you know, it's going to be 3:00 p.m. That's know, it's going to be 3:00 p.m. That's know, it's going to be 3:00 p.m. That's really going to depend on the really going to depend on the really going to depend on the individual, when you ingest caffeine, individual, when you ingest caffeine, individual, when you ingest caffeine, some of the other demands of your day. some of the other demands of your day. some of the other demands of your day. But, you can learn to recognize when But, you can learn to recognize when But, you can learn to recognize when these two periods for optimized learning these two periods for optimized learning these two periods for optimized learning will occur, and here are the key will occur, and here are the key will occur, and here are the key principles. Watch for a day or two, principles. Watch for a day or two, principles. Watch for a day or two, meaning pay attention to when you have meaning pay attention to when you have meaning pay attention to when you have your peak levels of physical and mental your peak levels of physical and mental your peak levels of physical and mental energy in the morning. That is between energy in the morning. That is between energy in the morning. That is between waking and noon, and then again between waking and noon, and then again between waking and noon, and then again between noon and about 6:00 or 7:00 p.m. noon and about 6:00 or 7:00 p.m. noon and about 6:00 or 7:00 p.m. Although, I'm sure that there are some Although, I'm sure that there are some Although, I'm sure that there are some late-shifted folks that will experience late-shifted folks that will experience late-shifted folks that will experience their peak in focus somewhere around their peak in focus somewhere around their peak in focus somewhere around 6:00 or 7:00 p.m., especially if they're 6:00 or 7:00 p.m., especially if they're 6:00 or 7:00 p.m., especially if they're waking up around 10:00 or 11:00 a.m. as waking up around 10:00 or 11:00 a.m. as waking up around 10:00 or 11:00 a.m. as I know some people out there are. I know some people out there are. I know some people out there are. Once you know where those peaks in focus Once you know where those peaks in focus Once you know where those peaks in focus occur on your schedule, occur on your schedule, occur on your schedule, set a stopwatch for one ultradian cycle set a stopwatch for one ultradian cycle set a stopwatch for one ultradian cycle in the early part of the day. In this in the early part of the day. In this in the early part of the day. In this example, I was saying 9:30, but if you example, I was saying 9:30, but if you example, I was saying 9:30, but if you can't hop on it until 10:00, that's can't hop on it until 10:00, that's can't hop on it until 10:00, that's fine. Set it for 90 minutes. consider fine. Set it for 90 minutes. consider fine. Set it for 90 minutes. consider that block wholly, meaning rule out all that block wholly, meaning rule out all that block wholly, meaning rule out all other distractions, but assume that other distractions, but assume that other distractions, but assume that within that 90-minute block you are only within that 90-minute block you are only within that 90-minute block you are only going to be able to focus intensely for going to be able to focus intensely for going to be able to focus intensely for about 1 hour. about 1 hour. about 1 hour. And just know that the molecules that And just know that the molecules that And just know that the molecules that control neuroplasticity, and these control neuroplasticity, and these control neuroplasticity, and these things have names, and yes, things have names, and yes, things have names, and yes, brain-derived neurotrophic factor BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor BDNF is sort of the most famous of those, but is sort of the most famous of those, but is sort of the most famous of those, but there are others as well. In fact, the there are others as well. In fact, the there are others as well. In fact, the very receptors that control synaptic very receptors that control synaptic very receptors that control synaptic strength, the connections between strength, the connections between strength, the connections between neurons, some of the neurotransmitters neurons, some of the neurotransmitters neurons, some of the neurotransmitters and neuromodulators involved in synaptic and neuromodulators involved in synaptic and neuromodulators involved in synaptic plasticity, they undergo regulation by plasticity, they undergo regulation by plasticity, they undergo regulation by these ultradian these ultradian these ultradian or changes in glucocorticoid. And then or changes in glucocorticoid. And then or changes in glucocorticoid. And then try and capture a second ultradian try and capture a second ultradian try and capture a second ultradian learning block in the afternoon. learning block in the afternoon. learning block in the afternoon. Again, just knowing that the first 10 or Again, just knowing that the first 10 or Again, just knowing that the first 10 or 15 minutes, consider it mental warm-up, 15 minutes, consider it mental warm-up, 15 minutes, consider it mental warm-up, and then you get about an hour. It's not and then you get about an hour. It's not and then you get about an hour. It's not exactly 60 minutes, but about an hour to exactly 60 minutes, but about an hour to exactly 60 minutes, but about an hour to maximize learning. So, if you're trying maximize learning. So, if you're trying maximize learning. So, if you're trying to learn something, really capture it to learn something, really capture it to learn something, really capture it during that phase as well. Now, is there during that phase as well. Now, is there during that phase as well. Now, is there a third opportunity or a fourth a third opportunity or a fourth a third opportunity or a fourth opportunity? This relates to Jackson's opportunity? This relates to Jackson's opportunity? This relates to Jackson's question directly, and the short answer question directly, and the short answer question directly, and the short answer is not really. You know, unless you're is not really. You know, unless you're is not really. You know, unless you're somebody who requires very little sleep somebody who requires very little sleep somebody who requires very little sleep within the 12 or 16 hours that one tends within the 12 or 16 hours that one tends within the 12 or 16 hours that one tends to be awake during the day, or 18 hours to be awake during the day, or 18 hours to be awake during the day, or 18 hours that one tends to be awake, there really that one tends to be awake, there really that one tends to be awake, there really only two of these major peaks in the only two of these major peaks in the only two of these major peaks in the glucocorticoid system that trigger the glucocorticoid system that trigger the glucocorticoid system that trigger the onset of these circadian cycles. Again, onset of these circadian cycles. Again, onset of these circadian cycles. Again, there's sort of a there's sort of a there's sort of a ramping up and a ramping down of ramping up and a ramping down of ramping up and a ramping down of glucocorticoids throughout the day, but glucocorticoids throughout the day, but glucocorticoids throughout the day, but the real key here is to learn when you the real key here is to learn when you the real key here is to learn when you tend to be most focused based on your tend to be most focused based on your tend to be most focused based on your regular sleep-wake cycle, caffeine regular sleep-wake cycle, caffeine regular sleep-wake cycle, caffeine intake, exercise, et cetera. And again, intake, exercise, et cetera. And again, intake, exercise, et cetera. And again, that's going to vary from person to that's going to vary from person to that's going to vary from person to person, and you really only have two person, and you really only have two person, and you really only have two opportunities or two ultradian cycles to opportunities or two ultradian cycles to opportunities or two ultradian cycles to capture in order to get the maximum capture in order to get the maximum capture in order to get the maximum focus challenging work done, aka focus challenging work done, aka focus challenging work done, aka learning. So, for somebody that wants to learning. So, for somebody that wants to learning. So, for somebody that wants to learn an immense amount of material, or learn an immense amount of material, or learn an immense amount of material, or who has the opportunity to capture who has the opportunity to capture who has the opportunity to capture another ultradian cycle, another ultradian cycle, another ultradian cycle, the other time where that tends to occur the other time where that tends to occur the other time where that tends to occur is also early day. So, some people by is also early day. So, some people by is also early day. So, some people by waking up early and using stimulants waking up early and using stimulants waking up early and using stimulants like caffeine and hydration or some like caffeine and hydration or some like caffeine and hydration or some brief high intensity exercise can brief high intensity exercise can brief high intensity exercise can trigger that cortisol pulse to shift a trigger that cortisol pulse to shift a trigger that cortisol pulse to shift a little bit earlier so that they can little bit earlier so that they can little bit earlier so that they can capture a morning work block that occurs capture a morning work block that occurs capture a morning work block that occurs somewhere let's say between 6:00 and somewhere let's say between 6:00 and somewhere let's say between 6:00 and 7:30 a.m. So let's think about our 7:30 a.m. So let's think about our 7:30 a.m. So let's think about our typical person at least in my example typical person at least in my example typical person at least in my example that's waking up around 7:00 a.m. And that's waking up around 7:00 a.m. And that's waking up around 7:00 a.m. And then I said has their first ultradian then I said has their first ultradian then I said has their first ultradian work cycle really flip on work cycle really flip on work cycle really flip on because that bump in cortisol around because that bump in cortisol around because that bump in cortisol around 9:30 or 10:00 a.m. If that person were 9:30 or 10:00 a.m. If that person were 9:30 or 10:00 a.m. If that person were say to set their alarm clock for 5:30 say to set their alarm clock for 5:30 say to set their alarm clock for 5:30 a.m. then get up then get up then get up get some artificial light if the sun get some artificial light if the sun get some artificial light if the sun isn't out you know turn on brighter isn't out you know turn on brighter isn't out you know turn on brighter artificial lights or if the sun happens artificial lights or if the sun happens artificial lights or if the sun happens to be up that time of year get some to be up that time of year get some to be up that time of year get some sunlight in your eyes sunlight in your eyes sunlight in your eyes but irrespective of sunlight were to get a irrespective of sunlight were to get a irrespective of sunlight were to get a little bit of brief high intensity little bit of brief high intensity little bit of brief high intensity exercise maybe 10 or 15 minutes of exercise maybe 10 or 15 minutes of exercise maybe 10 or 15 minutes of skipping rope or even just jumping jacks skipping rope or even just jumping jacks skipping rope or even just jumping jacks or go out for a brief jog or go out for a brief jog or go out for a brief jog what happens then is the cortisol pulse what happens then is the cortisol pulse what happens then is the cortisol pulse starts to shift earlier and so the next starts to shift earlier and so the next starts to shift earlier and so the next day and the following day and so on and day and the following day and so on and day and the following day and so on and so forth provided they're still doing so forth provided they're still doing so forth provided they're still doing that exercise first thing and ideally that exercise first thing and ideally that exercise first thing and ideally getting some light in their eyes as well getting some light in their eyes as well getting some light in their eyes as well then they have an opportunity to well then they have an opportunity to well then they have an opportunity to capture an increase in cortisol that is capture an increase in cortisol that is capture an increase in cortisol that is now shifted from about 7:00 a.m. to now shifted from about 7:00 a.m. to now shifted from about 7:00 a.m. to about 8:30 a.m. So they can capture an about 8:30 a.m. So they can capture an about 8:30 a.m. So they can capture an hour of work there and then they will hour of work there and then they will hour of work there and then they will also still be within that rising phase also still be within that rising phase also still be within that rising phase of cortisol in the 9:30 to 10:00 a.m. of cortisol in the 9:30 to 10:00 a.m. of cortisol in the 9:30 to 10:00 a.m. block that lasts until about block that lasts until about block that lasts until about you know 11:30 or so they might have you know 11:30 or so they might have you know 11:30 or so they might have lunch perhaps after lunch they do a lunch perhaps after lunch they do a lunch perhaps after lunch they do a non-sleep deep rest maybe they don't non-sleep deep rest maybe they don't non-sleep deep rest maybe they don't maybe you're a napper maybe you're not maybe you're a napper maybe you're not maybe you're a napper maybe you're not doesn't really matter and then in the doesn't really matter and then in the doesn't really matter and then in the afternoon and I would suspect it would now be in and I would suspect it would now be in and I would suspect it would now be in the earlier afternoon sometime around the earlier afternoon sometime around the earlier afternoon sometime around 2:00 or 2:30 would be typical although 2:00 or 2:30 would be typical although 2:00 or 2:30 would be typical although again that exact time will vary again that exact time will vary again that exact time will vary person to person then they would want to person to person then they would want to person to person then they would want to schedule another 90-minute work block so schedule another 90-minute work block so schedule another 90-minute work block so that's how you can capture three now you that's how you can capture three now you that's how you can capture three now you can start to see also why capturing four can start to see also why capturing four can start to see also why capturing four ultradian work blocks would be ultradian work blocks would be ultradian work blocks would be exceedingly rare it's just not typical exceedingly rare it's just not typical exceedingly rare it's just not typical that people are awake for that much of that people are awake for that much of that people are awake for that much of the day. You have to sleep at some the day. You have to sleep at some the day. You have to sleep at some point. And I should mention that if point. And I should mention that if point. And I should mention that if you're going to force yourself to wake you're going to force yourself to wake you're going to force yourself to wake up earlier on a consistent basis, you up earlier on a consistent basis, you up earlier on a consistent basis, you probably should be trying to get to probably should be trying to get to probably should be trying to get to sleep a little bit earlier as well sleep a little bit earlier as well sleep a little bit earlier as well because it's not just the quality, but because it's not just the quality, but because it's not just the quality, but the duration of quality sleep that the duration of quality sleep that the duration of quality sleep that really matters for learning. And really matters for learning. And really matters for learning. And I should also remind everybody that the I should also remind everybody that the I should also remind everybody that the actual rewiring of neurons does not actual rewiring of neurons does not actual rewiring of neurons does not occur during any focused work block. It occur during any focused work block. It occur during any focused work block. It actually occurs during deep sleep the actually occurs during deep sleep the actually occurs during deep sleep the following night and the following night following night and the following night following night and the following night and during non-sleep deep rest. This is and during non-sleep deep rest. This is and during non-sleep deep rest. This is why non-sleep deep rest can accelerate why non-sleep deep rest can accelerate why non-sleep deep rest can accelerate learning because it's in states of rest learning because it's in states of rest learning because it's in states of rest that the actual connections between that the actual connections between that the actual connections between neurons strengthen or weaken or new neurons strengthen or weaken or new neurons strengthen or weaken or new neurons are added in a way that allows neurons are added in a way that allows neurons are added in a way that allows for what we call learning. Okay, so one for what we call learning. Okay, so one for what we call learning. Okay, so one or two ultradian work blocks or two ultradian work blocks or two ultradian work blocks per day is typical, three would be per day is typical, three would be per day is typical, three would be really exceptional, and four would be really exceptional, and four would be really exceptional, and four would be extraordinary. Look for them. Look for them. Look for them. Meaning look to see when you are feeling Meaning look to see when you are feeling Meaning look to see when you are feeling most focused and alert typically in the most focused and alert typically in the most focused and alert typically in the period before waking at noon and period before waking at noon and period before waking at noon and typically in the period between noon and typically in the period between noon and typically in the period between noon and bedtime given your standard intake of bedtime given your standard intake of bedtime given your standard intake of caffeine and exercise and other life caffeine and exercise and other life caffeine and exercise and other life events. Please also remember that even though Please also remember that even though Please also remember that even though it's an ultradian 90-minute work block, it's an ultradian 90-minute work block, it's an ultradian 90-minute work block, the neuroplasticity is going to be best the neuroplasticity is going to be best the neuroplasticity is going to be best triggered within a 60-minute portion of triggered within a 60-minute portion of triggered within a 60-minute portion of that. And there's no way to know exactly that. And there's no way to know exactly that. And there's no way to know exactly when that 60 minutes begins and ends when that 60 minutes begins and ends when that 60 minutes begins and ends until you actually begin the work block. until you actually begin the work block. until you actually begin the work block. So this is really designed to be So this is really designed to be So this is really designed to be empirical. You need to actually go do empirical. You need to actually go do empirical. You need to actually go do this. What you'll notice again is that this. What you'll notice again is that this. What you'll notice again is that it's hard to focus at first and you'll it's hard to focus at first and you'll it's hard to focus at first and you'll drop into a state of focus. You may get drop into a state of focus. You may get drop into a state of focus. You may get distracted and that's perfectly normal. distracted and that's perfectly normal. distracted and that's perfectly normal. You refocus, get back into triggering You refocus, get back into triggering You refocus, get back into triggering learning. That's really what you're learning. That's really what you're learning. That's really what you're doing. You're triggering learning and doing. You're triggering learning and doing. You're triggering learning and then there'll be some taper and then there'll be some taper and then there'll be some taper and then you'll be out of the ultradian work you'll be out of the ultradian work you'll be out of the ultradian work block. Now, it's also key to understand block. Now, it's also key to understand block. Now, it's also key to understand that myself and other people should not that myself and other people should not that myself and other people should not expect that they're only working during expect that they're only working during expect that they're only working during these 90-minute work blocks. It's just these 90-minute work blocks. It's just these 90-minute work blocks. It's just that a lot of the sorts of demands of that a lot of the sorts of demands of that a lot of the sorts of demands of our day, including, you know, cooking our day, including, you know, cooking our day, including, you know, cooking and shopping for groceries, and email, and shopping for groceries, and email, and shopping for groceries, and email, and text messaging, and social media. A lot text messaging, and social media. A lot text messaging, and social media. A lot of those things don't require intense of those things don't require intense of those things don't require intense focus of the sort that I believe Jackson focus of the sort that I believe Jackson focus of the sort that I believe Jackson is asking about maximizing and that I'm is asking about maximizing and that I'm is asking about maximizing and that I'm referring to when I talk about these referring to when I talk about these referring to when I talk about these ultradian work blocks. And then, as a ultradian work blocks. And then, as a ultradian work blocks. And then, as a final point, I've been talking about final point, I've been talking about final point, I've been talking about these ultradian work blocks and focus, these ultradian work blocks and focus, these ultradian work blocks and focus, etc. in a context that brings to mind ideas in a context that brings to mind ideas in a context that brings to mind ideas about cognitive work. So, learning a about cognitive work. So, learning a about cognitive work. So, learning a language, learning math, writing or language, learning math, writing or language, learning math, writing or creating, doing something related to creating, doing something related to creating, doing something related to music, etc. But, these 90-minute music, etc. But, these 90-minute music, etc. But, these 90-minute ultradian work blocks also directly ultradian work blocks also directly ultradian work blocks also directly relate to physical skill learning as relate to physical skill learning as relate to physical skill learning as well, and to physical exercise as well. well, and to physical exercise as well. well, and to physical exercise as well. So, if you are somebody who's really So, if you are somebody who's really So, if you are somebody who's really interested in improving your fitness, interested in improving your fitness, interested in improving your fitness, and your fitness requires a lot of and your fitness requires a lot of and your fitness requires a lot of focused attention, focused attention, focused attention, so, for instance, when I go out for a so, for instance, when I go out for a so, for instance, when I go out for a long run on Sundays, which is part of my long run on Sundays, which is part of my long run on Sundays, which is part of my fitness routine, fitness routine, fitness routine, I'm deliberately not thinking about I'm deliberately not thinking about I'm deliberately not thinking about much. I'm just trying to cruise along. I much. I'm just trying to cruise along. I much. I'm just trying to cruise along. I might focus a little bit on my pace and might focus a little bit on my pace and might focus a little bit on my pace and stride, maybe an audiobook I'm listening stride, maybe an audiobook I'm listening stride, maybe an audiobook I'm listening to, or a podcast. But, typically, I'm to, or a podcast. But, typically, I'm to, or a podcast. But, typically, I'm just kind of cruising along. It's it's just kind of cruising along. It's it's just kind of cruising along. It's it's low cognitive demand work. These low cognitive demand work. These low cognitive demand work. These ultradian work blocks can really be ultradian work blocks can really be ultradian work blocks can really be maximized for pure cognitive work, so, maximized for pure cognitive work, so, maximized for pure cognitive work, so, the kind of book-type work, etc., music, the kind of book-type work, etc., music, the kind of book-type work, etc., music, etc. Or, they can also be leveraged etc. Or, they can also be leveraged etc. Or, they can also be leveraged toward skill learning. So, if you're toward skill learning. So, if you're toward skill learning. So, if you're trying to learn how to dance, or how to trying to learn how to dance, or how to trying to learn how to dance, or how to perform a particular athletic move, or perform a particular athletic move, or perform a particular athletic move, or you're trying to get better at some you're trying to get better at some you're trying to get better at some skill that requires a lot of focus and skill that requires a lot of focus and skill that requires a lot of focus and alignment of alignment of alignment of muscular movement and cognitive demands, muscular movement and cognitive demands, muscular movement and cognitive demands, etc., well, then, these are also going etc., well, then, these are also going etc., well, then, these are also going to be ideal for triggering to be ideal for triggering to be ideal for triggering neuroplasticity to get better in the neuroplasticity to get better in the neuroplasticity to get better in the motor skill-based domain, as it's motor skill-based domain, as it's motor skill-based domain, as it's called. etc. If you'd like to learn more about etc. If you'd like to learn more about etc. If you'd like to learn more about ultradian shifts in neuroplasticity and ultradian shifts in neuroplasticity and ultradian shifts in neuroplasticity and ultradian work bouts, I will certainly ultradian work bouts, I will certainly ultradian work bouts, I will certainly do more on this in the standard Huberman do more on this in the standard Huberman do more on this in the standard Huberman Lab podcast, but the keywords to look up Lab podcast, but the keywords to look up Lab podcast, but the keywords to look up if you want to explore this further if you want to explore this further if you want to explore this further online, it's not something that a lot of online, it's not something that a lot of online, it's not something that a lot of people know about, is called iterative people know about, is called iterative people know about, is called iterative metaplasticity. It's a vast literature metaplasticity. It's a vast literature metaplasticity. It's a vast literature and one that I'd be happy to teach you and one that I'd be happy to teach you and one that I'd be happy to teach you in a standard podcast episode, but in a standard podcast episode, but in a standard podcast episode, but in the interest of getting to more the interest of getting to more the interest of getting to more questions from you all, uh hopefully the questions from you all, uh hopefully the questions from you all, uh hopefully the answer I've given you now has been answer I've given you now has been answer I've given you now has been complete enough, yet clear enough, and complete enough, yet clear enough, and complete enough, yet clear enough, and yet succinct enough that you can start yet succinct enough that you can start yet succinct enough that you can start to leverage these really powerful to leverage these really powerful to leverage these really powerful aspects of iterative metaplasticity and aspects of iterative metaplasticity and aspects of iterative metaplasticity and ultradian rhythms for learning. And I'd ultradian rhythms for learning. And I'd ultradian rhythms for learning. And I'd just like to point out that these just like to point out that these just like to point out that these opportunities for opportunities for opportunities for focused learning that occur in these focused learning that occur in these focused learning that occur in these 90-minute ultradian cycles are really 90-minute ultradian cycles are really 90-minute ultradian cycles are really terrific opportunities. They are offered terrific opportunities. They are offered terrific opportunities. They are offered to you at least twice every day, and you to you at least twice every day, and you to you at least twice every day, and you can really learn to detect when they can really learn to detect when they can really learn to detect when they occur and when they're likely to occur. occur and when they're likely to occur. occur and when they're likely to occur. You can certainly learn at other times You can certainly learn at other times You can certainly learn at other times in the 24-hour cycle, but for anyone in the 24-hour cycle, but for anyone in the 24-hour cycle, but for anyone who's tried to stay up late at night who's tried to stay up late at night who's tried to stay up late at night cramming for an exam, or for somebody cramming for an exam, or for somebody cramming for an exam, or for somebody who's tried to learn during the who's tried to learn during the who's tried to learn during the sleepiest time of their afternoon, sleepiest time of their afternoon, sleepiest time of their afternoon, we can be very familiar with the fact we can be very familiar with the fact we can be very familiar with the fact that there are times of day in which we that there are times of day in which we that there are times of day in which we are best at learning, and as I've just are best at learning, and as I've just are best at learning, and as I've just described, there are ways to capture described, there are ways to capture described, there are ways to capture those moments, and they are valuable those moments, and they are valuable those moments, and they are valuable moments. So, even though it's just about moments. So, even though it's just about moments. So, even though it's just about 3 hours per day, or really only 2 hours 3 hours per day, or really only 2 hours 3 hours per day, or really only 2 hours per day cuz of the 60-90 minute thing per day cuz of the 60-90 minute thing per day cuz of the 60-90 minute thing that I talked about a few minutes ago, that I talked about a few minutes ago, that I talked about a few minutes ago, learn to know when these occur and learn to know when these occur and learn to know when these occur and really treat them as valuable, maybe really treat them as valuable, maybe really treat them as valuable, maybe even holy in the sense that they are even holy in the sense that they are even holy in the sense that they are really the times that are offered up to really the times that are offered up to really the times that are offered up to you each day by your own biology in ways you each day by your own biology in ways you each day by your own biology in ways that will allow you to get better pretty that will allow you to get better pretty that will allow you to get better pretty much at anything. Thank you for joining much at anything. Thank you for joining much at anything. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me for the beginning of this Ask Me for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full Anything episode. To hear the full Anything episode. To hear the full episode, and to hear future episodes of episode, and to hear future episodes of episode, and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and receive transcripts of them and receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel, and premium tools not standard channel, and premium tools not standard channel, and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast. And to fund research. In particular, And to fund research. In particular, And to fund research. In particular, research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is a species which I think we all agree is a species which I think we all agree is a species that we are most interested in. And we that we are most interested in. And we that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those health, and performance. And those health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media Huberman Lab podcast and other media Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give you information to your burning you information to your burning you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So, this is a terrific way that they're So, this is a terrific way that they're So, this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further support research for science and support research for science and support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts some premium content such as transcripts some premium content such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and of the AMAs and various transcripts and of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast protocols of Huberman Lab podcast protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, episodes not found elsewhere. And again, episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental you'll be supporting research for mental you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the performance. You can sign up for the performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to premium channel by going to premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.