Everybody should get an AMH test. I Everybody should get an AMH test. I Everybody should get an AMH test. I think it's a very important marker. If think it's a very important marker. If think it's a very important marker. If you are listening to this and you want you are listening to this and you want you are listening to this and you want kids one day, ask your doctor for this kids one day, ask your doctor for this kids one day, ask your doctor for this test. It is not a test of egg quality. test. It is not a test of egg quality. test. It is not a test of egg quality. And we talked about what egg quality is, And we talked about what egg quality is, And we talked about what egg quality is, right? Genetics and egg competency. right? Genetics and egg competency. right? Genetics and egg competency. But it is a check of how many eggs you But it is a check of how many eggs you But it is a check of how many eggs you have and that knowledge can be really have and that knowledge can be really have and that knowledge can be really impactful for how you view your future impactful for how you view your future impactful for how you view your future and your plan. and your plan. and your plan. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science [music] and where we discuss science [music] and where we discuss science [music] and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Natalie Crawford. Dr. today is Dr. Natalie Crawford. Dr. today is Dr. Natalie Crawford. Dr. Natalie Crawford is a double board Natalie Crawford is a double board Natalie Crawford is a double board certified physician specializing in certified physician specializing in certified physician specializing in obstetrics and gynecology, fertility, obstetrics and gynecology, fertility, obstetrics and gynecology, fertility, and reproductive health. Today we and reproductive health. Today we and reproductive health. Today we discuss the actionable steps that all discuss the actionable steps that all discuss the actionable steps that all women can take to improve their women can take to improve their women can take to improve their reproductive and hormone health both to reproductive and hormone health both to reproductive and hormone health both to enhance probability of successful enhance probability of successful enhance probability of successful pregnancy, but also because fertility pregnancy, but also because fertility pregnancy, but also because fertility and hormone health are strong correlates and hormone health are strong correlates and hormone health are strong correlates of general health and longevity. Dr. of general health and longevity. Dr. of general health and longevity. Dr. Crawford shares what all women, Crawford shares what all women, Crawford shares what all women, regardless of age or reproductive goals, regardless of age or reproductive goals, regardless of age or reproductive goals, can do to enhance their health using can do to enhance their health using can do to enhance their health using lifestyle, nutrition, supplementation, lifestyle, nutrition, supplementation, lifestyle, nutrition, supplementation, and prescription medical tools that she and prescription medical tools that she and prescription medical tools that she indeed uses in her practice. We also indeed uses in her practice. We also indeed uses in her practice. We also have a very honest discussion about have a very honest discussion about have a very honest discussion about biological versus chronological age and biological versus chronological age and biological versus chronological age and fertility. Why age is not just a number, fertility. Why age is not just a number, fertility. Why age is not just a number, but also why it is that many women do but also why it is that many women do but also why it is that many women do successfully conceive in their 40s. Of successfully conceive in their 40s. Of successfully conceive in their 40s. Of course, there's a lot of information course, there's a lot of information course, there's a lot of information online nowadays about women's hormones, online nowadays about women's hormones, online nowadays about women's hormones, fertility, and health. Today, thanks to fertility, and health. Today, thanks to fertility, and health. Today, thanks to Dr. Crawford, you'll learn what is known Dr. Crawford, you'll learn what is known Dr. Crawford, you'll learn what is known and documented and what she has herself and documented and what she has herself and documented and what she has herself consistently observed clinically in her consistently observed clinically in her consistently observed clinically in her practice about women's health and practice about women's health and practice about women's health and fertility. Few, if any, people have Dr. Crawford's Few, if any, people have Dr. Crawford's Few, if any, people have Dr. Crawford's training, clinical acumen, understanding training, clinical acumen, understanding training, clinical acumen, understanding of the new research, and incredible of the new research, and incredible of the new research, and incredible ability to communicate the well and ability to communicate the well and ability to communicate the well and lesser-known actionable steps for lesser-known actionable steps for lesser-known actionable steps for improving female health. Dr. Crawford improving female health. Dr. Crawford improving female health. Dr. Crawford also has a new book out entitled The also has a new book out entitled The also has a new book out entitled The Fertility Formula: Take Control of Your Fertility Formula: Take Control of Your Fertility Formula: Take Control of Your Reproductive Future, which again focuses Reproductive Future, which again focuses Reproductive Future, which again focuses on reproductive health, but also hormone on reproductive health, but also hormone on reproductive health, but also hormone health and how both of those things health and how both of those things health and how both of those things impact female health in the short and impact female health in the short and impact female health in the short and long term. Before we begin, I'd like to long term. Before we begin, I'd like to long term. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, a part of my Stanford. It is, however, a part of my Stanford. It is, however, a part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. And now for my discussion with Dr. And now for my discussion with Dr. Natalie Crawford. Dr. Natalie Crawford, Natalie Crawford. Dr. Natalie Crawford, Natalie Crawford. Dr. Natalie Crawford, welcome back. welcome back. welcome back. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me. I'm &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me. I'm &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me. I'm thrilled to be here. And congratulations thrilled to be here. And congratulations thrilled to be here. And congratulations on your new book, The Fertility Formula. on your new book, The Fertility Formula. on your new book, The Fertility Formula. It's no small feat to complete a book It's no small feat to complete a book It's no small feat to complete a book and it's and it's especially a big feat and it's and it's especially a big feat and it's and it's especially a big feat to complete a book that offers people so to complete a book that offers people so to complete a book that offers people so much advice, not just people who want to much advice, not just people who want to much advice, not just people who want to get pregnant, get pregnant, get pregnant, but also looking at things through the but also looking at things through the but also looking at things through the lens of fertility as an important health lens of fertility as an important health lens of fertility as an important health metric. Yes. Thank you so much. You know metric. Yes. Thank you so much. You know metric. Yes. Thank you so much. You know what goes into writing a book and it's what goes into writing a book and it's what goes into writing a book and it's always been this aspirational goal of always been this aspirational goal of always been this aspirational goal of mine and after educating and talking mine and after educating and talking mine and after educating and talking about fertility with patients and people about fertility with patients and people about fertility with patients and people online, it's been something I've wanted online, it's been something I've wanted online, it's been something I've wanted to do, but I will say it is a much to do, but I will say it is a much to do, but I will say it is a much bigger feat to go through it, to work bigger feat to go through it, to work bigger feat to go through it, to work with editors, to try to refine with editors, to try to refine with editors, to try to refine within your word count. I was, you know, within your word count. I was, you know, within your word count. I was, you know, I was 20,000 words over and try to bring I was 20,000 words over and try to bring I was 20,000 words over and try to bring it back in. So, thank you for having me it back in. So, thank you for having me it back in. So, thank you for having me and for holding it up and reading it and for holding it up and reading it and for holding it up and reading it early and sharing your endorsement for early and sharing your endorsement for early and sharing your endorsement for it, too. That means so much. it, too. That means so much. it, too. That means so much. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm insisting, as much as one &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm insisting, as much as one &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm insisting, as much as one can insist, that various people in my can insist, that various people in my can insist, that various people in my life read this book, um, including life read this book, um, including life read this book, um, including family members and other people because, family members and other people because, family members and other people because, again, it's not just about people who again, it's not just about people who again, it's not just about people who want to have children or who already want to have children or who already want to have children or who already have children, but fertility as a way of have children, but fertility as a way of have children, but fertility as a way of kind of knowing where one is in their kind of knowing where one is in their kind of knowing where one is in their health arc and their life arc. Um, so if health arc and their life arc. Um, so if health arc and their life arc. Um, so if you don't mind, um, how should people you don't mind, um, how should people you don't mind, um, how should people think about fertility purely as think about fertility purely as think about fertility purely as uh a read-out of health? I mean, what uh a read-out of health? I mean, what uh a read-out of health? I mean, what just how do you how do you frame this just how do you how do you frame this just how do you how do you frame this for like if somebody comes to you and for like if somebody comes to you and for like if somebody comes to you and says, "Listen, they have kids or they says, "Listen, they have kids or they says, "Listen, they have kids or they don't want kids or they're not sure if don't want kids or they're not sure if don't want kids or they're not sure if they want kids, but um, they want kids, but um, they want kids, but um, why use fertility as a lens on general why use fertility as a lens on general why use fertility as a lens on general health? Yeah, fertility is a health health? Yeah, fertility is a health health? Yeah, fertility is a health marker and I love that you bring that up marker and I love that you bring that up marker and I love that you bring that up the top of the episode here because so the top of the episode here because so the top of the episode here because so often patients, women specifically, often patients, women specifically, often patients, women specifically, think fertility is only the ability to think fertility is only the ability to think fertility is only the ability to get pregnant. We really simplify it into get pregnant. We really simplify it into get pregnant. We really simplify it into this one phase of life. But if we want this one phase of life. But if we want this one phase of life. But if we want to zoom out, your fertility is a sign to zoom out, your fertility is a sign to zoom out, your fertility is a sign that you have good hormonal health, good that you have good hormonal health, good that you have good hormonal health, good cellular, good metabolic health because cellular, good metabolic health because cellular, good metabolic health because it takes so many different moving parts it takes so many different moving parts it takes so many different moving parts to ovulate, for an egg to allow a sperm to ovulate, for an egg to allow a sperm to ovulate, for an egg to allow a sperm to fertilize, to implant, to get to fertilize, to implant, to get to fertilize, to implant, to get pregnant. But also your hormonal health pregnant. But also your hormonal health pregnant. But also your hormonal health and the ovarian function is really going and the ovarian function is really going and the ovarian function is really going to impact your entire life, how you feel to impact your entire life, how you feel to impact your entire life, how you feel on a day-to-day as a woman. But if we on a day-to-day as a woman. But if we on a day-to-day as a woman. But if we want to be really specific, if you have want to be really specific, if you have want to be really specific, if you have infertility, you have increased rates of infertility, you have increased rates of infertility, you have increased rates of metabolic syndrome, cancer, heart metabolic syndrome, cancer, heart metabolic syndrome, cancer, heart attack, stroke, and dying early. So, attack, stroke, and dying early. So, attack, stroke, and dying early. So, those are extremely scary statistics and those are extremely scary statistics and those are extremely scary statistics and you know, I had my own infertility you know, I had my own infertility you know, I had my own infertility journey, so I fall into this category. journey, so I fall into this category. journey, so I fall into this category. But the reason why is not that But the reason why is not that But the reason why is not that infertility causes any of those things infertility causes any of those things infertility causes any of those things directly. It's that for most people, directly. It's that for most people, directly. It's that for most people, it's one of the first warning signs that it's one of the first warning signs that it's one of the first warning signs that something is not right in their body and something is not right in their body and something is not right in their body and that there's higher levels of chronic that there's higher levels of chronic that there's higher levels of chronic inflammation or insulin resistance that inflammation or insulin resistance that inflammation or insulin resistance that we know can impact long-term health we know can impact long-term health we know can impact long-term health outcomes. For women who are still of reproductive For women who are still of reproductive For women who are still of reproductive age, and I realize there's no strict age, and I realize there's no strict age, and I realize there's no strict cut-off, um, we can and certainly will talk about we can and certainly will talk about we can and certainly will talk about what are the measures, direct and what are the measures, direct and what are the measures, direct and indirect, of fertility that, um, can indirect, of fertility that, um, can indirect, of fertility that, um, can give them a window into their kind of give them a window into their kind of give them a window into their kind of health span risk factors, life span risk health span risk factors, life span risk health span risk factors, life span risk factors. For women that have already factors. For women that have already factors. For women that have already reached menopause or in perimenopause, reached menopause or in perimenopause, reached menopause or in perimenopause, um, how should they think about um, how should they think about um, how should they think about fertility as a health marker? Meaning, fertility as a health marker? Meaning, fertility as a health marker? Meaning, if somebody is has passed the point if somebody is has passed the point if somebody is has passed the point where they can safely, um, get pregnant, where they can safely, um, get pregnant, where they can safely, um, get pregnant, &gt;&gt; Mhm. does that mean that their periods &gt;&gt; Mhm. does that mean that their periods &gt;&gt; Mhm. does that mean that their periods are no longer informative? I imagine are no longer informative? I imagine are no longer informative? I imagine their periods features about their periods features about their periods features about their menstrual cycle are still very menstrual cycle are still very menstrual cycle are still very informative about their general health. informative about their general health. informative about their general health. As long as you're having a menstrual As long as you're having a menstrual As long as you're having a menstrual cycle, it is a sign that you're cycle, it is a sign that you're cycle, it is a sign that you're ovulating and you theoretically could ovulating and you theoretically could ovulating and you theoretically could get pregnant. So, I think it's really get pregnant. So, I think it's really get pregnant. So, I think it's really important to say that even in important to say that even in important to say that even in perimenopause, which is the transitional perimenopause, which is the transitional perimenopause, which is the transitional time between having regular, appropriate time between having regular, appropriate time between having regular, appropriate hormonal function, that reliable hormonal function, that reliable hormonal function, that reliable characteristic of the ovary responding characteristic of the ovary responding characteristic of the ovary responding to the brain, this is the transition to the brain, this is the transition to the brain, this is the transition time as you're starting to get to a time as you're starting to get to a time as you're starting to get to a lower egg count that you will eventually lower egg count that you will eventually lower egg count that you will eventually start to see some cycle changes, but you start to see some cycle changes, but you start to see some cycle changes, but you also have a lot of hormone dysfunction. also have a lot of hormone dysfunction. also have a lot of hormone dysfunction. But you can still get pregnant and in But you can still get pregnant and in But you can still get pregnant and in fact, I see a fair amount of patients fact, I see a fair amount of patients fact, I see a fair amount of patients who said, who said, who said, "I thought I was past that stage of my "I thought I was past that stage of my "I thought I was past that stage of my life based on my age." life based on my age." life based on my age." But if you're still having periods, it's But if you're still having periods, it's But if you're still having periods, it's a really important window into your a really important window into your a really important window into your hormonal health. It can tell you a lot hormonal health. It can tell you a lot hormonal health. It can tell you a lot about your body, especially if you know about your body, especially if you know about your body, especially if you know when you ovulate and we can look at the when you ovulate and we can look at the when you ovulate and we can look at the distinct phases of the cycle, the distinct phases of the cycle, the distinct phases of the cycle, the follicular phase and the luteal phase. follicular phase and the luteal phase. follicular phase and the luteal phase. When we're a little bit past this, When we're a little bit past this, When we're a little bit past this, menopause by definition, which I hate, menopause by definition, which I hate, menopause by definition, which I hate, is 12 months without a period. So, is 12 months without a period. So, is 12 months without a period. So, menopause is one single day in time. menopause is one single day in time. menopause is one single day in time. Really, it means you've been in ovarian Really, it means you've been in ovarian Really, it means you've been in ovarian failure for 12 months before you'll failure for 12 months before you'll failure for 12 months before you'll magically get this diagnosis. But magically get this diagnosis. But magically get this diagnosis. But menopause at its purest is ovarian menopause at its purest is ovarian menopause at its purest is ovarian failure. The ovaries no longer have the failure. The ovaries no longer have the failure. The ovaries no longer have the capability to respond to the brain capability to respond to the brain capability to respond to the brain signals. You're not going to make signals. You're not going to make signals. You're not going to make estrogen or progesterone anymore. At estrogen or progesterone anymore. At estrogen or progesterone anymore. At that time, a woman's metabolic health that time, a woman's metabolic health that time, a woman's metabolic health completely changes, but the age of which completely changes, but the age of which completely changes, but the age of which you went through menopause really can you went through menopause really can you went through menopause really can impact your reproductive health outcomes impact your reproductive health outcomes impact your reproductive health outcomes long-term. And some of the long-term. And some of the long-term. And some of the characteristics you might have had in characteristics you might have had in characteristics you might have had in your cycle when we look backwards can your cycle when we look backwards can your cycle when we look backwards can inform us some about your cellular inform us some about your cellular inform us some about your cellular health now. So, it's still really health now. So, it's still really health now. So, it's still really important to think back and move important to think back and move important to think back and move forward. And then on a bigger scale, forward. And then on a bigger scale, forward. And then on a bigger scale, we're seeing the tide turn on hormone we're seeing the tide turn on hormone we're seeing the tide turn on hormone replacement therapy and I know that's replacement therapy and I know that's replacement therapy and I know that's not what this entire episode's about, not what this entire episode's about, not what this entire episode's about, but as a reproductive endocrinologist, I but as a reproductive endocrinologist, I but as a reproductive endocrinologist, I love estrogen. I love hormones. And I love estrogen. I love hormones. And I love estrogen. I love hormones. And I think it's really important for women to think it's really important for women to think it's really important for women to know that you can start hormone know that you can start hormone know that you can start hormone replacement therapy at any time. So, replacement therapy at any time. So, replacement therapy at any time. So, even though even though even though long time ago we felt really comfortable long time ago we felt really comfortable long time ago we felt really comfortable starting it right at the time of starting it right at the time of starting it right at the time of menopause, we're starting to see benefits starting we're starting to see benefits starting we're starting to see benefits starting in the perimenopausal period. We see a in the perimenopausal period. We see a in the perimenopausal period. We see a benefit starting at once you have benefit starting at once you have benefit starting at once you have menopause, but I think it's a disservice menopause, but I think it's a disservice menopause, but I think it's a disservice to women to make them have no period, to women to make them have no period, to women to make them have no period, ovarian failure for 12 months, no ovarian failure for 12 months, no ovarian failure for 12 months, no estrogen, feel terrible, before we'll estrogen, feel terrible, before we'll estrogen, feel terrible, before we'll allow them to have hormone replacement allow them to have hormone replacement allow them to have hormone replacement therapy. Yeah, this is such an important therapy. Yeah, this is such an important therapy. Yeah, this is such an important theme and if I may, um, I theme and if I may, um, I theme and if I may, um, I realize I have to be very careful, uh, I realize I have to be very careful, uh, I realize I have to be very careful, uh, to not draw parallels to men's hormonal to not draw parallels to men's hormonal to not draw parallels to men's hormonal health when talking about women's hormonal when talking about women's hormonal when talking about women's hormonal health because it's not a one-for-one. health because it's not a one-for-one. health because it's not a one-for-one. They're very distinct processes. On the They're very distinct processes. On the They're very distinct processes. On the other hand, I think thematically, what other hand, I think thematically, what other hand, I think thematically, what I'm about to say, I believe holds. So, I'm about to say, I believe holds. So, I'm about to say, I believe holds. So, hopefully it won't upset too many hopefully it won't upset too many hopefully it won't upset too many people, which is, you know, for many people, which is, you know, for many people, which is, you know, for many years now, um, for reasons that, uh, years now, um, for reasons that, uh, years now, um, for reasons that, uh, are unfair, um, are unfair, um, are unfair, um, hormone replacement therapy was sort of hormone replacement therapy was sort of hormone replacement therapy was sort of became widely available for men before became widely available for men before became widely available for men before it became widely available for women. it became widely available for women. it became widely available for women. Uh, there are reasons for this. We don't Uh, there are reasons for this. We don't Uh, there are reasons for this. We don't have to go into it, but they're have to go into it, but they're have to go into it, but they're the kind of obvious ones. Um, they're the kind of obvious ones. Um, they're the kind of obvious ones. Um, uh, that things were pushed to market uh, that things were pushed to market uh, that things were pushed to market more quickly and more quickly and more quickly and so forth. But there's been this and so forth. But there's been this and so forth. But there's been this idea, you know, should and there it's idea, you know, should and there it's idea, you know, should and there it's usually testosterone replacement usually testosterone replacement usually testosterone replacement therapy, right? Um, and there was this therapy, right? Um, and there was this therapy, right? Um, and there was this idea that unless somebody fell below 300 idea that unless somebody fell below 300 idea that unless somebody fell below 300 ng/dL for a male, that they weren't, ng/dL for a male, that they weren't, ng/dL for a male, that they weren't, um, uh, um, uh, um, uh, that they shouldn't get testosterone that they shouldn't get testosterone that they shouldn't get testosterone replacement therapy. Now it's kind of replacement therapy. Now it's kind of replacement therapy. Now it's kind of understood that if somebody chooses, understood that if somebody chooses, understood that if somebody chooses, they can usually find a doctor that if they can usually find a doctor that if they can usually find a doctor that if they're the low end of normal, they can they're the low end of normal, they can they're the low end of normal, they can push to the high end of normal or to the push to the high end of normal or to the push to the high end of normal or to the middle of the of the range so that they middle of the of the range so that they middle of the of the range so that they can get their symptoms away and just can get their symptoms away and just can get their symptoms away and just feel, right, to optimize within the feel, right, to optimize within the feel, right, to optimize within the normal range. That's sort of And so, I'm normal range. That's sort of And so, I'm normal range. That's sort of And so, I'm relieved to hear that you're saying the relieved to hear that you're saying the relieved to hear that you're saying the same is true for women. And I'm relieved same is true for women. And I'm relieved same is true for women. And I'm relieved to hear it because I think that having to hear it because I think that having to hear it because I think that having these strict cut-offs of like no periods these strict cut-offs of like no periods these strict cut-offs of like no periods for a year, well, I mean, it could take for a year, well, I mean, it could take for a year, well, I mean, it could take a long time to reach that. I mean, what a long time to reach that. I mean, what a long time to reach that. I mean, what if it's, you know, two periods per year, if it's, you know, two periods per year, if it's, you know, two periods per year, right? Does that mean that person right? Does that mean that person right? Does that mean that person doesn't deserve the therapy, which is doesn't deserve the therapy, which is doesn't deserve the therapy, which is what essentially what I think you're what essentially what I think you're what essentially what I think you're saying. So, the R in hormone replacement saying. So, the R in hormone replacement saying. So, the R in hormone replacement is the dangerous letter in my opinion is the dangerous letter in my opinion is the dangerous letter in my opinion because there is this notion of augmenting there is this notion of augmenting there is this notion of augmenting hormones. &gt;&gt; Exactly. Okay, so for forgive me for &gt;&gt; Exactly. Okay, so for forgive me for &gt;&gt; Exactly. Okay, so for forgive me for going long, but I think the two going long, but I think the two going long, but I think the two situations it would be great if both situations it would be great if both situations it would be great if both women and men could augment their women and men could augment their women and men could augment their hormones to be at the high end of normal hormones to be at the high end of normal hormones to be at the high end of normal or wherever puts them in a place where or wherever puts them in a place where or wherever puts them in a place where they're not experiencing symptoms. they're not experiencing symptoms. they're not experiencing symptoms. Absolutely. We know that Absolutely. We know that Absolutely. We know that as humans, we now have longer lifespans, as humans, we now have longer lifespans, as humans, we now have longer lifespans, we outlive our reproductive hormones, we outlive our reproductive hormones, we outlive our reproductive hormones, yet they are essential for our yet they are essential for our yet they are essential for our day-to-day function and to feel our day-to-day function and to feel our day-to-day function and to feel our best, and we should at least be given best, and we should at least be given best, and we should at least be given the opportunity to the opportunity to the opportunity to have our symptoms evaluated, to be have our symptoms evaluated, to be have our symptoms evaluated, to be offered hormone therapy if we want it, offered hormone therapy if we want it, offered hormone therapy if we want it, and to not have to have these harsh and to not have to have these harsh and to not have to have these harsh cutoffs, especially for something that cutoffs, especially for something that cutoffs, especially for something that can be so can be so can be so protective long-term. I mean, for women protective long-term. I mean, for women protective long-term. I mean, for women we see it be cardioprotective, it can we see it be cardioprotective, it can we see it be cardioprotective, it can help lower the risk of Alzheimer's help lower the risk of Alzheimer's help lower the risk of Alzheimer's disease, of course it can be protective disease, of course it can be protective disease, of course it can be protective for your bones. So, I love this greater for your bones. So, I love this greater for your bones. So, I love this greater discussion, and it really stems from discussion, and it really stems from discussion, and it really stems from learning about your body, knowing what's learning about your body, knowing what's learning about your body, knowing what's normal so you can advocate for what's normal so you can advocate for what's normal so you can advocate for what's not normal, and really feeling like you not normal, and really feeling like you not normal, and really feeling like you have your own agency over your health have your own agency over your health have your own agency over your health and your own future. and your own future. and your own future. I'd like to take a quick break to I'd like to take a quick break to I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any other. Their newest bar, the bronze bar, other. Their newest bar, the bronze bar, other. Their newest bar, the bronze bar, has 20 g of protein, only 150 calories, has 20 g of protein, only 150 calories, has 20 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. I have to say, these and 0 g of sugar. I have to say, these and 0 g of sugar. I have to say, these are the best tasting protein bars I've are the best tasting protein bars I've are the best tasting protein bars I've ever had, and I've tried a lot of ever had, and I've tried a lot of ever had, and I've tried a lot of protein bars over the years. These new protein bars over the years. These new protein bars over the years. These new David bars have a marshmallow base, and David bars have a marshmallow base, and David bars have a marshmallow base, and they're covered in chocolate coating, they're covered in chocolate coating, they're covered in chocolate coating, and they're absolutely incredible. I of and they're absolutely incredible. I of and they're absolutely incredible. I of course eat regular whole foods. I eat course eat regular whole foods. I eat course eat regular whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But, I also make it a vegetables, etc. But, I also make it a vegetables, etc. But, I also make it a point to eat one or two David bars per point to eat one or two David bars per point to eat one or two David bars per day as a snack, which makes it easy to day as a snack, which makes it easy to day as a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goal of 1 g of protein hit my protein goal of 1 g of protein hit my protein goal of 1 g of protein per pound of body weight. And that per pound of body weight. And that per pound of body weight. And that allows me to take in the protein I need allows me to take in the protein I need allows me to take in the protein I need without consuming excess calories. I without consuming excess calories. I without consuming excess calories. I love all the David bronze bar flavors, love all the David bronze bar flavors, love all the David bronze bar flavors, including cookie dough, caramel including cookie dough, caramel including cookie dough, caramel chocolate, double chocolate, peanut chocolate, double chocolate, peanut chocolate, double chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They all actually butter chocolate. They all actually butter chocolate. They all actually taste like candy bars. Again, they're taste like candy bars. Again, they're taste like candy bars. Again, they're amazing. But again, they have no sugar, amazing. But again, they have no sugar, amazing. But again, they have no sugar, and they have 20 g of protein with just and they have 20 g of protein with just and they have 20 g of protein with just 150 calories. If you'd like to try 150 calories. If you'd like to try 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. Now, I've been doing therapy for a long Now, I've been doing therapy for a long Now, I've been doing therapy for a long time, and I can tell you that it's a lot time, and I can tell you that it's a lot time, and I can tell you that it's a lot like physical workouts. There are days like physical workouts. There are days like physical workouts. There are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I don't want to do it. But, when I when I don't want to do it. But, when I when I don't want to do it. But, when I finish a therapy session, every single finish a therapy session, every single finish a therapy session, every single time I come away feeling better, knowing time I come away feeling better, knowing time I come away feeling better, knowing the time was well spent, and that's the time was well spent, and that's the time was well spent, and that's because typically I come away with a because typically I come away with a because typically I come away with a valuable insight or new perspective that valuable insight or new perspective that valuable insight or new perspective that I hadn't considered before. Something I hadn't considered before. Something I hadn't considered before. Something perhaps that I'm working through with perhaps that I'm working through with perhaps that I'm working through with regards to work or relationships or regards to work or relationships or regards to work or relationships or simply my relationship to myself. With simply my relationship to myself. With simply my relationship to myself. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy to BetterHelp, they make it very easy to BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert therapist who can help find an expert therapist who can help find an expert therapist who can help provide the benefits that come from provide the benefits that come from provide the benefits that come from effective therapy. They have a short effective therapy. They have a short effective therapy. They have a short questionnaire to help match you to a questionnaire to help match you to a questionnaire to help match you to a therapist, and while BetterHelp has an therapist, and while BetterHelp has an therapist, and while BetterHelp has an industry-leading match rate, if you industry-leading match rate, if you industry-leading match rate, if you aren't happy with your match, you can aren't happy with your match, you can aren't happy with your match, you can switch to a different therapist at any switch to a different therapist at any switch to a different therapist at any time. And it works. BetterHelp has an time. And it works. BetterHelp has an time. And it works. BetterHelp has an average rating of 4.9 out of five for average rating of 4.9 out of five for average rating of 4.9 out of five for its live sessions based on over 1.7 its live sessions based on over 1.7 its live sessions based on over 1.7 million client reviews. Also, because million client reviews. Also, because million client reviews. Also, because BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's very time-efficient. There's no driving very time-efficient. There's no driving very time-efficient. There's no driving to a therapist's office, looking for to a therapist's office, looking for to a therapist's office, looking for parking, etc. If you'd like to try parking, etc. If you'd like to try parking, etc. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go to BetterHelp, go to BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. I wish that um the medical profession I wish that um the medical profession I wish that um the medical profession um could agree on nomenclature that um could agree on nomenclature that um could agree on nomenclature that included hormone replacement, the R, included hormone replacement, the R, included hormone replacement, the R, replacement therapy for people that are replacement therapy for people that are replacement therapy for people that are out of range. You know, they're two out of range. You know, they're two out of range. You know, they're two too low, out of the normal reference too low, out of the normal reference too low, out of the normal reference range. Hormone augmentation therapy range. Hormone augmentation therapy range. Hormone augmentation therapy um for people that want to push within um for people that want to push within um for people that want to push within the normal range. And then of course, the normal range. And then of course, the normal range. And then of course, there's super physiological stuff, and there's super physiological stuff, and there's super physiological stuff, and that's kind of how all of this got here that's kind of how all of this got here that's kind of how all of this got here was there were a bunch of mainly guys was there were a bunch of mainly guys was there were a bunch of mainly guys taking tons of anabolic steroids, and taking tons of anabolic steroids, and taking tons of anabolic steroids, and then estrogen's a steroid, you know, estrogen's a steroid, you know, estrogen's a steroid, you know, testosterone's a steroid, and then it testosterone's a steroid, and then it testosterone's a steroid, and then it just became a long road to get to this just became a long road to get to this just became a long road to get to this point where people like you are able to point where people like you are able to point where people like you are able to even talk about this, right? I mean, I even talk about this, right? I mean, I even talk about this, right? I mean, I think 10 years ago, I think the medical think 10 years ago, I think the medical think 10 years ago, I think the medical profession was not open to the idea that profession was not open to the idea that profession was not open to the idea that a 40-year-old woman, for instance, who a 40-year-old woman, for instance, who a 40-year-old woman, for instance, who had not yet undergone menopause by the had not yet undergone menopause by the had not yet undergone menopause by the strict definition, would take estrogen. strict definition, would take estrogen. strict definition, would take estrogen. It was seen as a risk as opposed to a It was seen as a risk as opposed to a It was seen as a risk as opposed to a benefit. &gt;&gt; Isn't it interesting? And, you know, by &gt;&gt; Isn't it interesting? And, you know, by &gt;&gt; Isn't it interesting? And, you know, by professional organizations, they would professional organizations, they would professional organizations, they would even call it menopausal hormone therapy, even call it menopausal hormone therapy, even call it menopausal hormone therapy, MHT, not even just hormone replacement MHT, not even just hormone replacement MHT, not even just hormone replacement therapy. And I talk about this a lot therapy. And I talk about this a lot therapy. And I talk about this a lot with my patients, the difference in with my patients, the difference in with my patients, the difference in replacing a hormone replacing a hormone replacing a hormone we'll use in an embryo transfer cycle. we'll use in an embryo transfer cycle. we'll use in an embryo transfer cycle. If I'm going to give you estrogen, you If I'm going to give you estrogen, you If I'm going to give you estrogen, you haven't ovulated, I now have to replace haven't ovulated, I now have to replace haven't ovulated, I now have to replace your progesterone. I have to give it in your progesterone. I have to give it in your progesterone. I have to give it in a certain format that it can get to high a certain format that it can get to high a certain format that it can get to high enough levels versus supplementing. Your enough levels versus supplementing. Your enough levels versus supplementing. Your body's making some, and we're body's making some, and we're body's making some, and we're supplementing that or augmenting it like supplementing that or augmenting it like supplementing that or augmenting it like you said to get it to the appropriate you said to get it to the appropriate you said to get it to the appropriate level or to make sure we have enough. level or to make sure we have enough. level or to make sure we have enough. I've given hormone therapy for a long I've given hormone therapy for a long I've given hormone therapy for a long time, right? I've been out of practice time, right? I've been out of practice time, right? I've been out of practice for over 10 years, and what's so for over 10 years, and what's so for over 10 years, and what's so interesting is that we'll use premature interesting is that we'll use premature interesting is that we'll use premature ovarian failure. So, ovarian failure. So, ovarian failure. So, going into ovarian failure before age going into ovarian failure before age going into ovarian failure before age 40, well accepted that these women need 40, well accepted that these women need 40, well accepted that these women need hormone replacement even when they still hormone replacement even when they still hormone replacement even when they still have the low end of hormonal function. have the low end of hormonal function. have the low end of hormonal function. So, in this population, we've been doing So, in this population, we've been doing So, in this population, we've been doing it for a really long time, but for it for a really long time, but for it for a really long time, but for menopause, it's been and so frowned upon menopause, it's been and so frowned upon menopause, it's been and so frowned upon because of the WHI and fear-based because of the WHI and fear-based because of the WHI and fear-based tactics about what would happen with tactics about what would happen with tactics about what would happen with hormone replacement. So, it's hormone replacement. So, it's hormone replacement. So, it's interesting, and I'm really glad to see interesting, and I'm really glad to see interesting, and I'm really glad to see the tide is turning, and we're really the tide is turning, and we're really the tide is turning, and we're really allowing people to allowing people to allowing people to stand up for themselves, to also know stand up for themselves, to also know stand up for themselves, to also know what's normal within their body, which what's normal within their body, which what's normal within their body, which sounds so common, but if we think about it, so common, but if we think about it, so common, but if we think about it, many women have been dismissed and many women have been dismissed and many women have been dismissed and gaslit for so long. gaslit for so long. gaslit for so long. And if you go to your doctor and you And if you go to your doctor and you And if you go to your doctor and you talk about your painful periods or your talk about your painful periods or your talk about your painful periods or your irregular cycles or your bloating that irregular cycles or your bloating that irregular cycles or your bloating that you have with your period and some of you have with your period and some of you have with your period and some of these red flag warning signs, the spotting, red flag warning signs, the spotting, red flag warning signs, the spotting, the this, and it gets pushed to the this, and it gets pushed to the this, and it gets pushed to the side, when you start to go through side, when you start to go through side, when you start to go through actual hormonal change later, it's actual hormonal change later, it's actual hormonal change later, it's really hard to then believe yourself. really hard to then believe yourself. really hard to then believe yourself. And so, I think it's really important, And so, I think it's really important, And so, I think it's really important, you know, I have a whole chapter in the you know, I have a whole chapter in the you know, I have a whole chapter in the book about how to learn to track your book about how to learn to track your book about how to learn to track your cycle and your ovulation and really cycle and your ovulation and really cycle and your ovulation and really learn to see the red flags your body learn to see the red flags your body learn to see the red flags your body gives you, not just if you want to get gives you, not just if you want to get gives you, not just if you want to get pregnant now, but to know that your pregnant now, but to know that your pregnant now, but to know that your hormones are really functioning as they hormones are really functioning as they hormones are really functioning as they should, and that's going to help you should, and that's going to help you should, and that's going to help you stand up for yourself later when you're stand up for yourself later when you're stand up for yourself later when you're in this transitional period, because in this transitional period, because in this transitional period, because perimenopause or diminished ovarian perimenopause or diminished ovarian perimenopause or diminished ovarian reserve like we call it in the fertility reserve like we call it in the fertility reserve like we call it in the fertility world, I mean, that can last 5 to 10 world, I mean, that can last 5 to 10 world, I mean, that can last 5 to 10 years. That can be a really long years. That can be a really long years. That can be a really long transitional period that women are going transitional period that women are going transitional period that women are going through, and they deserve support if through, and they deserve support if through, and they deserve support if they're not feeling their best. they're not feeling their best. they're not feeling their best. Are all um now I want to call it hormone Are all um now I want to call it hormone Are all um now I want to call it hormone augmentation, hormone let's just call it augmentation, hormone let's just call it augmentation, hormone let's just call it hormone replacement for sake of uh hormone replacement for sake of uh hormone replacement for sake of uh simplicity. Um hormone therapies uh for simplicity. Um hormone therapies uh for simplicity. Um hormone therapies uh for women, do they always start with women, do they always start with women, do they always start with estrogen when it comes to trying to estrogen when it comes to trying to estrogen when it comes to trying to encourage fertility or push fertility or encourage fertility or push fertility or encourage fertility or push fertility or well-being out into um well-being out into um well-being out into um more years? That's an interesting more years? That's an interesting more years? That's an interesting question. I think when it comes to question. I think when it comes to question. I think when it comes to hormone replacement therapy in general, hormone replacement therapy in general, hormone replacement therapy in general, we've got estrogen, progesterone, we've got estrogen, progesterone, we've got estrogen, progesterone, testosterone. Most women when they start testosterone. Most women when they start testosterone. Most women when they start not reliably making estrogen, that's not reliably making estrogen, that's not reliably making estrogen, that's when they really start to feel bad. And when they really start to feel bad. And when they really start to feel bad. And so, typically some type of estrogen so, typically some type of estrogen so, typically some type of estrogen replacement, and there's many different replacement, and there's many different replacement, and there's many different ways, right? There's patches, there's ways, right? There's patches, there's ways, right? There's patches, there's pills, there's vaginal inserts, there's pills, there's vaginal inserts, there's pills, there's vaginal inserts, there's vaginal cream, often helps some of the vaginal cream, often helps some of the vaginal cream, often helps some of the symptoms they're having. But, symptoms they're having. But, symptoms they're having. But, progesterone alone or in combination can progesterone alone or in combination can progesterone alone or in combination can be a big player. Progesterone also is be a big player. Progesterone also is be a big player. Progesterone also is not made if you're not ovulating well, not made if you're not ovulating well, not made if you're not ovulating well, so there's this tandem where often you so there's this tandem where often you so there's this tandem where often you need both of them, but I have some need both of them, but I have some need both of them, but I have some perimenopausal patients who feel great perimenopausal patients who feel great perimenopausal patients who feel great on just progesterone. To me, on just progesterone. To me, on just progesterone. To me, testosterone's the last one we add to testosterone's the last one we add to testosterone's the last one we add to the mix, and it will always depend on the mix, and it will always depend on the mix, and it will always depend on clinical scenario. There's nuance. clinical scenario. There's nuance. clinical scenario. There's nuance. Estrogen and testosterone can convert Estrogen and testosterone can convert Estrogen and testosterone can convert back and forth, so for most women, if back and forth, so for most women, if back and forth, so for most women, if they are adequately being replaced on they are adequately being replaced on they are adequately being replaced on estrogen, and they still have estrogen, and they still have estrogen, and they still have functioning ovaries, so in this functioning ovaries, so in this functioning ovaries, so in this transitional period, they tend to not transitional period, they tend to not transitional period, they tend to not need testosterone. But, that's never need testosterone. But, that's never need testosterone. But, that's never 100% of the time. 100% of the time. 100% of the time. I think greater to your question about I think greater to your question about I think greater to your question about how is there a way for us to extend the is there a way for us to extend the is there a way for us to extend the ovarian lifespan is a really good one. ovarian lifespan is a really good one. ovarian lifespan is a really good one. We know that women who go into ovarian We know that women who go into ovarian We know that women who go into ovarian failure early, so when we look at that, failure early, so when we look at that, failure early, so when we look at that, we call it POI, the premature ovarian we call it POI, the premature ovarian we call it POI, the premature ovarian insufficiency group, insufficiency group, insufficiency group, their ovaries have more inflammatory their ovaries have more inflammatory their ovaries have more inflammatory markers, they have more chronic markers, they have more chronic markers, they have more chronic inflammation and fibrosis inside the inflammation and fibrosis inside the inflammation and fibrosis inside the ovary. There's a higher prevalence with ovary. There's a higher prevalence with ovary. There's a higher prevalence with autoimmune disease or chronic autoimmune disease or chronic autoimmune disease or chronic inflammatory disorders. inflammatory disorders. inflammatory disorders. So, I think there's also something to be So, I think there's also something to be So, I think there's also something to be said, despite having not having the said, despite having not having the said, despite having not having the perfect paper to sit here and say that perfect paper to sit here and say that perfect paper to sit here and say that we know a variety of different things we know a variety of different things we know a variety of different things that increase chronic inflammation, that increase chronic inflammation, that increase chronic inflammation, cause you to have a lower egg count, and cause you to have a lower egg count, and cause you to have a lower egg count, and are associated with earlier menopause or are associated with earlier menopause or are associated with earlier menopause or earlier ovarian failure, that paying earlier ovarian failure, that paying earlier ovarian failure, that paying attention to these factors earlier in attention to these factors earlier in attention to these factors earlier in your life, whether it's controlling an your life, whether it's controlling an your life, whether it's controlling an autoimmune disease, earlier diagnosis of autoimmune disease, earlier diagnosis of autoimmune disease, earlier diagnosis of Hashimoto's, whether it's treating your whether it's treating your whether it's treating your endometriosis, or cultivating a lifestyle that's cultivating a lifestyle that's cultivating a lifestyle that's decreasing inflammation, right? Avoiding decreasing inflammation, right? Avoiding decreasing inflammation, right? Avoiding certain toxins, eating anti-inflammatory certain toxins, eating anti-inflammatory certain toxins, eating anti-inflammatory foods, the type of exercise, and how we foods, the type of exercise, and how we foods, the type of exercise, and how we deal with those lifestyle tenants, deal with those lifestyle tenants, deal with those lifestyle tenants, that likely has the capability to that likely has the capability to that likely has the capability to extend our ovarian lifespan to the extend our ovarian lifespan to the extend our ovarian lifespan to the degree that it can. degree that it can. degree that it can. I know these days people are very I know these days people are very I know these days people are very concerned about plastics, Yeah. and you concerned about plastics, Yeah. and you concerned about plastics, Yeah. and you mentioned toxins, so I was going to get mentioned toxins, so I was going to get mentioned toxins, so I was going to get to this later, but I'll just ask now. to this later, but I'll just ask now. to this later, but I'll just ask now. How concerned are you about plastic How concerned are you about plastic How concerned are you about plastic water bottles and um water bottles and um water bottles and um I mean, we can't avoid exposure to I mean, we can't avoid exposure to I mean, we can't avoid exposure to plastics, and I think one thing that Dr. plastics, and I think one thing that Dr. plastics, and I think one thing that Dr. Rhonda Patrick has done nicely is to Rhonda Patrick has done nicely is to Rhonda Patrick has done nicely is to highlight the fact that the really highlight the fact that the really highlight the fact that the really small, hence microplastics, are really small, hence microplastics, are really small, hence microplastics, are really the ones that we worry about the most the ones that we worry about the most the ones that we worry about the most because they can get into so many because they can get into so many because they can get into so many tissues, but we're constantly ingesting tissues, but we're constantly ingesting tissues, but we're constantly ingesting plastic. Some of them are just excreted plastic. Some of them are just excreted plastic. Some of them are just excreted um because they're big, but some of them um because they're big, but some of them um because they're big, but some of them get into our cells, right? get into our cells, right? get into our cells, right? Are there any data that have you or Are there any data that have you or Are there any data that have you or observational um data that have you observational um data that have you observational um data that have you genuinely concerned that plastics are genuinely concerned that plastics are genuinely concerned that plastics are becoming more of an issue vis-a-vis becoming more of an issue vis-a-vis becoming more of an issue vis-a-vis fertility. There definitely is concern. I always There definitely is concern. I always There definitely is concern. I always want to frame this and you did a nice want to frame this and you did a nice want to frame this and you did a nice job of it, so I'll double down. The job of it, so I'll double down. The job of it, so I'll double down. The goal when we talk about toxin avoidance goal when we talk about toxin avoidance goal when we talk about toxin avoidance is you can't avoid everything. You is you can't avoid everything. You is you can't avoid everything. You cannot avoid every toxin in this world, cannot avoid every toxin in this world, cannot avoid every toxin in this world, nor should we try to have this all or nor should we try to have this all or nor should we try to have this all or nothing mentality, which is what so many nothing mentality, which is what so many nothing mentality, which is what so many people do. Oh, if I can't avoid it, I people do. Oh, if I can't avoid it, I people do. Oh, if I can't avoid it, I just will totally ignore it then in just will totally ignore it then in just will totally ignore it then in general. When we want to think about toxins, When we want to think about toxins, When we want to think about toxins, there's many different mechanisms why there's many different mechanisms why there's many different mechanisms why plastics can be harmful. When it comes plastics can be harmful. When it comes plastics can be harmful. When it comes to microplastics as you mentioned, we to microplastics as you mentioned, we to microplastics as you mentioned, we know they can accumulate in the ovary. know they can accumulate in the ovary. know they can accumulate in the ovary. So, if we want to be really transparent So, if we want to be really transparent So, if we want to be really transparent and simple, your ovaries must function and simple, your ovaries must function and simple, your ovaries must function in order for you to make estrogen and in order for you to make estrogen and in order for you to make estrogen and progesterone, in order for you to progesterone, in order for you to progesterone, in order for you to ovulate, in order for you to get ovulate, in order for you to get ovulate, in order for you to get pregnant. So, if microplastics can pregnant. So, if microplastics can pregnant. So, if microplastics can accumulate inside the ovary, accumulate inside the ovary, accumulate inside the ovary, that's obviously detrimental towards that's obviously detrimental towards that's obviously detrimental towards fertility or ovarian function. fertility or ovarian function. fertility or ovarian function. On a greater scale, we know that some of On a greater scale, we know that some of On a greater scale, we know that some of the endocrine disrupting chemicals that the endocrine disrupting chemicals that the endocrine disrupting chemicals that are in plastics have been associated are in plastics have been associated are in plastics have been associated with worse IVF outcomes, lower live with worse IVF outcomes, lower live with worse IVF outcomes, lower live birth rates, longer time to pregnancy. birth rates, longer time to pregnancy. birth rates, longer time to pregnancy. And these are population-based cohort And these are population-based cohort And these are population-based cohort studies, so there's no randomized studies, so there's no randomized studies, so there's no randomized control trial. So, we have to limit it. control trial. So, we have to limit it. control trial. So, we have to limit it. And there's some truth to the fact that And there's some truth to the fact that And there's some truth to the fact that people who might be more exposed to people who might be more exposed to people who might be more exposed to plastics may have other lifestyle factors may have other lifestyle factors may have other lifestyle factors such as we know plastics can also be in such as we know plastics can also be in such as we know plastics can also be in food wrappers, right? So, maybe they food wrappers, right? So, maybe they food wrappers, right? So, maybe they have more of an ultra-processed food have more of an ultra-processed food have more of an ultra-processed food diet. So, it's never one specific thing. diet. So, it's never one specific thing. diet. So, it's never one specific thing. But I look at all of these But I look at all of these But I look at all of these lifestyle factors and I include toxins lifestyle factors and I include toxins lifestyle factors and I include toxins as one of them. as one of them. as one of them. These are all either contributing to These are all either contributing to These are all either contributing to your inflammatory burden or they're your inflammatory burden or they're your inflammatory burden or they're helping you. And when we start thinking helping you. And when we start thinking helping you. And when we start thinking about optimal hormonal health and about optimal hormonal health and about optimal hormonal health and fertility, it is your decision every single day. Am it is your decision every single day. Am it is your decision every single day. Am I drinking water out of this cup or out I drinking water out of this cup or out I drinking water out of this cup or out of a plastic bottle? Am I going to lift of a plastic bottle? Am I going to lift of a plastic bottle? Am I going to lift weights, do nothing? Am I going to run? weights, do nothing? Am I going to run? weights, do nothing? Am I going to run? How much sleep am I going to get? What How much sleep am I going to get? What How much sleep am I going to get? What foods am I going to eat? foods am I going to eat? foods am I going to eat? How do I deal with stress? And these How do I deal with stress? And these How do I deal with stress? And these choices, even though one single one is choices, even though one single one is choices, even though one single one is not going to make it or break it, not going to make it or break it, not going to make it or break it, together they can add up to that together they can add up to that together they can add up to that inflammatory burden or they can help inflammatory burden or they can help inflammatory burden or they can help decrease it. And that chronic decrease it. And that chronic decrease it. And that chronic inflammation does in fact matter to your inflammation does in fact matter to your inflammation does in fact matter to your fertility and does worry me. fertility and does worry me. fertility and does worry me. I realize I'm jumping around I realize I'm jumping around I realize I'm jumping around here a bit, but um in just thinking here a bit, but um in just thinking here a bit, but um in just thinking about what seems to be on a lot of about what seems to be on a lot of about what seems to be on a lot of people's minds, I took a informal poll people's minds, I took a informal poll people's minds, I took a informal poll of some people heading into this cuz of some people heading into this cuz of some people heading into this cuz obviously I only know my own obviously I only know my own obviously I only know my own experience as a male. So, to a number of experience as a male. So, to a number of experience as a male. So, to a number of women, I asked the question um you know, women, I asked the question um you know, women, I asked the question um you know, what are you wondering about? And a what are you wondering about? And a what are you wondering about? And a common question was common question was common question was um it seems that for some women, if they've it seems that for some women, if they've it seems that for some women, if they've been pregnant once before, been pregnant once before, been pregnant once before, uh they have it in mind that it's going uh they have it in mind that it's going uh they have it in mind that it's going to be easy for them to get pregnant to be easy for them to get pregnant to be easy for them to get pregnant again later or easier. And of course, again later or easier. And of course, again later or easier. And of course, they understand the logic that they were they understand the logic that they were they understand the logic that they were younger before by definition, even if younger before by definition, even if younger before by definition, even if it's a year, right? Um and that it's a year, right? Um and that it's a year, right? Um and that fertility drops off with time. But there fertility drops off with time. But there fertility drops off with time. But there seems to be this um kind of seems to be this um kind of seems to be this um kind of belief uh that if one was pregnant before, that uh that if one was pregnant before, that uh that if one was pregnant before, that it's going to be possible to get it's going to be possible to get it's going to be possible to get pregnant again within the normal windows pregnant again within the normal windows pregnant again within the normal windows of biological windows for getting of biological windows for getting of biological windows for getting pregnant. Is there any evidence that pregnant. Is there any evidence that pregnant. Is there any evidence that having been pregnant before having been pregnant before having been pregnant before makes it easier to get pregnant again? makes it easier to get pregnant again? makes it easier to get pregnant again? That's separate from the fact that That's separate from the fact that That's separate from the fact that obviously, they were pregnant before. I obviously, they were pregnant before. I obviously, they were pregnant before. I realize that's a convoluted question, realize that's a convoluted question, realize that's a convoluted question, but it's not a perfect experiment, but it's not a perfect experiment, but it's not a perfect experiment, right? Because they've been pregnant right? Because they've been pregnant right? Because they've been pregnant before, obviously they can get pregnant. before, obviously they can get pregnant. before, obviously they can get pregnant. If they haven't, the control group is If they haven't, the control group is If they haven't, the control group is not a very Yeah. uh it it's not a good not a very Yeah. uh it it's not a good not a very Yeah. uh it it's not a good control group for an experiment. But for control group for an experiment. But for control group for an experiment. But for within the person, if they've been within the person, if they've been within the person, if they've been pregnant before, can they exhale a pregnant before, can they exhale a pregnant before, can they exhale a little bit that yes, they can get little bit that yes, they can get little bit that yes, they can get pregnant? I did fellowship research with pregnant? I did fellowship research with pregnant? I did fellowship research with the primary investigator on a large the primary investigator on a large the primary investigator on a large cohort study, one of the biggest ones we cohort study, one of the biggest ones we cohort study, one of the biggest ones we have on natural fertility, and this have on natural fertility, and this have on natural fertility, and this study was called time to conceive. And study was called time to conceive. And study was called time to conceive. And it was looking at women who did not have it was looking at women who did not have it was looking at women who did not have a history of infertility, who were a history of infertility, who were a history of infertility, who were trying to get pregnant, who were 30 and trying to get pregnant, who were 30 and trying to get pregnant, who were 30 and older. And then we looked at different older. And then we looked at different older. And then we looked at different variables of them. And one of the most variables of them. And one of the most variables of them. And one of the most startling pieces of data is that there's startling pieces of data is that there's startling pieces of data is that there's a huge age-related impact of fertility, a huge age-related impact of fertility, a huge age-related impact of fertility, right? This data set the standards right? This data set the standards right? This data set the standards for the numbers that we quote. Meaning, for the numbers that we quote. Meaning, for the numbers that we quote. Meaning, if I will sit here and say if you're if I will sit here and say if you're if I will sit here and say if you're trying to get pregnant with your first trying to get pregnant with your first trying to get pregnant with your first child and you're 30, you'll have a 20% child and you're 30, you'll have a 20% child and you're 30, you'll have a 20% chance per month, right? The finest chance per month, right? The finest chance per month, right? The finest point we look at in natural fertility point we look at in natural fertility point we look at in natural fertility studies is called fecundability, the studies is called fecundability, the studies is called fecundability, the probability of pregnancy per month. But probability of pregnancy per month. But probability of pregnancy per month. But as you age, when you're 35 to 36, that as you age, when you're 35 to 36, that as you age, when you're 35 to 36, that number will be 11 to 12% per month. At number will be 11 to 12% per month. At number will be 11 to 12% per month. At age 38, it'll be 5% per month. And at 40 age 38, it'll be 5% per month. And at 40 age 38, it'll be 5% per month. And at 40 and beyond, it'll be 3% per month. and beyond, it'll be 3% per month. and beyond, it'll be 3% per month. Importantly, for the person hearing Importantly, for the person hearing Importantly, for the person hearing this, none of those numbers are zero. this, none of those numbers are zero. this, none of those numbers are zero. And so, by no means do we mean you can't And so, by no means do we mean you can't And so, by no means do we mean you can't get pregnant. But in the group who had a get pregnant. But in the group who had a get pregnant. But in the group who had a child before and were trying to conceive child before and were trying to conceive child before and were trying to conceive with the same partner, that number with the same partner, that number with the same partner, that number stayed between 18 to 20% up till age 37. stayed between 18 to 20% up till age 37. stayed between 18 to 20% up till age 37. And then it dropped. So, we do see that And then it dropped. So, we do see that And then it dropped. So, we do see that there is this protective benefit for a there is this protective benefit for a there is this protective benefit for a multitude of reasons, right? You multitude of reasons, right? You multitude of reasons, right? You conceived with that person, so they had conceived with that person, so they had conceived with that person, so they had sperm, right? Sometimes I find out some sperm, right? Sometimes I find out some sperm, right? Sometimes I find out some patients, the male partner has no sperm patients, the male partner has no sperm patients, the male partner has no sperm and we didn't know all that time they and we didn't know all that time they and we didn't know all that time they were trying. were trying. were trying. &gt;&gt; Goodness. Right? Oh, I've had patients &gt;&gt; Goodness. Right? Oh, I've had patients &gt;&gt; Goodness. Right? Oh, I've had patients try for years, be dismissed by their try for years, be dismissed by their try for years, be dismissed by their doctor. Because men and women mistakenly doctor. Because men and women mistakenly doctor. Because men and women mistakenly think that because there's semen, think that because there's semen, think that because there's semen, there's sperm. Exactly. There's there's sperm. Exactly. There's there's sperm. Exactly. There's ejaculate, so there must be sperm inside ejaculate, so there must be sperm inside ejaculate, so there must be sperm inside of it. of it. of it. And then when we find out there's And then when we find out there's And then when we find out there's none, it's heartbreaking. It's a none, it's heartbreaking. It's a none, it's heartbreaking. It's a big reason why we can segue and say one big reason why we can segue and say one big reason why we can segue and say one of the things I of the things I of the things I really hate the most right now about my really hate the most right now about my really hate the most right now about my field is that by definition, infertility field is that by definition, infertility field is that by definition, infertility is a failure. And we don't even is a failure. And we don't even is a failure. And we don't even recommend testing or screening or talk recommend testing or screening or talk recommend testing or screening or talk about a preventive approach at all until about a preventive approach at all until about a preventive approach at all until you have failed. Yet if we look at the you have failed. Yet if we look at the you have failed. Yet if we look at the population, say okay, the definition of population, say okay, the definition of population, say okay, the definition of infertility is trying to get pregnant infertility is trying to get pregnant infertility is trying to get pregnant for 12 months. And then once you've for 12 months. And then once you've for 12 months. And then once you've reached that point, well now we'll check reached that point, well now we'll check reached that point, well now we'll check a semen analysis. Now we'll do an a semen analysis. Now we'll do an a semen analysis. Now we'll do an anatomical investigation. Now we'll anatomical investigation. Now we'll anatomical investigation. Now we'll check your ovarian reserve. Now we will check your ovarian reserve. Now we will check your ovarian reserve. Now we will discuss if you're ovulating. discuss if you're ovulating. discuss if you're ovulating. So, we're making you go through this So, we're making you go through this So, we're making you go through this period of time where you're trying and period of time where you're trying and period of time where you're trying and yes, maybe the majority of people will yes, maybe the majority of people will yes, maybe the majority of people will get pregnant. get pregnant. get pregnant. But most people who do will get pregnant But most people who do will get pregnant But most people who do will get pregnant the first 6 months. So, 72% of people the first 6 months. So, 72% of people the first 6 months. So, 72% of people will get pregnant in that first 6 months will get pregnant in that first 6 months will get pregnant in that first 6 months of trying and only 13% will get pregnant of trying and only 13% will get pregnant of trying and only 13% will get pregnant in the next 6 months of trying. in the next 6 months of trying. in the next 6 months of trying. That's why if you're 35 and older, we That's why if you're 35 and older, we That's why if you're 35 and older, we will shorten that testing interval down will shorten that testing interval down will shorten that testing interval down to 6 months. to 6 months. to 6 months. But sitting across from so many people But sitting across from so many people But sitting across from so many people who've tried and tried, went to their who've tried and tried, went to their who've tried and tried, went to their doctor, their doctor said, "Oh, you're doctor, their doctor said, "Oh, you're doctor, their doctor said, "Oh, you're fine. You're young. You're this, you're fine. You're young. You're this, you're fine. You're young. You're this, you're that." Forced them to try longer and that." Forced them to try longer and that." Forced them to try longer and fail. And then to find out fallopian fail. And then to find out fallopian fail. And then to find out fallopian tubes were blocked. They had a birth tubes were blocked. They had a birth tubes were blocked. They had a birth defect of the uterus. He had no sperm. defect of the uterus. He had no sperm. defect of the uterus. He had no sperm. She had low ovarian reserve. And they She had low ovarian reserve. And they She had low ovarian reserve. And they would have intervened differently back would have intervened differently back would have intervened differently back at time period A had they had that data. at time period A had they had that data. at time period A had they had that data. Really makes me feel like we have to Really makes me feel like we have to Really makes me feel like we have to switch how we approach infertility in switch how we approach infertility in switch how we approach infertility in the world where infertility rates are the world where infertility rates are the world where infertility rates are rising, women are rising, women are rising, women are waiting later to get pregnant. waiting later to get pregnant. waiting later to get pregnant. It doesn't really make sense to make It doesn't really make sense to make It doesn't really make sense to make people fail first before we'll even do people fail first before we'll even do people fail first before we'll even do an investigation. We should test things an investigation. We should test things an investigation. We should test things and if it's all normal, maybe you do and if it's all normal, maybe you do and if it's all normal, maybe you do just go try your 6 or 12 months. just go try your 6 or 12 months. just go try your 6 or 12 months. We would capture people who don't get We would capture people who don't get We would capture people who don't get pregnant and be able to help them at a pregnant and be able to help them at a pregnant and be able to help them at a sooner time period, which is so sooner time period, which is so sooner time period, which is so valuable. So, to your origin question, valuable. So, to your origin question, valuable. So, to your origin question, there is data that having a child there is data that having a child there is data that having a child previously puts you statistically at a previously puts you statistically at a previously puts you statistically at a higher chance of getting pregnant again. higher chance of getting pregnant again. higher chance of getting pregnant again. But secondary infertility is real. This But secondary infertility is real. This But secondary infertility is real. This is where you've gotten pregnant before is where you've gotten pregnant before is where you've gotten pregnant before and now you're having a hard time and now you're having a hard time and now you're having a hard time conceiving your second child. conceiving your second child. conceiving your second child. I want to acknowledge that it's really I want to acknowledge that it's really I want to acknowledge that it's really hard for people who walk it because they hard for people who walk it because they hard for people who walk it because they weren't expecting it. They're a little weren't expecting it. They're a little weren't expecting it. They're a little underprepared for it because they said, underprepared for it because they said, underprepared for it because they said, "Oh, I got pregnant so fast before." "Oh, I got pregnant so fast before." "Oh, I got pregnant so fast before." They come into it just assuming it will They come into it just assuming it will They come into it just assuming it will be as easy. be as easy. be as easy. They watch their children have a longer They watch their children have a longer They watch their children have a longer age gap, a bigger age gap than they age gap, a bigger age gap than they age gap, a bigger age gap than they wanted. But also, they don't really fit wanted. But also, they don't really fit wanted. But also, they don't really fit into the community. Meaning, there's a into the community. Meaning, there's a into the community. Meaning, there's a really robust infertility community and really robust infertility community and really robust infertility community and they support each other. And so many they support each other. And so many they support each other. And so many patients who have secondary infertility patients who have secondary infertility patients who have secondary infertility say they feel caught in between feeling say they feel caught in between feeling say they feel caught in between feeling guilty that their child's not enough for guilty that their child's not enough for guilty that their child's not enough for wanting more. Of course, they're wanting more. Of course, they're wanting more. Of course, they're thankful for their child, but not really thankful for their child, but not really thankful for their child, but not really fitting into that category. Yet also fitting into that category. Yet also fitting into that category. Yet also simultaneously feeling left behind their simultaneously feeling left behind their simultaneously feeling left behind their friend group or their family group or friend group or their family group or friend group or their family group or watching their family start to look watching their family start to look watching their family start to look differently. And so, even in women who've had a prior And so, even in women who've had a prior And so, even in women who've had a prior child, age does become impactful. It's not the age does become impactful. It's not the age does become impactful. It's not the only variable. We also see that, you only variable. We also see that, you only variable. We also see that, you know, sperm counts change with age. So, know, sperm counts change with age. So, know, sperm counts change with age. So, your partner's sperm count will change your partner's sperm count will change your partner's sperm count will change with age. We see egg quality starts to with age. We see egg quality starts to with age. We see egg quality starts to change with age, largely because change with age, largely because change with age, largely because metabolic health changes with age as metabolic health changes with age as metabolic health changes with age as well. And then we see things like And then we see things like And then we see things like endometriosis and adenomyosis, which are endometriosis and adenomyosis, which are endometriosis and adenomyosis, which are tincture of time diseases. It's simply tincture of time diseases. It's simply tincture of time diseases. It's simply you've had more time, so there's a you've had more time, so there's a you've had more time, so there's a higher probability that these diseases higher probability that these diseases higher probability that these diseases could be present. could be present. could be present. So, I think it's important to say yes, So, I think it's important to say yes, So, I think it's important to say yes, you can probably take a sigh of relief you can probably take a sigh of relief you can probably take a sigh of relief that most likely, you won't have trouble that most likely, you won't have trouble that most likely, you won't have trouble again. But if you've been trying those 6 again. But if you've been trying those 6 again. But if you've been trying those 6 months after and you're not pregnant, I months after and you're not pregnant, I months after and you're not pregnant, I would say kind of at the longest, go and would say kind of at the longest, go and would say kind of at the longest, go and get an evaluation. And if you're a get an evaluation. And if you're a get an evaluation. And if you're a little bit older, maybe started your little bit older, maybe started your little bit older, maybe started your journey a little bit later, it's never journey a little bit later, it's never journey a little bit later, it's never too early to get an evaluation for too early to get an evaluation for too early to get an evaluation for anybody at any time cuz you can't make anybody at any time cuz you can't make anybody at any time cuz you can't make decisions on data you don't know. I'm a decisions on data you don't know. I'm a decisions on data you don't know. I'm a big fan of knowing the data and then big fan of knowing the data and then big fan of knowing the data and then making the choice that's right for you making the choice that's right for you making the choice that's right for you and your circumstance versus taking and your circumstance versus taking and your circumstance versus taking population-based data and just applying population-based data and just applying population-based data and just applying it to every single person. it to every single person. it to every single person. Yeah, all excellent points. And um with Yeah, all excellent points. And um with Yeah, all excellent points. And um with respect to the sperm testing, since respect to the sperm testing, since respect to the sperm testing, since clearly there are men who think they're clearly there are men who think they're clearly there are men who think they're making sperm and they're not, making sperm and they're not, making sperm and they're not, um there are at-home tests of that as well. there are at-home tests of that as well. there are at-home tests of that as well. So, once again, men have it a little bit So, once again, men have it a little bit So, once again, men have it a little bit easier. They can do it at home. easier. They can do it at home. easier. They can do it at home. Although, I don't know how high quality Although, I don't know how high quality Although, I don't know how high quality the at-home tests are. There are some the at-home tests are. There are some the at-home tests are. There are some that are just telling you, almost like a that are just telling you, almost like a that are just telling you, almost like a pregnancy test, plus minus, are sperm pregnancy test, plus minus, are sperm pregnancy test, plus minus, are sperm present, are sperm not? Of course, present, are sperm not? Of course, present, are sperm not? Of course, that's not really telling you the full that's not really telling you the full that's not really telling you the full picture. There are those some mail-in picture. There are those some mail-in picture. There are those some mail-in tests that go to a true lab that we tests that go to a true lab that we tests that go to a true lab that we would even take as valid. So, it's a would even take as valid. So, it's a would even take as valid. So, it's a it's called a CLIA certified lab, CLIA, it's called a CLIA certified lab, CLIA, it's called a CLIA certified lab, CLIA, for somebody listening. And you can find for somebody listening. And you can find for somebody listening. And you can find some of these online mail-in sperm tests some of these online mail-in sperm tests some of these online mail-in sperm tests and collect a sample. They send you the and collect a sample. They send you the and collect a sample. They send you the whole kit, you mail it off. It's very whole kit, you mail it off. It's very whole kit, you mail it off. It's very valid. And you get all the sperm valid. And you get all the sperm valid. And you get all the sperm parameters that we would then look for. parameters that we would then look for. parameters that we would then look for. So, that's a great way to get data So, that's a great way to get data So, that's a great way to get data yourself and not have to yourself and not have to yourself and not have to have your doctor tell you no or go to a have your doctor tell you no or go to a have your doctor tell you no or go to a fertility clinic. I mean, we'll do a fertility clinic. I mean, we'll do a fertility clinic. I mean, we'll do a semen analysis for anybody who calls and semen analysis for anybody who calls and semen analysis for anybody who calls and most clinics will. most clinics will. most clinics will. It's usually earlier that patients are It's usually earlier that patients are It's usually earlier that patients are getting roadblocked, whether it's their getting roadblocked, whether it's their getting roadblocked, whether it's their PCP or their regular OBGYN. They're PCP or their regular OBGYN. They're PCP or their regular OBGYN. They're getting dismissed and just oh, just try getting dismissed and just oh, just try getting dismissed and just oh, just try first, it's probably fine. Mhm. You first, it's probably fine. Mhm. You first, it's probably fine. Mhm. You mentioned that if a woman has had a mentioned that if a woman has had a mentioned that if a woman has had a successful pregnancy that the successful pregnancy that the successful pregnancy that the probability of getting pregnant again is probability of getting pregnant again is probability of getting pregnant again is significantly higher, although with the significantly higher, although with the significantly higher, although with the caveats you mentioned. Is there any data caveats you mentioned. Is there any data caveats you mentioned. Is there any data about if someone has been pregnant and about if someone has been pregnant and about if someone has been pregnant and either terminated or lost the pregnancy, either terminated or lost the pregnancy, either terminated or lost the pregnancy, whether or not that's related to ability whether or not that's related to ability whether or not that's related to ability to get pregnant again later? to get pregnant again later? to get pregnant again later? &gt;&gt; It's a good question. Most of the data &gt;&gt; It's a good question. Most of the data &gt;&gt; It's a good question. Most of the data that exists is looking at prior live that exists is looking at prior live that exists is looking at prior live birth. So, I think there's a couple birth. So, I think there's a couple birth. So, I think there's a couple things if you've gotten pregnant things if you've gotten pregnant things if you've gotten pregnant regardless of the outcome of that regardless of the outcome of that regardless of the outcome of that pregnancy, if it's with the same partner, we can if it's with the same partner, we can if it's with the same partner, we can feel confident that they had sperm feel confident that they had sperm feel confident that they had sperm present. So, that's already one leg up present. So, that's already one leg up present. So, that's already one leg up over never getting pregnant. If it was over never getting pregnant. If it was over never getting pregnant. If it was an intrauterine pregnancy, we know at an intrauterine pregnancy, we know at an intrauterine pregnancy, we know at least one fallopian tube was least one fallopian tube was least one fallopian tube was functioning. So, that's also in the camp functioning. So, that's also in the camp functioning. So, that's also in the camp of we're checking some mental boxes of we're checking some mental boxes of we're checking some mental boxes of some of the things that we think about. some of the things that we think about. some of the things that we think about. And we know your body could accept an And we know your body could accept an And we know your body could accept an embryo implanting at least to some embryo implanting at least to some embryo implanting at least to some degree. The top cause of pregnancy loss degree. The top cause of pregnancy loss degree. The top cause of pregnancy loss is going to be is going to be is going to be random genetic abnormality. random genetic abnormality. random genetic abnormality. This wasn't the right embryo or the This wasn't the right embryo or the This wasn't the right embryo or the embryo didn't have the right capacity or embryo didn't have the right capacity or embryo didn't have the right capacity or capability to truly implant. capability to truly implant. capability to truly implant. So, I think that should give you some So, I think that should give you some So, I think that should give you some sigh of relief that it's probably going sigh of relief that it's probably going sigh of relief that it's probably going to be a little bit easier because to be a little bit easier because to be a little bit easier because certain boxes are checked. certain boxes are checked. certain boxes are checked. I think it's also really important to I think it's also really important to I think it's also really important to say I mean, I had four pregnancy losses I mean, I had four pregnancy losses I mean, I had four pregnancy losses myself. I don't know if you know this. myself. I don't know if you know this. myself. I don't know if you know this. So, I had four pregnancy losses. Yeah. So, I had four pregnancy losses. Yeah. So, I had four pregnancy losses. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I mean, and by the way, could I &gt;&gt; I mean, and by the way, could I &gt;&gt; I mean, and by the way, could I really appreciate the personal story uh really appreciate the personal story uh really appreciate the personal story uh sharing in the book because it sharing in the book because it sharing in the book because it um it really clearly was in service to your it really clearly was in service to your it really clearly was in service to your patients and to the to the reader. And patients and to the to the reader. And patients and to the to the reader. And even as a male who can't relate even as a male who can't relate even as a male who can't relate certainly to certain aspects of all certainly to certain aspects of all certainly to certain aspects of all this, um it was um it was um it was it was not only very moving, but it was it was not only very moving, but it was it was not only very moving, but it was it was really a testament to just how it was really a testament to just how it was really a testament to just how that sort of thing lands and then the that sort of thing lands and then the that sort of thing lands and then the process of trying to sort out what's process of trying to sort out what's process of trying to sort out what's real. And it just made me even more real. And it just made me even more real. And it just made me even more grateful for the other information grateful for the other information grateful for the other information because otherwise, I mean, it would sort because otherwise, I mean, it would sort because otherwise, I mean, it would sort of be like if I'm talking about ovarian of be like if I'm talking about ovarian of be like if I'm talking about ovarian health, right? Which I've talked health, right? Which I've talked health, right? Which I've talked about on podcast, but about on podcast, but about on podcast, but yeah, with all the caveats, you know, yeah, with all the caveats, you know, yeah, with all the caveats, you know, that how but of course, how could I that how but of course, how could I that how but of course, how could I possibly know? So, the your personal possibly know? So, the your personal possibly know? So, the your personal experience well the reader and I, you experience well the reader and I, you experience well the reader and I, you know, feel know, feel know, feel and felt for you in reading it. feel and felt for you in reading it. feel and felt for you in reading it. It is it is super impactful because It is it is super impactful because It is it is super impactful because people there's a level of trust that people there's a level of trust that people there's a level of trust that just comes from somebody who's been just comes from somebody who's been just comes from somebody who's been through that whole jungle. Thank you. through that whole jungle. Thank you. through that whole jungle. Thank you. I'll try not to cry on this show about I'll try not to cry on this show about I'll try not to cry on this show about it, which is funny cuz it's so long ago, it, which is funny cuz it's so long ago, it, which is funny cuz it's so long ago, right? I have two children now. right? I have two children now. right? I have two children now. Had them after this journey. Had them after this journey. Had them after this journey. And it was terrible for so many different it was terrible for so many different it was terrible for so many different reasons. Of course, going through reasons. Of course, going through reasons. Of course, going through pregnancy loss is an emotional roller pregnancy loss is an emotional roller pregnancy loss is an emotional roller coaster. I started to have a lot of coaster. I started to have a lot of coaster. I started to have a lot of self-blame against myself. I felt like self-blame against myself. I felt like self-blame against myself. I felt like it was my own body, something was wrong. it was my own body, something was wrong. it was my own body, something was wrong. And professionally, what I was And professionally, what I was And professionally, what I was unprepared for is I was This was the end unprepared for is I was This was the end unprepared for is I was This was the end of OBGYN and then the beginning of my of OBGYN and then the beginning of my of OBGYN and then the beginning of my reproductive endocrinology fellowship. reproductive endocrinology fellowship. reproductive endocrinology fellowship. So, I felt like how am I going to be a So, I felt like how am I going to be a So, I felt like how am I going to be a fertility doctor, Andrew, if I can't fertility doctor, Andrew, if I can't fertility doctor, Andrew, if I can't even get myself pregnant? Right? The even get myself pregnant? Right? The even get myself pregnant? Right? The professional impact of how it made me professional impact of how it made me professional impact of how it made me view myself and my space, I was so view myself and my space, I was so view myself and my space, I was so unprepared for, right? We especially in unprepared for, right? We especially in unprepared for, right? We especially in an era where you separate your personal an era where you separate your personal an era where you separate your personal and professional life, which is, you and professional life, which is, you and professional life, which is, you know, what was 100% accepted back then. know, what was 100% accepted back then. know, what was 100% accepted back then. You know, my last pregnancy loss was an You know, my last pregnancy loss was an You know, my last pregnancy loss was an ectopic pregnancy. My fertility nurse ectopic pregnancy. My fertility nurse ectopic pregnancy. My fertility nurse had to give me my methotrexate shot. I had to give me my methotrexate shot. I had to give me my methotrexate shot. I mean, everybody knew about it. mean, everybody knew about it. mean, everybody knew about it. And I felt like a really big failure. And I felt like a really big failure. And I felt like a really big failure. And when I sought help to say And when I sought help to say And when I sought help to say it'll happen, just relax, there's it'll happen, just relax, there's it'll happen, just relax, there's nothing you can do or even just do IVF, nothing you can do or even just do IVF, nothing you can do or even just do IVF, felt so dismissive of what felt so dismissive of what felt so dismissive of what I felt like was true as the patient I felt like was true as the patient I felt like was true as the patient experience. Say, well, what about this experience. Say, well, what about this experience. Say, well, what about this symptom or what about this question? And symptom or what about this question? And symptom or what about this question? And just really, really pushed aside. And just really, really pushed aside. And just really, really pushed aside. And I'll be honest, it made my whole career I'll be honest, it made my whole career I'll be honest, it made my whole career is different because of it, which isn't is different because of it, which isn't is different because of it, which isn't it interesting how sometimes it interesting how sometimes it interesting how sometimes things happen to us that are not ideal. things happen to us that are not ideal. things happen to us that are not ideal. And that can be really terrible. I have And that can be really terrible. I have And that can be really terrible. I have the two kids I'm meant to have, but also the two kids I'm meant to have, but also the two kids I'm meant to have, but also I have forever viewed fertility I have forever viewed fertility I have forever viewed fertility differently. In fact, all my fellowship differently. In fact, all my fellowship differently. In fact, all my fellowship research was on natural fertility research was on natural fertility research was on natural fertility because of it cuz I said at the core, I because of it cuz I said at the core, I because of it cuz I said at the core, I want to know want to know want to know why some people get pregnant naturally why some people get pregnant naturally why some people get pregnant naturally and why other people don't. Like I and why other people don't. Like I and why other people don't. Like I really want to know that. I want to do really want to know that. I want to do really want to know that. I want to do epidemiologic research. I got a master's epidemiologic research. I got a master's epidemiologic research. I got a master's in clinical research because in clinical research because in clinical research because that research is very complicated to that research is very complicated to that research is very complicated to understand. And most fellows do an IVF understand. And most fellows do an IVF understand. And most fellows do an IVF lab project, which is great, but it's a lab project, which is great, but it's a lab project, which is great, but it's a lot more of a controlled environment. lot more of a controlled environment. lot more of a controlled environment. And then I've been so passionate about And then I've been so passionate about And then I've been so passionate about talking about it since then. And so, I talking about it since then. And so, I talking about it since then. And so, I think to walk back what I wanted to say think to walk back what I wanted to say think to walk back what I wanted to say though is if you've gone through though is if you've gone through though is if you've gone through pregnancy loss, I don't want to ever pregnancy loss, I don't want to ever pregnancy loss, I don't want to ever dismiss how terrible that experience is. dismiss how terrible that experience is. dismiss how terrible that experience is. And sometimes it can feel that way by me And sometimes it can feel that way by me And sometimes it can feel that way by me sitting here as a professional and sitting here as a professional and sitting here as a professional and saying oh, you had a pregnancy loss, so that oh, you had a pregnancy loss, so that oh, you had a pregnancy loss, so that could be a good sign for the future. could be a good sign for the future. could be a good sign for the future. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And I don't want anybody to ever &gt;&gt; Mhm. And I don't want anybody to ever &gt;&gt; Mhm. And I don't want anybody to ever feel that hearing it, but it does tell feel that hearing it, but it does tell feel that hearing it, but it does tell us that certain systems are intact. On us that certain systems are intact. On us that certain systems are intact. On the other hand, after two pregnancy the other hand, after two pregnancy the other hand, after two pregnancy losses, you need an evaluation. The losses, you need an evaluation. The losses, you need an evaluation. The evaluation is for certain blood tests, a evaluation is for certain blood tests, a evaluation is for certain blood tests, a semen analysis, a sperm fragmentation, semen analysis, a sperm fragmentation, semen analysis, a sperm fragmentation, and a uterine and tubal evaluation. That and a uterine and tubal evaluation. That and a uterine and tubal evaluation. That can be moved up to one if you had heavy can be moved up to one if you had heavy can be moved up to one if you had heavy blood loss, you know, needed a D&amp;C blood loss, you know, needed a D&amp;C blood loss, you know, needed a D&amp;C procedure, if your periods have changed procedure, if your periods have changed procedure, if your periods have changed afterward, if anything was really off, afterward, if anything was really off, afterward, if anything was really off, you can always get tested. And we never you can always get tested. And we never you can always get tested. And we never want to be in the world where we used to want to be in the world where we used to want to be in the world where we used to make women go through three pregnancy make women go through three pregnancy make women go through three pregnancy losses before they would get an losses before they would get an losses before they would get an evaluation. And I fell into that camp. evaluation. And I fell into that camp. evaluation. And I fell into that camp. After two, I said, After two, I said, After two, I said, shouldn't we do tests? I'm starting to shouldn't we do tests? I'm starting to shouldn't we do tests? I'm starting to fall off the curve here. Isn't something fall off the curve here. Isn't something fall off the curve here. Isn't something wrong? And I was told, you need to have wrong? And I was told, you need to have wrong? And I was told, you need to have another pregnancy loss before we'll do another pregnancy loss before we'll do another pregnancy loss before we'll do those tests. And that's the worst thing, those tests. And that's the worst thing, those tests. And that's the worst thing, the worst feeling that I had to fail the worst feeling that I had to fail the worst feeling that I had to fail again to a certain degree and lose a again to a certain degree and lose a again to a certain degree and lose a pregnancy before they would even pregnancy before they would even pregnancy before they would even investigate why. investigate why. investigate why. Yeah, that this theme it seems of like Yeah, that this theme it seems of like Yeah, that this theme it seems of like it's only menopause when you haven't had it's only menopause when you haven't had it's only menopause when you haven't had a period for a year, you have to have a period for a year, you have to have a period for a year, you have to have two pregnancy losses and then we can put two pregnancy losses and then we can put two pregnancy losses and then we can put you into this category of like oh, you into this category of like oh, you into this category of like oh, amenable for treatment. I mean, it's so amenable for treatment. I mean, it's so amenable for treatment. I mean, it's so it's um it's um it's um something really backwards about all of something really backwards about all of something really backwards about all of that. I imagine with your book and um that. I imagine with your book and um that. I imagine with your book and um you being public facing with health you being public facing with health you being public facing with health information and hopefully others information and hopefully others information and hopefully others um with you in your field that um with you in your field that um with you in your field that eventually this will change. I mean, I eventually this will change. I mean, I eventually this will change. I mean, I if I were to draw the parallel to if I were to draw the parallel to if I were to draw the parallel to psychiatry, which isn't a fair one. I psychiatry, which isn't a fair one. I psychiatry, which isn't a fair one. I mean, should someone really have to um mean, should someone really have to um mean, should someone really have to um be waking up at 3:00 in the morning for be waking up at 3:00 in the morning for be waking up at 3:00 in the morning for an entire year and have no uh hope for an entire year and have no uh hope for an entire year and have no uh hope for the future and be near suicidal before the future and be near suicidal before the future and be near suicidal before they get whatever the adequate treatment they get whatever the adequate treatment they get whatever the adequate treatment is? &gt;&gt; or whatever is going on. It doesn't &gt;&gt; or whatever is going on. It doesn't &gt;&gt; or whatever is going on. It doesn't &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; it doesn't make sense. I don't think it &gt;&gt; it doesn't make sense. I don't think it &gt;&gt; it doesn't make sense. I don't think it serves us. And I will say this, too. serves us. And I will say this, too. serves us. And I will say this, too. And we're starting to see a change. And we're starting to see a change. And we're starting to see a change. My big lofty hope for the book is that My big lofty hope for the book is that My big lofty hope for the book is that it changes the entire field of it changes the entire field of it changes the entire field of fertility. Like I understand why OBGYN fertility. Like I understand why OBGYN fertility. Like I understand why OBGYN used to take care of this. And then at used to take care of this. And then at used to take care of this. And then at some point they said, some people have some point they said, some people have some point they said, some people have infertility, let's draw a line in the infertility, let's draw a line in the infertility, let's draw a line in the sand and have some people specialize in sand and have some people specialize in sand and have some people specialize in this, right? And I had 3 years of this, right? And I had 3 years of this, right? And I had 3 years of training in that training in that training in that after OBGYN. after OBGYN. after OBGYN. But at the same point, But at the same point, But at the same point, it doesn't make sense to practice that it doesn't make sense to practice that it doesn't make sense to practice that way. It doesn't make sense to force way. It doesn't make sense to force way. It doesn't make sense to force people to fail. And I might tell you, people to fail. And I might tell you, people to fail. And I might tell you, hey, the greatest likelihood is all the hey, the greatest likelihood is all the hey, the greatest likelihood is all the tests will come back normal. But we tests will come back normal. But we tests will come back normal. But we should do them because sometimes it should do them because sometimes it should do them because sometimes it doesn't, right? If I look across doesn't, right? If I look across doesn't, right? If I look across somebody who has recurrent pregnancy somebody who has recurrent pregnancy somebody who has recurrent pregnancy loss, I say, loss, I say, loss, I say, 80% of the time, every test will come 80% of the time, every test will come 80% of the time, every test will come back normal. But 20% is a big number. back normal. But 20% is a big number. back normal. But 20% is a big number. That's a lot of people who maybe it's a That's a lot of people who maybe it's a That's a lot of people who maybe it's a simple medication, maybe it's a simple medication, maybe it's a simple medication, maybe it's a procedure, something can markedly change procedure, something can markedly change procedure, something can markedly change what they're going through. And in the what they're going through. And in the what they're going through. And in the same breath, same breath, same breath, and the 80% really need specialized care and the 80% really need specialized care and the 80% really need specialized care because what's really going on if we because what's really going on if we because what's really going on if we don't have an easy test for it. So, I don't have an easy test for it. So, I don't have an easy test for it. So, I agree with you. I think the whole field agree with you. I think the whole field agree with you. I think the whole field needs to change. I think we need change needs to change. I think we need change needs to change. I think we need change how we define terms, how we address how we define terms, how we address how we define terms, how we address women, how we approach reproductive women, how we approach reproductive women, how we approach reproductive health and hormones and fertility. And health and hormones and fertility. And health and hormones and fertility. And really in a more proactive really in a more proactive really in a more proactive patient-centric approach. And women and patient-centric approach. And women and patient-centric approach. And women and men are driving this really by talking men are driving this really by talking men are driving this really by talking about it. 10 years ago when I started on about it. 10 years ago when I started on about it. 10 years ago when I started on social media, nobody talked about social media, nobody talked about social media, nobody talked about fertility. And patients who did had fertility. And patients who did had fertility. And patients who did had nameless, faceless accounts. And now you nameless, faceless accounts. And now you nameless, faceless accounts. And now you see celebrities talking about IVF, see celebrities talking about IVF, see celebrities talking about IVF, talking about endometriosis, talking about endometriosis, talking about endometriosis, talking about their termination for genetic about their termination for genetic about their termination for genetic reasons or whatever happened. And those reasons or whatever happened. And those reasons or whatever happened. And those stories are so powerful to drop the stories are so powerful to drop the stories are so powerful to drop the stigma, but also highlight how wrong it stigma, but also highlight how wrong it stigma, but also highlight how wrong it is that we force women to fail before is that we force women to fail before is that we force women to fail before we'll even evaluate what's going on, let we'll even evaluate what's going on, let we'll even evaluate what's going on, let alone treat. alone treat. alone treat. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The reason I started taking it and the reason I started taking it and the reason I started taking it and the reason I still take it is because AG1 is reason I still take it is because AG1 is reason I still take it is because AG1 is to my knowledge the highest quality and to my knowledge the highest quality and to my knowledge the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational most comprehensive of the foundational most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to drink into a single scoop that's easy to drink into a single scoop that's easy to drink and it tastes great. It's designed to and it tastes great. It's designed to and it tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut health, immune support things like gut health, immune support things like gut health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does health, and overall energy. And it does health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps you might so by helping to fill any gaps you might so by helping to fill any gaps you might have in your daily nutrition. Now, of have in your daily nutrition. Now, of have in your daily nutrition. Now, of course, everyone should strive to eat course, everyone should strive to eat course, everyone should strive to eat nutritious whole foods. I certainly do nutritious whole foods. I certainly do nutritious whole foods. I certainly do that every day. But I'm often asked if that every day. But I'm often asked if that every day. But I'm often asked if you could take just one supplement, what you could take just one supplement, what you could take just one supplement, what would that supplement be? And my answer would that supplement be? And my answer would that supplement be? And my answer is always AG1 because it has just been is always AG1 because it has just been is always AG1 because it has just been oh so critical to supporting all aspects oh so critical to supporting all aspects oh so critical to supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, of my physical health, mental health, of my physical health, mental health, and performance. I know this from my own and performance. I know this from my own and performance. I know this from my own experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, that's drinkag1 with the numeral that's drinkag1 with the numeral that's drinkag1 with the numeral one.com/huberman to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. One theme that I heard One theme that I heard One theme that I heard over and over again over and over again over and over again was um women would say, "Okay, they thought women would say, "Okay, they thought women would say, "Okay, they thought that they might have been pregnant that they might have been pregnant that they might have been pregnant before or they knew they had been before or they knew they had been before or they knew they had been pregnant once before." pregnant once before." pregnant once before." Circumstances varied, but they sort of Circumstances varied, but they sort of Circumstances varied, but they sort of had it in mind that they could get had it in mind that they could get had it in mind that they could get pregnant at some point. pregnant at some point. pregnant at some point. And that their mom had And that their mom had And that their mom had one either them or a sibling one either them or a sibling one either them or a sibling let's say at like age 42 or 43 and let's say at like age 42 or 43 and let's say at like age 42 or 43 and they're in good health themselves. they're in good health themselves. they're in good health themselves. And so they had it have in mind that And so they had it have in mind that And so they had it have in mind that there's time. there's time. there's time. I think this is not uncommon. I think this is not uncommon. I think this is not uncommon. And given that life is very expensive, And given that life is very expensive, And given that life is very expensive, most people in the world seem to be most people in the world seem to be most people in the world seem to be underpaid nowadays. underpaid nowadays. underpaid nowadays. And people are waiting longer to get married people are waiting longer to get married people are waiting longer to get married and have children. and have children. and have children. And the other common narrative that I was the other common narrative that I was the other common narrative that I was hearing was that there hearing was that there hearing was that there people that want kids, but they it's people that want kids, but they it's people that want kids, but they it's under the well, if I found the right under the well, if I found the right under the well, if I found the right person, I would do it, but otherwise I person, I would do it, but otherwise I person, I would do it, but otherwise I wouldn't do it on my Yeah. That's not wouldn't do it on my Yeah. That's not wouldn't do it on my Yeah. That's not always the case, but it's pretty always the case, but it's pretty always the case, but it's pretty it's a it's a it's a common theme, it's a it's a it's a common theme, it's a it's a it's a common theme, right? So for those women, which I think right? So for those women, which I think right? So for those women, which I think is quite a few, whether or not they're is quite a few, whether or not they're is quite a few, whether or not they're in their 20s or their 30s or their 40s, in their 20s or their 30s or their 40s, in their 20s or their 30s or their 40s, what sorts of things do you recommend what sorts of things do you recommend what sorts of things do you recommend they would add to that rather just kind they would add to that rather just kind they would add to that rather just kind of real life analysis? Those are not of real life analysis? Those are not of real life analysis? Those are not meaningless metrics like how would one's meaningless metrics like how would one's meaningless metrics like how would one's mother had a child or for instance. mother had a child or for instance. mother had a child or for instance. But things have changed. Microplastics, But things have changed. Microplastics, But things have changed. Microplastics, maybe certain things have gotten better, maybe certain things have gotten better, maybe certain things have gotten better, right? We're no longer eating margarine. right? We're no longer eating margarine. right? We're no longer eating margarine. I'm not trying to be facetious Yeah. I'm not trying to be facetious Yeah. I'm not trying to be facetious Yeah. here. I think that there's so many here. I think that there's so many here. I think that there's so many variables. People are living longer, yet variables. People are living longer, yet variables. People are living longer, yet there are more environmental toxins there are more environmental toxins there are more environmental toxins perhaps. I mean people are smoking less. perhaps. I mean people are smoking less. perhaps. I mean people are smoking less. So it the Are they though? Are they? So it the Are they though? Are they? So it the Are they though? Are they? We'll talk about nicotine for sure. We'll talk about nicotine for sure. We'll talk about nicotine for sure. So for those women in their let's say 20s, for those women in their let's say 20s, for those women in their let's say 20s, 30s, and early 40s 30s, and early 40s 30s, and early 40s &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. What's the level of urgency that they What's the level of urgency that they What's the level of urgency that they get certain things checked out and what get certain things checked out and what get certain things checked out and what should they get checked out? Oh, and I should they get checked out? Oh, and I should they get checked out? Oh, and I should say that they'll say that they're should say that they'll say that they're should say that they'll say that they're having regular periods. having regular periods. having regular periods. I'd love to answer it and I'm going to, I'd love to answer it and I'm going to, I'd love to answer it and I'm going to, but for the person who's maybe coming to but for the person who's maybe coming to but for the person who's maybe coming to this discussion this discussion this discussion let me let's explain egg quality really let me let's explain egg quality really let me let's explain egg quality really quickly cuz it really is going to tie quickly cuz it really is going to tie quickly cuz it really is going to tie into what we can test and what we into what we can test and what we into what we can test and what we cannot. As you know well, As you know well, As you know well, women are born with all the eggs they're women are born with all the eggs they're women are born with all the eggs they're ever going to have. The eggs are kept I ever going to have. The eggs are kept I ever going to have. The eggs are kept I like to think about it as in a vault like to think about it as in a vault like to think about it as in a vault inside your ovary and so they're stored inside your ovary and so they're stored inside your ovary and so they're stored there. You have the most eggs when there. You have the most eggs when there. You have the most eggs when you're 5 months old inside your mom. You you're 5 months old inside your mom. You you're 5 months old inside your mom. You have 6 to 7 million eggs. By the time have 6 to 7 million eggs. By the time have 6 to 7 million eggs. By the time that you're born, you have 1 to 2 that you're born, you have 1 to 2 that you're born, you have 1 to 2 million. By the time you start your million. By the time you start your million. By the time you start your first period, you have half a million. first period, you have half a million. first period, you have half a million. So you lose eggs over time. So you lose eggs over time. So you lose eggs over time. A lot of the determination of that A lot of the determination of that A lot of the determination of that starting number will be influenced some starting number will be influenced some starting number will be influenced some by genetics and some from your mom's by genetics and some from your mom's by genetics and some from your mom's health while she's pregnant with you. health while she's pregnant with you. health while she's pregnant with you. Things she's exposed to, her current Things she's exposed to, her current Things she's exposed to, her current disease state. disease state. disease state. What I want people to think about is What I want people to think about is What I want people to think about is every single month you are losing eggs. every single month you are losing eggs. every single month you are losing eggs. So I like to imagine and describe to my So I like to imagine and describe to my So I like to imagine and describe to my patients a group of eggs is coming out patients a group of eggs is coming out patients a group of eggs is coming out of the vault. Each egg grows inside a of the vault. Each egg grows inside a of the vault. Each egg grows inside a small fluid-filled structure called a small fluid-filled structure called a small fluid-filled structure called a follicle. The brain sends out follicle. The brain sends out follicle. The brain sends out follicle-stimulating hormone or FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone or FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone or FSH, well-named, gets a follicle to grow. As well-named, gets a follicle to grow. As well-named, gets a follicle to grow. As the follicle grows, it makes estrogen. the follicle grows, it makes estrogen. the follicle grows, it makes estrogen. This is called the follicular phase. This is called the follicular phase. This is called the follicular phase. Estrogen levels talk back to the brain. Estrogen levels talk back to the brain. Estrogen levels talk back to the brain. Remember that the brain does not see Remember that the brain does not see Remember that the brain does not see what's happening anywhere in the body. what's happening anywhere in the body. what's happening anywhere in the body. It is simply waiting for the hormone It is simply waiting for the hormone It is simply waiting for the hormone signal. That's what hormones are. signal. That's what hormones are. signal. That's what hormones are. They're communication signals. I like to They're communication signals. I like to They're communication signals. I like to think about it like text messages think about it like text messages think about it like text messages between friends. between friends. between friends. When estrogen is high enough for long When estrogen is high enough for long When estrogen is high enough for long enough, 200 picograms for 50 hours enough, 200 picograms for 50 hours enough, 200 picograms for 50 hours and that's the level it'll tell the and that's the level it'll tell the and that's the level it'll tell the brain it's time to ovulate. The brain it's time to ovulate. The brain it's time to ovulate. The brain will send out a surge of LH. Follicle will send out a surge of LH. Follicle will send out a surge of LH. Follicle will then rupture. Egg will be released. will then rupture. Egg will be released. will then rupture. Egg will be released. It only has 24 hours to be fertilized, It only has 24 hours to be fertilized, It only has 24 hours to be fertilized, but that follicle will actually reform but that follicle will actually reform but that follicle will actually reform and become the corpus luteum. Now we're and become the corpus luteum. Now we're and become the corpus luteum. Now we're entering to the back half of the cycle entering to the back half of the cycle entering to the back half of the cycle called the luteal phase. The corpus called the luteal phase. The corpus called the luteal phase. The corpus luteum makes progesterone stimulated luteum makes progesterone stimulated luteum makes progesterone stimulated from LH pulses from the brain. So then from LH pulses from the brain. So then from LH pulses from the brain. So then it makes progesterone pulses throughout it makes progesterone pulses throughout it makes progesterone pulses throughout the luteal phase. the luteal phase. the luteal phase. Can only live for about 2 weeks unless a Can only live for about 2 weeks unless a Can only live for about 2 weeks unless a pregnancy occurs. When you have an pregnancy occurs. When you have an pregnancy occurs. When you have an embryo come in and implant, it makes embryo come in and implant, it makes embryo come in and implant, it makes HCG, the pregnancy hormone we check in a HCG, the pregnancy hormone we check in a HCG, the pregnancy hormone we check in a pregnancy test. pregnancy test. pregnancy test. Fun nerdy fact, HCG and LH share a Fun nerdy fact, HCG and LH share a Fun nerdy fact, HCG and LH share a receptor. So HCG comes into the corpus receptor. So HCG comes into the corpus receptor. So HCG comes into the corpus luteum and now stimulates a constant luteum and now stimulates a constant luteum and now stimulates a constant production of progesterone. production of progesterone. production of progesterone. But if that doesn't happen, corpus But if that doesn't happen, corpus But if that doesn't happen, corpus luteum will die, progesterone will drop, luteum will die, progesterone will drop, luteum will die, progesterone will drop, and you'll get a period. Okay. and you'll get a period. Okay. and you'll get a period. Okay. Also back to the vault, you have a Also back to the vault, you have a Also back to the vault, you have a different number of eggs that come out different number of eggs that come out different number of eggs that come out every month that is proportional to how every month that is proportional to how every month that is proportional to how many remain. So when you are younger, many remain. So when you are younger, many remain. So when you are younger, when you have more eggs, more eggs come when you have more eggs, more eggs come when you have more eggs, more eggs come out of the vault every month. As you get out of the vault every month. As you get out of the vault every month. As you get older and you have fewer eggs, fewer older and you have fewer eggs, fewer older and you have fewer eggs, fewer come out every month. That explains why come out every month. That explains why come out every month. That explains why you go from 6 to 7 million to 1 to 2 you go from 6 to 7 million to 1 to 2 you go from 6 to 7 million to 1 to 2 million and why you go from 1 to 2 million and why you go from 1 to 2 million and why you go from 1 to 2 million to half a million because you million to half a million because you million to half a million because you had more, you're losing more. had more, you're losing more. had more, you're losing more. At some point everybody will be out of At some point everybody will be out of At some point everybody will be out of eggs, right? eggs, right? eggs, right? We're going to call that ovarian failure We're going to call that ovarian failure We're going to call that ovarian failure and not menopause for the sake of our and not menopause for the sake of our and not menopause for the sake of our discussion, but so everybody will go discussion, but so everybody will go discussion, but so everybody will go into ovarian failure. into ovarian failure. into ovarian failure. Now the timeline once you have your Now the timeline once you have your Now the timeline once you have your clock is now up. Because at that point clock is now up. Because at that point clock is now up. Because at that point there's no more eggs, you cannot get there's no more eggs, you cannot get there's no more eggs, you cannot get pregnant with your own genetic child. pregnant with your own genetic child. pregnant with your own genetic child. You still have a functioning uterus. You still have a functioning uterus. You still have a functioning uterus. It's just not being stimulated. So It's just not being stimulated. So It's just not being stimulated. So importantly, those women can get importantly, those women can get importantly, those women can get pregnant with donor eggs or donor pregnant with donor eggs or donor pregnant with donor eggs or donor embryos. They can still carry a embryos. They can still carry a embryos. They can still carry a pregnancy. That's sometime a myth that pregnancy. That's sometime a myth that pregnancy. That's sometime a myth that people think about. people think about. people think about. But once you're out of eggs, that's kind But once you're out of eggs, that's kind But once you're out of eggs, that's kind of the end of your clock. Now two things of the end of your clock. Now two things of the end of your clock. Now two things are happening with time that are really are happening with time that are really are happening with time that are really important because your eggs are inside important because your eggs are inside important because your eggs are inside that vault inside your ovary that vault inside your ovary that vault inside your ovary is that they absorb the wear and tear of is that they absorb the wear and tear of is that they absorb the wear and tear of your life. And your egg has many your life. And your egg has many your life. And your egg has many different functions. It has to respond different functions. It has to respond different functions. It has to respond to hormone signals and make estrogen, to hormone signals and make estrogen, to hormone signals and make estrogen, make progesterone, and ovulate. The make progesterone, and ovulate. The make progesterone, and ovulate. The mitochondria inside the egg, which mitochondria inside the egg, which mitochondria inside the egg, which everybody knows the mitochondria, the everybody knows the mitochondria, the everybody knows the mitochondria, the powerhouse of the cell, gets exclusively powerhouse of the cell, gets exclusively powerhouse of the cell, gets exclusively passed on to the embryo. It completely passed on to the embryo. It completely passed on to the embryo. It completely controls embryo growth and development. controls embryo growth and development. controls embryo growth and development. In fact, the male genome doesn't even In fact, the male genome doesn't even In fact, the male genome doesn't even kick in until day three after kick in until day three after kick in until day three after fertilization. All those first few days fertilization. All those first few days fertilization. All those first few days are 100% maternal. are 100% maternal. are 100% maternal. The egg also has a hold the chromosomes The egg also has a hold the chromosomes The egg also has a hold the chromosomes in correct position. in correct position. in correct position. So an interesting fact is that inside So an interesting fact is that inside So an interesting fact is that inside the egg, it is frozen in metaphase of the egg, it is frozen in metaphase of the egg, it is frozen in metaphase of meiosis two for whatever reason. And so meiosis two for whatever reason. And so meiosis two for whatever reason. And so the chromosomes have met in the middle the chromosomes have met in the middle the chromosomes have met in the middle and they're held apart by those meiotic and they're held apart by those meiotic and they're held apart by those meiotic spindles and they do not separate until spindles and they do not separate until spindles and they do not separate until you ovulate. And so then you get your you ovulate. And so then you get your you ovulate. And so then you get your egg that has all we think about as your egg that has all we think about as your egg that has all we think about as your 23 X. The other part goes into a polar 23 X. The other part goes into a polar 23 X. The other part goes into a polar body. Okay, this means that when you're 25, Okay, this means that when you're 25, Okay, this means that when you're 25, your eggs have only been held in your eggs have only been held in your eggs have only been held in metaphase for 25 years. Your chromosomes metaphase for 25 years. Your chromosomes metaphase for 25 years. Your chromosomes are for the most part still in the right are for the most part still in the right are for the most part still in the right position. Your proteins are strong that position. Your proteins are strong that position. Your proteins are strong that are holding them apart. Most people have are holding them apart. Most people have are holding them apart. Most people have better generalized metabolic health. better generalized metabolic health. better generalized metabolic health. Their mitochondria are stronger. Their mitochondria are stronger. Their mitochondria are stronger. When you are 40 When you are 40 When you are 40 years have passed. We've asked those 40 years have passed. We've asked those 40 years have passed. We've asked those chromosomes to hold there longer. And we chromosomes to hold there longer. And we chromosomes to hold there longer. And we say if I have a line of kindergarteners say if I have a line of kindergarteners say if I have a line of kindergarteners and I ask them to stand for 40 years, and I ask them to stand for 40 years, and I ask them to stand for 40 years, like somebody's going to get out of like somebody's going to get out of like somebody's going to get out of line. So tincture of time adds up. line. So tincture of time adds up. line. So tincture of time adds up. But the other thing that happens as we But the other thing that happens as we But the other thing that happens as we get older is as a population, we get older is as a population, we get older is as a population, we get more metabolically unhealthy. So we see more metabolically unhealthy. So we see more metabolically unhealthy. So we see more chronic inflammation, more insulin more chronic inflammation, more insulin more chronic inflammation, more insulin resistance, more obesity. And all of resistance, more obesity. And all of resistance, more obesity. And all of those factors influence oxidative those factors influence oxidative those factors influence oxidative stress, mitochondrial health, DNA stress, mitochondrial health, DNA stress, mitochondrial health, DNA damage. They can damage the meiotic damage. They can damage the meiotic damage. They can damage the meiotic spindles holding those chromosomes spindles holding those chromosomes spindles holding those chromosomes apart. So we also see apart. So we also see apart. So we also see more genetic abnormalities as we age, more genetic abnormalities as we age, more genetic abnormalities as we age, but that is worsening as metabolic but that is worsening as metabolic but that is worsening as metabolic health worsens, too. Okay. health worsens, too. Okay. health worsens, too. Okay. We don't have a direct test for egg We don't have a direct test for egg We don't have a direct test for egg quality. That's what we call egg quality. That's what we call egg quality. That's what we call egg quality. Genetic normalcy and egg quality. Genetic normalcy and egg quality. Genetic normalcy and egg competency. How good are the competency. How good are the competency. How good are the mitochondria? Can it do its job? mitochondria? Can it do its job? mitochondria? Can it do its job? We approximate it to age. We approximate it to age. We approximate it to age. Which has some faults because not all Which has some faults because not all Which has some faults because not all 40-year-olds are created equal. 40-year-olds are created equal. 40-year-olds are created equal. When we think about ovarian reserve, When we think about ovarian reserve, When we think about ovarian reserve, this is how many eggs you have this is how many eggs you have this is how many eggs you have remaining. So this is how many eggs are remaining. So this is how many eggs are remaining. So this is how many eggs are inside the vault. And we can approximate inside the vault. And we can approximate inside the vault. And we can approximate it with a blood test called AMH. AMH it with a blood test called AMH. AMH it with a blood test called AMH. AMH stands for anti-Müllerian hormone. It's stands for anti-Müllerian hormone. It's stands for anti-Müllerian hormone. It's made from the granulosa cells that made from the granulosa cells that made from the granulosa cells that surround each follicle. So in its purest surround each follicle. So in its purest surround each follicle. So in its purest form, more eggs inside the vault, more form, more eggs inside the vault, more form, more eggs inside the vault, more come out, more AMH. Fewer eggs in the come out, more AMH. Fewer eggs in the come out, more AMH. Fewer eggs in the vault, fewer come out, lower AMH. Not a vault, fewer come out, lower AMH. Not a vault, fewer come out, lower AMH. Not a perfect test. The vault also is not perfect test. The vault also is not perfect test. The vault also is not perfect, so there's some month-to-month perfect, so there's some month-to-month perfect, so there's some month-to-month variability in how many exactly get sent variability in how many exactly get sent variability in how many exactly get sent out. And in prolonged periods of not And in prolonged periods of not And in prolonged periods of not ovulating, AMH can be suppressed, ovulating, AMH can be suppressed, ovulating, AMH can be suppressed, whether it's from birth control pills, whether it's from birth control pills, whether it's from birth control pills, pregnancy, postpartum, whatever the pregnancy, postpartum, whatever the pregnancy, postpartum, whatever the reason is. So AMH is imperfect, but it reason is. So AMH is imperfect, but it reason is. So AMH is imperfect, but it is something and it's a very simple is something and it's a very simple is something and it's a very simple blood test. blood test. blood test. It's not telling us if you can get It's not telling us if you can get It's not telling us if you can get pregnant or not, but it is telling us pregnant or not, but it is telling us pregnant or not, but it is telling us how many eggs do we have outside the how many eggs do we have outside the how many eggs do we have outside the vault. And the way I like to frame this vault. And the way I like to frame this vault. And the way I like to frame this is that every woman who wants to have is that every woman who wants to have is that every woman who wants to have children or understand her own children or understand her own children or understand her own reproductive timeline should get an AMH reproductive timeline should get an AMH reproductive timeline should get an AMH checked. That is against medical advice, meaning That is against medical advice, meaning That is against medical advice, meaning the American College of OBGYN says that the American College of OBGYN says that the American College of OBGYN says that women should not get an AMH checked women should not get an AMH checked women should not get an AMH checked unless they have infertility. unless they have infertility. unless they have infertility. Okay, this is wild to me, right? Okay, this is wild to me, right? Okay, this is wild to me, right? &gt;&gt; I mean to me as well. I mean it just &gt;&gt; I mean to me as well. I mean it just &gt;&gt; I mean to me as well. I mean it just seems like this failure criteria it seems like this failure criteria it seems like this failure criteria it just seems so it seems just very extreme just seems so it seems just very extreme just seems so it seems just very extreme and unnecessary. Unless there's some and unnecessary. Unless there's some and unnecessary. Unless there's some hidden agenda to try and prevent people hidden agenda to try and prevent people hidden agenda to try and prevent people from maintaining fertility or from maintaining fertility or from maintaining fertility or having children because and that doesn't having children because and that doesn't having children because and that doesn't square with square with square with at least my assumptions. The idea here at least my assumptions. The idea here at least my assumptions. The idea here is that it can be really stressful. This is that it can be really stressful. This is that it can be really stressful. This is what they say in their document. is what they say in their document. is what they say in their document. American College of OBGYN, it can be American College of OBGYN, it can be American College of OBGYN, it can be very stressful for a woman to find out very stressful for a woman to find out very stressful for a woman to find out she has a low AMH and that it doesn't she has a low AMH and that it doesn't she has a low AMH and that it doesn't predict fertility. predict fertility. predict fertility. And there's some truth to that. So let's And there's some truth to that. So let's And there's some truth to that. So let's think about I have two 30-year-olds. One think about I have two 30-year-olds. One think about I have two 30-year-olds. One has 20 eggs outside the vault, which has 20 eggs outside the vault, which has 20 eggs outside the vault, which would be age-related norm, and one has would be age-related norm, and one has would be age-related norm, and one has five eggs outside the vault. Well, if five eggs outside the vault. Well, if five eggs outside the vault. Well, if every single other factor is the same every single other factor is the same every single other factor is the same and they each are ovulating one egg, and they each are ovulating one egg, and they each are ovulating one egg, they have the same chance of getting they have the same chance of getting they have the same chance of getting pregnant, right? So that's not a faulty pregnant, right? So that's not a faulty pregnant, right? So that's not a faulty statement. However, the person who has statement. However, the person who has statement. However, the person who has five eggs will not have as long to grow five eggs will not have as long to grow five eggs will not have as long to grow her family. She will not get as many her family. She will not get as many her family. She will not get as many eggs if we're doing advanced treatment eggs if we're doing advanced treatment eggs if we're doing advanced treatment like egg freezing or IVF because I can like egg freezing or IVF because I can like egg freezing or IVF because I can only get the eggs outside the vault to only get the eggs outside the vault to only get the eggs outside the vault to grow. So it's hugely impactful for what grow. So it's hugely impactful for what grow. So it's hugely impactful for what your journey may look like in treatment. your journey may look like in treatment. your journey may look like in treatment. But more so than that, Andrew, so many But more so than that, Andrew, so many But more so than that, Andrew, so many of the causes of a low AMH directly of the causes of a low AMH directly of the causes of a low AMH directly contribute to infertility. Things like contribute to infertility. Things like contribute to infertility. Things like autoimmune disease, insulin resistance, autoimmune disease, insulin resistance, autoimmune disease, insulin resistance, endometriosis, smoking cigarettes. So if endometriosis, smoking cigarettes. So if endometriosis, smoking cigarettes. So if there are factors, some of which you can there are factors, some of which you can there are factors, some of which you can control, some of which you can treat. control, some of which you can treat. control, some of which you can treat. If I have a woman who has a low AMH, If I have a woman who has a low AMH, If I have a woman who has a low AMH, I'm not going to sit here and say, I'm not going to sit here and say, I'm not going to sit here and say, "Okay, well, you can still get pregnant, "Okay, well, you can still get pregnant, "Okay, well, you can still get pregnant, no worries." I'm going to say, "I don't no worries." I'm going to say, "I don't no worries." I'm going to say, "I don't know that you'll have infertility, but know that you'll have infertility, but know that you'll have infertility, but some of the reasons your AMH is low can some of the reasons your AMH is low can some of the reasons your AMH is low can cause infertility. You will get fewer cause infertility. You will get fewer cause infertility. You will get fewer eggs if we're freezing your eggs or eggs if we're freezing your eggs or eggs if we're freezing your eggs or doing IVF. You will go into menopause doing IVF. You will go into menopause doing IVF. You will go into menopause earlier. So, we need not wait, right? To earlier. So, we need not wait, right? To earlier. So, we need not wait, right? To your point, the woman who's 20, 30, 40 your point, the woman who's 20, 30, 40 your point, the woman who's 20, 30, 40 thinking about this, thinking about this, thinking about this, she might make a very different decision she might make a very different decision she might make a very different decision when she knows she's really faced with a when she knows she's really faced with a when she knows she's really faced with a timeline that is less than ideal. timeline that is less than ideal. timeline that is less than ideal. And why should we allow time to be And why should we allow time to be And why should we allow time to be making that decision for us instead of making that decision for us instead of making that decision for us instead of at least playing an active role? I sit at least playing an active role? I sit at least playing an active role? I sit across from women every day find out across from women every day find out across from women every day find out they have a low AMH, and I say this, they have a low AMH, and I say this, they have a low AMH, and I say this, like, let's do the investigation to see like, let's do the investigation to see like, let's do the investigation to see if we can find out why. if we can find out why. if we can find out why. Probably 50% of the time we find an Probably 50% of the time we find an Probably 50% of the time we find an autoimmune disease. autoimmune disease. autoimmune disease. I can't reverse the clock, but I can I can't reverse the clock, but I can I can't reverse the clock, but I can slow down the rate of inflammation, slow down the rate of inflammation, slow down the rate of inflammation, right? If say [clears throat] if it's right? If say [clears throat] if it's right? If say [clears throat] if it's Hashimoto's, suddenly we can do thyroid Hashimoto's, suddenly we can do thyroid Hashimoto's, suddenly we can do thyroid replacement, we can work on decreasing replacement, we can work on decreasing replacement, we can work on decreasing inflammation. If inflammation harms our inflammation. If inflammation harms our inflammation. If inflammation harms our ovary, maybe we can slow down that rate ovary, maybe we can slow down that rate ovary, maybe we can slow down that rate of egg loss. of egg loss. of egg loss. At least she's being treated and At least she's being treated and At least she's being treated and probably feeling better and will have probably feeling better and will have probably feeling better and will have improved fertility outcomes because her improved fertility outcomes because her improved fertility outcomes because her Hashimoto's is treated. So, we should Hashimoto's is treated. So, we should Hashimoto's is treated. So, we should look at why. Why is it low? And treating look at why. Why is it low? And treating look at why. Why is it low? And treating that why very well may impact fertility. that why very well may impact fertility. that why very well may impact fertility. We also might say, what should we do We also might say, what should we do We also might say, what should we do about this? You know, I have about this? You know, I have about this? You know, I have a lot of couples who are partnered who a lot of couples who are partnered who a lot of couples who are partnered who are just waiting for the right time to are just waiting for the right time to are just waiting for the right time to get pregnant. So, sometimes we say, get pregnant. So, sometimes we say, get pregnant. So, sometimes we say, well, we could get pregnant, but I'm in we could get pregnant, but I'm in we could get pregnant, but I'm in medical training, I'm going to law medical training, I'm going to law medical training, I'm going to law school, I'm doing XYZ, it's not a good school, I'm doing XYZ, it's not a good school, I'm doing XYZ, it's not a good time. Well, when faced with their perfect Well, when faced with their perfect Well, when faced with their perfect time, they may not have eggs anymore. time, they may not have eggs anymore. time, they may not have eggs anymore. Suddenly, we reevaluate where we are, Suddenly, we reevaluate where we are, Suddenly, we reevaluate where we are, and there's no one right answer. We and there's no one right answer. We and there's no one right answer. We might choose to try to get pregnant now. might choose to try to get pregnant now. might choose to try to get pregnant now. If we don't have a partner, we might buy If we don't have a partner, we might buy If we don't have a partner, we might buy donor sperm and try to get pregnant. donor sperm and try to get pregnant. donor sperm and try to get pregnant. Maybe we freeze eggs. Maybe we freeze Maybe we freeze eggs. Maybe we freeze Maybe we freeze eggs. Maybe we freeze embryos. Maybe we do none of those embryos. Maybe we do none of those embryos. Maybe we do none of those things, but we made the active choice, things, but we made the active choice, things, but we made the active choice, right? Sitting here saying, "I chose not right? Sitting here saying, "I chose not right? Sitting here saying, "I chose not to pursue treatment knowing my AMH was to pursue treatment knowing my AMH was to pursue treatment knowing my AMH was low and that I might be in ovarian low and that I might be in ovarian low and that I might be in ovarian failure at the point when I was planning failure at the point when I was planning failure at the point when I was planning to have a family, and I know that" to have a family, and I know that" to have a family, and I know that" makes the journey so much easier to walk makes the journey so much easier to walk makes the journey so much easier to walk because you made that active choice from because you made that active choice from because you made that active choice from a place of a knowledge that was your a place of a knowledge that was your a place of a knowledge that was your autonomous decision versus saying, "I autonomous decision versus saying, "I autonomous decision versus saying, "I asked my doctor for an AMH test 5 years asked my doctor for an AMH test 5 years asked my doctor for an AMH test 5 years ago. They told me it wasn't medically ago. They told me it wasn't medically ago. They told me it wasn't medically recommended because I don't have recommended because I don't have recommended because I don't have infertility, and had I known that infertility, and had I known that infertility, and had I known that information then, I might have done information then, I might have done information then, I might have done something different." something different." something different." Well, that was the longest discussion to Well, that was the longest discussion to Well, that was the longest discussion to say everybody should get an AMH. I think say everybody should get an AMH. I think say everybody should get an AMH. I think it's a very important marker. it's a very important marker. it's a very important marker. It's a newer-ish test. We've only been It's a newer-ish test. We've only been It's a newer-ish test. We've only been checking it for about the past 10 years. checking it for about the past 10 years. checking it for about the past 10 years. It's not a perfect test. I don't have It's not a perfect test. I don't have It's not a perfect test. I don't have the nomogram for exactly how it should the nomogram for exactly how it should the nomogram for exactly how it should drop over time, and I like to think drop over time, and I like to think drop over time, and I like to think about it as categories. about it as categories. about it as categories. Normal, above average, below average, Normal, above average, below average, Normal, above average, below average, critically low. And based on your critically low. And based on your critically low. And based on your category, we should probably talk and do category, we should probably talk and do category, we should probably talk and do different things. If you are listening different things. If you are listening different things. If you are listening to this and you want kids one day, ask to this and you want kids one day, ask to this and you want kids one day, ask your doctor for this test. your doctor for this test. your doctor for this test. If they say no, you can order it If they say no, you can order it If they say no, you can order it yourself at a LabCorp request, many of yourself at a LabCorp request, many of yourself at a LabCorp request, many of the online platforms like Function the online platforms like Function the online platforms like Function Health, you can have an AMH checked Health, you can have an AMH checked Health, you can have an AMH checked through them. You can ask your doctor through them. You can ask your doctor through them. You can ask your doctor for it and say, "Well, if it's low, I for it and say, "Well, if it's low, I for it and say, "Well, if it's low, I know I'll talk to a fertility doctor to know I'll talk to a fertility doctor to know I'll talk to a fertility doctor to find out more information." Or call a find out more information." Or call a find out more information." Or call a fertility clinic and just say you want fertility clinic and just say you want fertility clinic and just say you want fertility testing. The end. Okay, I fertility testing. The end. Okay, I fertility testing. The end. Okay, I think it's such an important think it's such an important think it's such an important [clears throat] marker. It is not a test [clears throat] marker. It is not a test [clears throat] marker. It is not a test of egg quality. You know, we talked of egg quality. You know, we talked of egg quality. You know, we talked about what egg quality is, right? about what egg quality is, right? about what egg quality is, right? Genetics and egg competency, Genetics and egg competency, Genetics and egg competency, but it is a check of how many eggs you but it is a check of how many eggs you but it is a check of how many eggs you have, and that knowledge can be really have, and that knowledge can be really have, and that knowledge can be really impactful for how you view your future impactful for how you view your future impactful for how you view your future and your plan. and your plan. and your plan. So, I think everybody should get an AMH. So, I think everybody should get an AMH. So, I think everybody should get an AMH. I think we've got to learn to track our I think we've got to learn to track our I think we've got to learn to track our cycle, and I know you said in the cycle, and I know you said in the cycle, and I know you said in the vignette that these women have regular vignette that these women have regular vignette that these women have regular cycles. Having a regular period is really good. Having a regular period is really good. Having a regular period is really good. It's much better than having an It's much better than having an It's much better than having an irregular period, but knowing when you irregular period, but knowing when you irregular period, but knowing when you ovulate and tracking ovulation is a much ovulate and tracking ovulation is a much ovulate and tracking ovulation is a much more sensitive health marker than simply more sensitive health marker than simply more sensitive health marker than simply when you bleed or when you have a when you bleed or when you have a when you bleed or when you have a period. Because tracking ovulation is period. Because tracking ovulation is period. Because tracking ovulation is going to allow us to know how long is going to allow us to know how long is going to allow us to know how long is your luteal phase and how long is your luteal phase and how long is your luteal phase and how long is your follicular phase. And ovulation follicular phase. And ovulation follicular phase. And ovulation disorders progress through a very disorders progress through a very disorders progress through a very predictable pattern, and we know this predictable pattern, and we know this predictable pattern, and we know this well. The first stage of an ovulation disorder The first stage of an ovulation disorder The first stage of an ovulation disorder is a luteal phase defect, meaning a is a luteal phase defect, meaning a is a luteal phase defect, meaning a shortening of your luteal phase. So, shortening of your luteal phase. So, shortening of your luteal phase. So, you're ovulating, but the brain and you're ovulating, but the brain and you're ovulating, but the brain and ovary have a miscommunication, ovary have a miscommunication, ovary have a miscommunication, and we don't make progesterone long and we don't make progesterone long and we don't make progesterone long enough to sustain the luteal phase. Less enough to sustain the luteal phase. Less enough to sustain the luteal phase. Less than 11 days is a short luteal phase, than 11 days is a short luteal phase, than 11 days is a short luteal phase, but you'll still have regular cycles. but you'll still have regular cycles. but you'll still have regular cycles. So, if I sit across from somebody and I So, if I sit across from somebody and I So, if I sit across from somebody and I just say, "Are your cycles regular?" and just say, "Are your cycles regular?" and just say, "Are your cycles regular?" and they say yes, and we carry on, I've they say yes, and we carry on, I've they say yes, and we carry on, I've missed the fact that they actually have missed the fact that they actually have missed the fact that they actually have a shortened luteal phase, and that a shortened luteal phase, and that a shortened luteal phase, and that warrants further investigation. warrants further investigation. warrants further investigation. Prolactin, thyroid, AMH, PCOS, looking Prolactin, thyroid, AMH, PCOS, looking Prolactin, thyroid, AMH, PCOS, looking at different causes. at different causes. at different causes. The second stage of ovulation disorder The second stage of ovulation disorder The second stage of ovulation disorder is a long luteal phase. is a long luteal phase. is a long luteal phase. Takes the ovary longer to actually Takes the ovary longer to actually Takes the ovary longer to actually respond to the FSH stimulus from the respond to the FSH stimulus from the respond to the FSH stimulus from the brain, and then from there we'll brain, and then from there we'll brain, and then from there we'll progress into irregularity and true progress into irregularity and true progress into irregularity and true amenorrhea or absence of periods, but amenorrhea or absence of periods, but amenorrhea or absence of periods, but those first stages, you might miss the those first stages, you might miss the those first stages, you might miss the little red flag warning sign that little red flag warning sign that little red flag warning sign that something's wrong inside your body something's wrong inside your body something's wrong inside your body because you're just tracking when your because you're just tracking when your because you're just tracking when your bleed is, and it's every 34 days, so you bleed is, and it's every 34 days, so you bleed is, and it's every 34 days, so you think it's normal, think it's normal, think it's normal, but if we were looking at when you but if we were looking at when you but if we were looking at when you actually ovulated, actually ovulated, actually ovulated, we have more data. So, learning to track we have more data. So, learning to track we have more data. So, learning to track ovulation as opposed to just ovulation as opposed to just ovulation as opposed to just cycle tracking, I think is one of the cycle tracking, I think is one of the cycle tracking, I think is one of the most important skills a woman can have most important skills a woman can have most important skills a woman can have for learning to listen to her own for learning to listen to her own for learning to listen to her own hormonal cues. hormonal cues. hormonal cues. Amazing. Um just Amazing. Um just Amazing. Um just I don't say that lightly. You just I don't say that lightly. You just I don't say that lightly. You just explained egg quality, the biology of explained egg quality, the biology of explained egg quality, the biology of the of the ovulation cycle, and how it the of the ovulation cycle, and how it the of the ovulation cycle, and how it links to the actionables, and um I'm links to the actionables, and um I'm links to the actionables, and um I'm just struck. It's awesome. Um just struck. It's awesome. Um just struck. It's awesome. Um And it has me asking a couple of practical it has me asking a couple of practical it has me asking a couple of practical questions. Um some people will have insurance, some Um some people will have insurance, some Um some people will have insurance, some won't. What's the cost of an AMH test? won't. What's the cost of an AMH test? won't. What's the cost of an AMH test? Let's assume insurance doesn't cover it. Let's assume insurance doesn't cover it. Let's assume insurance doesn't cover it. Um and they just have to go completely Um and they just have to go completely Um and they just have to go completely out of pocket. Uh and before you answer, out of pocket. Uh and before you answer, out of pocket. Uh and before you answer, I will say whatever it is, I think it I will say whatever it is, I think it I will say whatever it is, I think it should probably be compared against what should probably be compared against what should probably be compared against what it would be to try and um it would be to try and um it would be to try and um I don't want to say rescue, but to I don't want to say rescue, but to I don't want to say rescue, but to not take the test, and then, you know, 3 not take the test, and then, you know, 3 not take the test, and then, you know, 3 years later you're trying to harvest years later you're trying to harvest years later you're trying to harvest eggs. It could be multiple cycles eggs. It could be multiple cycles eggs. It could be multiple cycles because you realize it was only five because you realize it was only five because you realize it was only five eggs per eggs per eggs per you know, per month as opposed to you know, per month as opposed to you know, per month as opposed to age match, right? 15, right? Exactly. age match, right? 15, right? Exactly. age match, right? 15, right? Exactly. So, um so, are we talking hundreds of So, um so, are we talking hundreds of So, um so, are we talking hundreds of dollars, thousands? dollars, thousands? dollars, thousands? $79. a $79 test, and a $79 test, and a $79 test, and I feel really strongly about this. I feel really strongly about this. I feel really strongly about this. I do not view myself as the gatekeeper of do not view myself as the gatekeeper of do not view myself as the gatekeeper of information about your body. Do you want information about your body. Do you want information about your body. Do you want hormone levels checked? Do you want an hormone levels checked? Do you want an hormone levels checked? Do you want an AMH? I do not think that is the role of AMH? I do not think that is the role of AMH? I do not think that is the role of a physician. I know I can say your a physician. I know I can say your a physician. I know I can say your insurance doesn't cover it. You can make insurance doesn't cover it. You can make insurance doesn't cover it. You can make the decision if $79 is worth it to you, the decision if $79 is worth it to you, the decision if $79 is worth it to you, but in the age of information, where but in the age of information, where but in the age of information, where that's an easy test to do, every lab that's an easy test to do, every lab that's an easy test to do, every lab runs it, and it's relatively inexpensive runs it, and it's relatively inexpensive runs it, and it's relatively inexpensive compared to freezing your eggs or IVF. I compared to freezing your eggs or IVF. I compared to freezing your eggs or IVF. I mean, right? Multitudes. $79. We're mean, right? Multitudes. $79. We're mean, right? Multitudes. $79. We're throwing a fit over a $79 test. throwing a fit over a $79 test. throwing a fit over a $79 test. Wow. Um Wow. Um Wow. Um &gt;&gt; [cough and clears throat] &gt;&gt; [cough and clears throat] &gt;&gt; [cough and clears throat] &gt;&gt; I &gt;&gt; I &gt;&gt; I I'm going to make sure that message goes I'm going to make sure that message goes I'm going to make sure that message goes far and wide. Um because I you know, I far and wide. Um because I you know, I far and wide. Um because I you know, I thought you were going to say maybe in thought you were going to say maybe in thought you were going to say maybe in the high hundreds or thousands, which the high hundreds or thousands, which the high hundreds or thousands, which for some people is going to be, you for some people is going to be, you for some people is going to be, you know, prohibitively expensive. Yes, I know, prohibitively expensive. Yes, I know, prohibitively expensive. Yes, I So, get AMH checked. I think I'll avoid So, get AMH checked. I think I'll avoid So, get AMH checked. I think I'll avoid going into too much editorializing here going into too much editorializing here going into too much editorializing here because I'm really just interested in because I'm really just interested in because I'm really just interested in how you view this, but how you view this, but how you view this, but how you describe the sort of the how you describe the sort of the how you describe the sort of the way your field has a way your field has a way your field has a originated and where it's headed reminds originated and where it's headed reminds originated and where it's headed reminds me a little bit of I remember in the me a little bit of I remember in the me a little bit of I remember in the '80s there was a '80s there was a '80s there was a genetic testing was starting to become genetic testing was starting to become genetic testing was starting to become possible. And a lot of it was happening possible. And a lot of it was happening possible. And a lot of it was happening at Stanford. I happen to grow up near at Stanford. I happen to grow up near at Stanford. I happen to grow up near campus, and I remember hearing you could campus, and I remember hearing you could campus, and I remember hearing you could get tested for like Huntington's get tested for like Huntington's get tested for like Huntington's disease, which disease, which disease, which is it can be a devastating disease. Um is it can be a devastating disease. Um is it can be a devastating disease. Um and the idea was people don't want to and the idea was people don't want to and the idea was people don't want to know. People don't want to know. I think People don't want to know. I think People don't want to know. I think everything I've observed, I can't everything I've observed, I can't everything I've observed, I can't speak for everyone, but everything I've speak for everyone, but everything I've speak for everyone, but everything I've observed about people's interest in observed about people's interest in observed about people's interest in their own health and genetics and what their own health and genetics and what their own health and genetics and what genetics does and doesn't mean tells me genetics does and doesn't mean tells me genetics does and doesn't mean tells me that people are actually much more that people are actually much more that people are actually much more interested, and they're much smarter than let's just and they're much smarter than let's just and they're much smarter than let's just call it the traditional medical field, call it the traditional medical field, call it the traditional medical field, certainly medical genetic testing, gave certainly medical genetic testing, gave certainly medical genetic testing, gave them credit for. It's like people aren't them credit for. It's like people aren't them credit for. It's like people aren't idiots. You can sit someone down and idiots. You can sit someone down and idiots. You can sit someone down and say, "Hey, listen, you have this gene. say, "Hey, listen, you have this gene. say, "Hey, listen, you have this gene. There's an X probability. Here's the There's an X probability. Here's the There's an X probability. Here's the things you can do to protect yourself." things you can do to protect yourself." things you can do to protect yourself." And but there was this assumption like And but there was this assumption like And but there was this assumption like people don't want to know because now people don't want to know because now people don't want to know because now they're going to live in dread and their they're going to live in dread and their they're going to live in dread and their life is going to be destroyed if they life is going to be destroyed if they life is going to be destroyed if they know they're going to get full-blown know they're going to get full-blown know they're going to get full-blown Huntington's or something like that. Huntington's or something like that. Huntington's or something like that. It's so paternalistic. It's so paternalistic. It's so paternalistic. &gt;&gt; It's actually &gt;&gt; It's actually &gt;&gt; It's actually I mean, it I mean, it I mean, it borders on unethical. Um borders on unethical. Um borders on unethical. Um people are smart. People can take in people are smart. People can take in people are smart. People can take in information, and they can make decisions information, and they can make decisions information, and they can make decisions that don't necessarily crater them on that don't necessarily crater them on that don't necessarily crater them on the basis of just knowledge. I mean, it the basis of just knowledge. I mean, it the basis of just knowledge. I mean, it feels like we sort of treat people like feels like we sort of treat people like feels like we sort of treat people like children, like little children. And even children, like little children. And even children, like little children. And even little children would probably want to little children would probably want to little children would probably want to know certain things. Although you don't know certain things. Although you don't know certain things. Although you don't want to give them genetic information, want to give them genetic information, want to give them genetic information, but certain things like, "Hey, you have but certain things like, "Hey, you have but certain things like, "Hey, you have a challenge with X, Y, and Z, and you a challenge with X, Y, and Z, and you a challenge with X, Y, and Z, and you can overcome it in the following ways." can overcome it in the following ways." can overcome it in the following ways." Technology's advanced. It has. How we Technology's advanced. It has. How we Technology's advanced. It has. How we counsel and how we approach health care counsel and how we approach health care counsel and how we approach health care needs to advance also, meaning needs to advance also, meaning needs to advance also, meaning we don't live in a universal health care we don't live in a universal health care we don't live in a universal health care system. We don't have only X dollars to system. We don't have only X dollars to system. We don't have only X dollars to spend on every single patient. And in spend on every single patient. And in spend on every single patient. And in certain circumstances, when that's the certain circumstances, when that's the certain circumstances, when that's the case or a patient has limited money, we case or a patient has limited money, we case or a patient has limited money, we do have to make very judicious decisions do have to make very judicious decisions do have to make very judicious decisions about the best use of those dollars. But about the best use of those dollars. But about the best use of those dollars. But for the majority of people who will be for the majority of people who will be for the majority of people who will be listening to this, they are willing to listening to this, they are willing to listening to this, they are willing to spend money on their health, and it spend money on their health, and it spend money on their health, and it shouldn't be a society or a physician or shouldn't be a society or a physician or shouldn't be a society or a physician or somebody standing in the way of getting somebody standing in the way of getting somebody standing in the way of getting data that can dramatically impact your data that can dramatically impact your data that can dramatically impact your life. And because you mentioned life. And because you mentioned life. And because you mentioned Huntington's, I should say, right? Huntington's, I should say, right? Huntington's, I should say, right? Autosomal dominant disorder. People have Autosomal dominant disorder. People have Autosomal dominant disorder. People have very strong feelings on if they want to very strong feelings on if they want to very strong feelings on if they want to know they have it or not, and I've had know they have it or not, and I've had know they have it or not, and I've had patients because we can test for this patients because we can test for this patients because we can test for this with IVF. with IVF. with IVF. So, we do genetic testing of embryos, So, we do genetic testing of embryos, So, we do genetic testing of embryos, and we often do screening to see if the and we often do screening to see if the and we often do screening to see if the chromosomes are in the right position, chromosomes are in the right position, chromosomes are in the right position, which we talked about for age, that can which we talked about for age, that can which we talked about for age, that can be really beneficial. We can do single be really beneficial. We can do single be really beneficial. We can do single gene testing as well, PGT-M for gene testing as well, PGT-M for gene testing as well, PGT-M for monogenetic diseases and Huntington's is monogenetic diseases and Huntington's is monogenetic diseases and Huntington's is one of them. one of them. one of them. And I've had some patients say, I And I've had some patients say, I And I've had some patients say, I my mom had Huntington's. It was the my mom had Huntington's. It was the my mom had Huntington's. It was the worst experience to watch her go through worst experience to watch her go through worst experience to watch her go through that. I would love to test my embryos, that. I would love to test my embryos, that. I would love to test my embryos, but I but I but I I've committed to myself that I don't I've committed to myself that I don't I've committed to myself that I don't want to know if I have it or not. Okay? want to know if I have it or not. Okay? want to know if I have it or not. Okay? And I think it's really important just And I think it's really important just And I think it's really important just to mention that disease to say, to mention that disease to say, to mention that disease to say, we can blind test you. You you know, we can blind test you. You you know, we can blind test you. You you know, we can you can make a probe to see if you can you can make a probe to see if you can you can make a probe to see if you carry it or not. You don't have to know carry it or not. You don't have to know carry it or not. You don't have to know and we can still test the embryos. And and we can still test the embryos. And and we can still test the embryos. And I've had a few patients who then I've had a few patients who then I've had a few patients who then themselves did not want to know, but we themselves did not want to know, but we themselves did not want to know, but we went through the steps to make a probe went through the steps to make a probe went through the steps to make a probe in case they did. In both cases, the in case they did. In both cases, the in case they did. In both cases, the patient did carry it, didn't find out patient did carry it, didn't find out patient did carry it, didn't find out that they did, but they could assuredly that they did, but they could assuredly that they did, but they could assuredly transfer an embryo that did not have it transfer an embryo that did not have it transfer an embryo that did not have it because often they these people have because often they these people have because often they these people have felt so strongly watching a family felt so strongly watching a family felt so strongly watching a family member die from a terrible progressive member die from a terrible progressive member die from a terrible progressive disease. They've said children are not disease. They've said children are not disease. They've said children are not in the cards for me. in the cards for me. in the cards for me. Or I'm not going to have genetic kids. Or I'm not going to have genetic kids. Or I'm not going to have genetic kids. Or sometimes they'll come to me saying, Or sometimes they'll come to me saying, Or sometimes they'll come to me saying, we have to use an egg donor or sperm we have to use an egg donor or sperm we have to use an egg donor or sperm donor because I might carry this and donor because I might carry this and donor because I might carry this and don't want to know. So, don't want to know. So, don't want to know. So, again, it's the idea that should be again, it's the idea that should be again, it's the idea that should be your own individual choice whether you your own individual choice whether you your own individual choice whether you want to know or not, but it shouldn't be want to know or not, but it shouldn't be want to know or not, but it shouldn't be the society or somebody else putting the society or somebody else putting the society or somebody else putting this roadblock up. And it's such an this roadblock up. And it's such an this roadblock up. And it's such an antiquated approach in the era of antiquated approach in the era of antiquated approach in the era of technology and access where you really technology and access where you really technology and access where you really can get so many data points. get so many data points. get so many data points. Why should somebody be making the Why should somebody be making the Why should somebody be making the decision on if that information's decision on if that information's decision on if that information's valuable to you? Yeah, and I think with valuable to you? Yeah, and I think with valuable to you? Yeah, and I think with blood testing, the price coming down, blood testing, the price coming down, blood testing, the price coming down, um, it seems to me maybe it's just the it seems to me maybe it's just the it seems to me maybe it's just the circles I run in that people want more circles I run in that people want more circles I run in that people want more information as opposed to less. But I'm information as opposed to less. But I'm information as opposed to less. But I'm glad that you raised this um these cases glad that you raised this um these cases glad that you raised this um these cases where people don't want to know certain where people don't want to know certain where people don't want to know certain amounts of information. Um certain amounts of information. Um certain amounts of information. Um one thing that well, I'll just pose this one thing that well, I'll just pose this one thing that well, I'll just pose this as a question. How many women out there, as a question. How many women out there, as a question. How many women out there, um do you think know do you think know do you think know if I'll have to be careful how I word if I'll have to be careful how I word if I'll have to be careful how I word this. If doing a egg harvest cycle this. If doing a egg harvest cycle this. If doing a egg harvest cycle um decreases their ovarian reserve or um decreases their ovarian reserve or um decreases their ovarian reserve or not. The majority of patients that I sit not. The majority of patients that I sit not. The majority of patients that I sit across from will tell me, I'm afraid to across from will tell me, I'm afraid to across from will tell me, I'm afraid to freeze my eggs or do IVF because I don't freeze my eggs or do IVF because I don't freeze my eggs or do IVF because I don't want to go into menopause earlier. So, want to go into menopause earlier. So, want to go into menopause earlier. So, the myth that doing that is going to tap the myth that doing that is going to tap the myth that doing that is going to tap into the vault and pull out eggs is into the vault and pull out eggs is into the vault and pull out eggs is inaccurate and a fear that really does inaccurate and a fear that really does inaccurate and a fear that really does need to be busted because it doesn't. need to be busted because it doesn't. need to be busted because it doesn't. It's a limitation of the science that I It's a limitation of the science that I It's a limitation of the science that I can only get the eggs outside the vault can only get the eggs outside the vault can only get the eggs outside the vault to grow. to grow. to grow. If I could tap into the vault, it would If I could tap into the vault, it would If I could tap into the vault, it would change the game. change the game. change the game. But right now I am limited by the eggs But right now I am limited by the eggs But right now I am limited by the eggs you give me, the number of them you give me, the number of them you give me, the number of them controlled by whatever's outside the controlled by whatever's outside the controlled by whatever's outside the vault. We in IVF, we just give FSH, same vault. We in IVF, we just give FSH, same vault. We in IVF, we just give FSH, same hormone your brain makes, trying to hormone your brain makes, trying to hormone your brain makes, trying to stimulate more than one egg to grow. stimulate more than one egg to grow. stimulate more than one egg to grow. Your body doesn't want to have five kids Your body doesn't want to have five kids Your body doesn't want to have five kids or 12 kids or 20 kids, so it has checks or 12 kids or 20 kids, so it has checks or 12 kids or 20 kids, so it has checks and balances to prevent that from and balances to prevent that from and balances to prevent that from happening. I, however, would like every egg outside I, however, would like every egg outside I, however, would like every egg outside the vault to grow because in nature, you the vault to grow because in nature, you the vault to grow because in nature, you will ovulate one and everything else will ovulate one and everything else will ovulate one and everything else will die. will die. will die. You are constantly losing eggs no matter You are constantly losing eggs no matter You are constantly losing eggs no matter what. When you're pregnant, when you're When you're pregnant, when you're When you're pregnant, when you're breastfeeding, when you're on birth breastfeeding, when you're on birth breastfeeding, when you're on birth control, before you start your first control, before you start your first control, before you start your first period, constantly losing them. I cannot period, constantly losing them. I cannot period, constantly losing them. I cannot change that right now. So, doing IVF or change that right now. So, doing IVF or change that right now. So, doing IVF or egg freezing is not going to decrease egg freezing is not going to decrease egg freezing is not going to decrease your ovarian reserve. It is simply going your ovarian reserve. It is simply going your ovarian reserve. It is simply going to influence one month in time trying to influence one month in time trying to influence one month in time trying to not have all those eggs die. And I think not have all those eggs die. And I think not have all those eggs die. And I think the myth is that um by doing a cycle of the myth is that um by doing a cycle of the myth is that um by doing a cycle of egg freezing that you're taking more of egg freezing that you're taking more of egg freezing that you're taking more eggs from your reserve. Um but as you eggs from your reserve. Um but as you eggs from your reserve. Um but as you pointed out, women are losing the same pointed out, women are losing the same pointed out, women are losing the same number of eggs each month or follicles number of eggs each month or follicles number of eggs each month or follicles each month regardless. You're maximizing each month regardless. You're maximizing each month regardless. You're maximizing on that process by just maturing more on that process by just maturing more on that process by just maturing more and taking them as opposed to letting and taking them as opposed to letting and taking them as opposed to letting them die. Exactly. We are not them die. Exactly. We are not them die. Exactly. We are not running out of eggs early. I think it's running out of eggs early. I think it's running out of eggs early. I think it's just based on again, nobody understands just based on again, nobody understands just based on again, nobody understands basic biology, so we think in our brain, basic biology, so we think in our brain, basic biology, so we think in our brain, I'm just losing that one egg since I'm just losing that one egg since I'm just losing that one egg since I'm ovulating. We're not thinking about all ovulating. We're not thinking about all ovulating. We're not thinking about all of the ones that were sent out of the of the ones that were sent out of the of the ones that were sent out of the vault who weren't chosen. Yeah, and vault who weren't chosen. Yeah, and vault who weren't chosen. Yeah, and [clears throat] I think people will also [clears throat] I think people will also [clears throat] I think people will also assume um because they haven't been told assume um because they haven't been told assume um because they haven't been told that if you do an egg, you know, if you that if you do an egg, you know, if you that if you do an egg, you know, if you stimulate for more to mature that you're stimulate for more to mature that you're stimulate for more to mature that you're somehow um taking away from eggs that somehow um taking away from eggs that somehow um taking away from eggs that you would have had, you know, stuck you would have had, you know, stuck you would have had, you know, stuck around somehow. Uh so, we're around somehow. Uh so, we're around somehow. Uh so, we're hitting we're at you we're saying the hitting we're at you we're saying the hitting we're at you we're saying the same thing three different ways. same thing three different ways. same thing three different ways. &gt;&gt; you're giving I mean, it's fascinating &gt;&gt; you're giving I mean, it's fascinating &gt;&gt; you're giving I mean, it's fascinating to me if you think about it because we to me if you think about it because we to me if you think about it because we are allowing the possibility for you to are allowing the possibility for you to are allowing the possibility for you to have children in your family that likely have children in your family that likely have children in your family that likely you would not, right? Because if you would not, right? Because if you would not, right? Because if you were to get pregnant naturally that were to get pregnant naturally that were to get pregnant naturally that month, the greatest probability is it month, the greatest probability is it month, the greatest probability is it would just be one that you would just be one that you would just be one that you would ovulate. Yeah, for IVF, we can sometimes ovulate. Yeah, for IVF, we can sometimes ovulate. Yeah, for IVF, we can sometimes take one month's group of eggs in time take one month's group of eggs in time take one month's group of eggs in time and have and have and have a couple different embryos and those a couple different embryos and those a couple different embryos and those become a couple children for you that become a couple children for you that become a couple children for you that you have from this one exact cohort. I you have from this one exact cohort. I you have from this one exact cohort. I think it's so think it's so think it's so fascinating. You know, early IVF days, fascinating. You know, early IVF days, fascinating. You know, early IVF days, I mean, IVF is not that old. It's only I mean, IVF is not that old. It's only I mean, IVF is not that old. It's only been around like 46 years. I think the been around like 46 years. I think the been around like 46 years. I think the oldest IVF babies oldest IVF babies oldest IVF babies we didn't have gonadotropins. We didn't we didn't have gonadotropins. We didn't we didn't have gonadotropins. We didn't have FSH um that was, you know, have FSH um that was, you know, have FSH um that was, you know, synthetic or purified. And so, we synthetic or purified. And so, we synthetic or purified. And so, we couldn't get multiple eggs to grow. So, couldn't get multiple eggs to grow. So, couldn't get multiple eggs to grow. So, original IVF patients had to go live at original IVF patients had to go live at original IVF patients had to go live at their IVF clinic and they had their IVF clinic and they had their IVF clinic and they had urinary-based hormone measurements done urinary-based hormone measurements done urinary-based hormone measurements done every day so they could try to gauge every day so they could try to gauge every day so they could try to gauge when as estradiol was rising, when they when as estradiol was rising, when they when as estradiol was rising, when they were getting closer to ovulation. And in were getting closer to ovulation. And in were getting closer to ovulation. And in those days, this is just science, they those days, this is just science, they those days, this is just science, they went and they did abdominal surgery to went and they did abdominal surgery to went and they did abdominal surgery to aspirate the egg. Now we do a vaginal aspirate the egg. Now we do a vaginal aspirate the egg. Now we do a vaginal egg retrieval where we take a needle egg retrieval where we take a needle egg retrieval where we take a needle attached to a vaginal ultrasound. It's a attached to a vaginal ultrasound. It's a attached to a vaginal ultrasound. It's a minimally invasive procedure. But back minimally invasive procedure. But back minimally invasive procedure. But back in the origin IVF studies, they had to in the origin IVF studies, they had to in the origin IVF studies, they had to go and do an abdominal incision to put a go and do an abdominal incision to put a go and do an abdominal incision to put a needle in the one single follicle to get needle in the one single follicle to get needle in the one single follicle to get the follicular fluid and the egg out. the follicular fluid and the egg out. the follicular fluid and the egg out. So, it was very low odds of working. It So, it was very low odds of working. It So, it was very low odds of working. It was crazy to even think of, but the was crazy to even think of, but the was crazy to even think of, but the advent of gonadotropins, the ability to advent of gonadotropins, the ability to advent of gonadotropins, the ability to it first started by purifying FSH and LH it first started by purifying FSH and LH it first started by purifying FSH and LH and be able to give that to people to and be able to give that to people to and be able to give that to people to stimulate more than one egg, stimulate more than one egg, stimulate more than one egg, understanding this concept that there's understanding this concept that there's understanding this concept that there's so many more eggs that you have outside so many more eggs that you have outside so many more eggs that you have outside the vault every month, that has changed the vault every month, that has changed the vault every month, that has changed the game and is such an amazing the game and is such an amazing the game and is such an amazing advancement in science that we can advancement in science that we can advancement in science that we can leverage that physiology for egg leverage that physiology for egg leverage that physiology for egg freezing or IVF. freezing or IVF. freezing or IVF. Uh very practical uh question. Um it's Uh very practical uh question. Um it's Uh very practical uh question. Um it's clear that the younger that a woman is, clear that the younger that a woman is, clear that the younger that a woman is, the more eggs that uh could be uh the more eggs that uh could be uh the more eggs that uh could be uh frozen in a given cycle. frozen in a given cycle. frozen in a given cycle. But I think it's fair to say that many But I think it's fair to say that many But I think it's fair to say that many people, either because of finances or people, either because of finances or people, either because of finances or life circumstances, that could be not life circumstances, that could be not life circumstances, that could be not having a partner and wanting a partner having a partner and wanting a partner having a partner and wanting a partner before having kids, this sort of thing, before having kids, this sort of thing, before having kids, this sort of thing, um are waiting. They're just waiting. What are waiting. They're just waiting. What are waiting. They're just waiting. What stands between stands between stands between um us now in the United States us now in the United States us now in the United States and egg freezing being covered by insurance egg freezing being covered by insurance egg freezing being covered by insurance 100%. I don't hold any superpowers, but there I don't hold any superpowers, but there I don't hold any superpowers, but there are, you know, there are pretty powerful are, you know, there are pretty powerful are, you know, there are pretty powerful ways to lobby ways to lobby ways to lobby um all the administrations regardless of um all the administrations regardless of um all the administrations regardless of who happens to be in office when that who happens to be in office when that who happens to be in office when that actually happens. I mean, it is actually happens. I mean, it is actually happens. I mean, it is possible, right? That the phone is a possible, right? That the phone is a possible, right? That the phone is a powerful tool. Advocacy is a powerful tool. Advocacy is a powerful tool. Advocacy is a powerful tool. I do think that um things can tool. I do think that um things can tool. I do think that um things can happen um if there's a lot of advocacy. happen um if there's a lot of advocacy. happen um if there's a lot of advocacy. So, um first question is, you know, So, um first question is, you know, So, um first question is, you know, what would that require? And um is that what would that require? And um is that what would that require? And um is that a good idea? a good idea? a good idea? I am a fan of knowledge and options. And I am a fan of knowledge and options. And I am a fan of knowledge and options. And egg freezing is not a guarantee. So, you egg freezing is not a guarantee. So, you egg freezing is not a guarantee. So, you know, how I pose it to patients is, we know, how I pose it to patients is, we know, how I pose it to patients is, we are going to keep the door of are going to keep the door of are going to keep the door of opportunity open longer for you. And opportunity open longer for you. And opportunity open longer for you. And that is our goal. If we want to that is our goal. If we want to that is our goal. If we want to compartmentalize it as some people will compartmentalize it as some people will compartmentalize it as some people will falsely sit across from me and say, oh, falsely sit across from me and say, oh, falsely sit across from me and say, oh, egg freezing's an insurance policy for egg freezing's an insurance policy for egg freezing's an insurance policy for my fertility. And it's not cuz an my fertility. And it's not cuz an my fertility. And it's not cuz an insurance policy always pays off, but insurance policy always pays off, but insurance policy always pays off, but it's an investment in my fertility. Like it's an investment in my fertility. Like it's an investment in my fertility. Like investing in the stock market. Like investing in the stock market. Like investing in the stock market. Like probably will pay off, but it depends on probably will pay off, but it depends on probably will pay off, but it depends on external factors that we don't have yet, external factors that we don't have yet, external factors that we don't have yet, right? So, the ROI is yet to be right? So, the ROI is yet to be right? So, the ROI is yet to be determined, but in general considered to determined, but in general considered to determined, but in general considered to be a good thing. be a good thing. be a good thing. I think it would be absolutely I think it would be absolutely I think it would be absolutely incredible to be in a place where egg freezing to be in a place where egg freezing to be in a place where egg freezing could be covered. And you know, there's could be covered. And you know, there's could be covered. And you know, there's definitely countries where it is. That definitely countries where it is. That definitely countries where it is. That they have said with the birth rate is they have said with the birth rate is they have said with the birth rate is dropping, we want to keep the dropping, we want to keep the dropping, we want to keep the reproductive lifespan open for some reproductive lifespan open for some reproductive lifespan open for some patients. We want to offer this. patients. We want to offer this. patients. We want to offer this. I think to be honest and transparent, I think to be honest and transparent, I think to be honest and transparent, the number one restriction against that the number one restriction against that the number one restriction against that we see as a field right now that we see as a field right now that we see as a field right now is the camp of people who are ethically is the camp of people who are ethically is the camp of people who are ethically or morally opposed to IVF for reasons of or morally opposed to IVF for reasons of or morally opposed to IVF for reasons of embryo disposition. embryo disposition. embryo disposition. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Embryo disposition. &gt;&gt; Embryo disposition. &gt;&gt; Embryo disposition. &gt;&gt; the personhood of an embryo. Is an &gt;&gt; the personhood of an embryo. Is an &gt;&gt; the personhood of an embryo. Is an embryo a person? I see because embryos embryo a person? I see because embryos embryo a person? I see because embryos that are not used are going to be either that are not used are going to be either that are not used are going to be either kept frozen or discarded. And to those kept frozen or discarded. And to those kept frozen or discarded. And to those people, that's seen as essentially people, that's seen as essentially people, that's seen as essentially killing a baby. Correct. killing a baby. Correct. killing a baby. Correct. &gt;&gt; Right, that's their that's their view. &gt;&gt; Right, that's their that's their view. &gt;&gt; Right, that's their that's their view. Yeah, and we should acknowledge Yeah, and we should acknowledge Yeah, and we should acknowledge that. I have many patients right now who that. I have many patients right now who that. I have many patients right now who are donating embryos, you know, when are donating embryos, you know, when are donating embryos, you know, when they are done with their family, which they are done with their family, which they are done with their family, which is an amazing way is an amazing way is an amazing way to kind of to kind of to kind of pass forward the opportunity and for pass forward the opportunity and for pass forward the opportunity and for other couples to have a family. And I other couples to have a family. And I other couples to have a family. And I also just want to say at the top of this also just want to say at the top of this also just want to say at the top of this is that is that is that IVF is incredible. 17 million babies IVF is incredible. 17 million babies IVF is incredible. 17 million babies have been born in this world because of have been born in this world because of have been born in this world because of IVF. So, I think this technology's IVF. So, I think this technology's IVF. So, I think this technology's great. Does that mean everybody has to great. Does that mean everybody has to great. Does that mean everybody has to do IVF? No. You are allowed to have your do IVF? No. You are allowed to have your do IVF? No. You are allowed to have your own feelings and decisions about own feelings and decisions about own feelings and decisions about anything that you do, IVF included. anything that you do, IVF included. anything that you do, IVF included. And there's often things we can do And there's often things we can do And there's often things we can do within the procedure for patients who within the procedure for patients who within the procedure for patients who might have religious or ethical concerns might have religious or ethical concerns might have religious or ethical concerns to limit the number of embryos that we to limit the number of embryos that we to limit the number of embryos that we make or only transfer embryos that are make or only transfer embryos that are make or only transfer embryos that are created. And that's important to know to created. And that's important to know to created. And that's important to know to bring that up if that's your line in the bring that up if that's your line in the bring that up if that's your line in the sand is that we can often do things sand is that we can often do things sand is that we can often do things differently based on your beliefs. It differently based on your beliefs. It differently based on your beliefs. It might be less efficient. It might cost might be less efficient. It might cost might be less efficient. It might cost more money. It might have a lower rate more money. It might have a lower rate more money. It might have a lower rate of success. But I've had patients walk of success. But I've had patients walk of success. But I've had patients walk that road and that's the way it felt that road and that's the way it felt that road and that's the way it felt comfortable to them. comfortable to them. comfortable to them. In this country, there's a camp and In this country, there's a camp and In this country, there's a camp and that's not too political. Um they're that's not too political. Um they're that's not too political. Um they're really pushing something called really pushing something called really pushing something called restorative reproductive medicine and restorative reproductive medicine and restorative reproductive medicine and they're opposing a lot of the American they're opposing a lot of the American they're opposing a lot of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine's um Society for Reproductive Medicine's um Society for Reproductive Medicine's um attempt to get fertility treatment and attempt to get fertility treatment and attempt to get fertility treatment and fertility preservation covered. And fertility preservation covered. And fertility preservation covered. And their rationale, even though a lot of their rationale, even though a lot of their rationale, even though a lot of RRM, I'm a huge fan of. It's about RRM, I'm a huge fan of. It's about RRM, I'm a huge fan of. It's about teaching women cycle tracking and teaching women cycle tracking and teaching women cycle tracking and getting to the root cause and really getting to the root cause and really getting to the root cause and really supporting understanding your fertility. supporting understanding your fertility. supporting understanding your fertility. Like bullet point 10 on their list is Like bullet point 10 on their list is Like bullet point 10 on their list is that IVF is unethical. But these people that IVF is unethical. But these people that IVF is unethical. But these people are ostensibly pro-child. So, that I are ostensibly pro-child. So, that I are ostensibly pro-child. So, that I sorry. I'm not a pro- sorry. I'm not a pro- sorry. I'm not a pro- &gt;&gt; my political stance, I people often &gt;&gt; my political stance, I people often &gt;&gt; my political stance, I people often speculate. Like, I'll be really honest, speculate. Like, I'll be really honest, speculate. Like, I'll be really honest, I don't like politics and I'm very I don't like politics and I'm very I don't like politics and I'm very disappointed in the current state of disappointed in the current state of disappointed in the current state of politics um on both sides and I try and politics um on both sides and I try and politics um on both sides and I try and go issue by issue and I realize that go issue by issue and I realize that go issue by issue and I realize that itself is a controversial statement. itself is a controversial statement. itself is a controversial statement. You're supposed to take a hard stance You're supposed to take a hard stance You're supposed to take a hard stance for or against, but I think that as a for or against, but I think that as a for or against, but I think that as a biologist, um I look at certain things biologist, um I look at certain things biologist, um I look at certain things and I go, "All right." Like, and I look and I go, "All right." Like, and I look and I go, "All right." Like, and I look at other things and go, "Oh my goodness, at other things and go, "Oh my goodness, at other things and go, "Oh my goodness, like what Stone Age are we living like what Stone Age are we living like what Stone Age are we living in?" And so, I think that um in?" And so, I think that um in?" And so, I think that um to argue uh to argue uh to argue uh whatever it is that one believes about whatever it is that one believes about whatever it is that one believes about it seems to me that IVF, at least to me, it seems to me that IVF, at least to me, it seems to me that IVF, at least to me, maybe I just I'm too uh through my own maybe I just I'm too uh through my own maybe I just I'm too uh through my own lens, but the whole notion of freezing lens, but the whole notion of freezing lens, but the whole notion of freezing eggs and creating embryos seems very eggs and creating embryos seems very eggs and creating embryos seems very pro-child to me. So, it doesn't square pro-child to me. So, it doesn't square pro-child to me. So, it doesn't square with number 10 on this list. with number 10 on this list. with number 10 on this list. &gt;&gt; with you. &gt;&gt; with you. &gt;&gt; with you. I agree with you and I think a lot of I agree with you and I think a lot of I agree with you and I think a lot of the people who are a fan of ARM might the people who are a fan of ARM might the people who are a fan of ARM might actually agree with you and I, but actually agree with you and I, but actually agree with you and I, but there's definitely people who are very there's definitely people who are very there's definitely people who are very adamantly opposed to IVF who put number adamantly opposed to IVF who put number adamantly opposed to IVF who put number 10 in there because they have a 10 in there because they have a 10 in there because they have a different agenda. Okay. different agenda. Okay. different agenda. Okay. I'm a fertility doctor, right? I want as I'm a fertility doctor, right? I want as I'm a fertility doctor, right? I want as many people to have a family as they many people to have a family as they many people to have a family as they desire. I want you to fulfill your desire. I want you to fulfill your desire. I want you to fulfill your life's dreams. If having a child is a life's dreams. If having a child is a life's dreams. If having a child is a part of it, I want to do everything I part of it, I want to do everything I part of it, I want to do everything I can to help you have that. can to help you have that. can to help you have that. I am not here to I am not here to I am not here to sell IVF or force IVF. I, at the end of sell IVF or force IVF. I, at the end of sell IVF or force IVF. I, at the end of the day, it impacts me zero what you the day, it impacts me zero what you the day, it impacts me zero what you individually choose to do. But I believe individually choose to do. But I believe individually choose to do. But I believe that across the board, people deserve that across the board, people deserve that across the board, people deserve the tools in the toolbox. They deserve the tools in the toolbox. They deserve the tools in the toolbox. They deserve to be presented with all the choices. We to be presented with all the choices. We to be presented with all the choices. We could try Clomid, we could try IUI, we could try Clomid, we could try IUI, we could try Clomid, we could try IUI, we could try surgery, we could try IVF. Oh, could try surgery, we could try IVF. Oh, could try surgery, we could try IVF. Oh, you're getting older, we could freeze you're getting older, we could freeze you're getting older, we could freeze your eggs. There's just more tools, your eggs. There's just more tools, your eggs. There's just more tools, there's more opportunities. And then there's more opportunities. And then there's more opportunities. And then based on your circumstance, your based on your circumstance, your based on your circumstance, your financial, your beliefs, you should be financial, your beliefs, you should be financial, your beliefs, you should be allowed to choose. I feel very adamantly allowed to choose. I feel very adamantly allowed to choose. I feel very adamantly that one's own beliefs that cause you to that one's own beliefs that cause you to that one's own beliefs that cause you to want to put it at number 10 on the list want to put it at number 10 on the list want to put it at number 10 on the list should not be the beliefs that we should not be the beliefs that we should not be the beliefs that we enforce on everybody, especially when we enforce on everybody, especially when we enforce on everybody, especially when we know that IVF can be so powerful to help know that IVF can be so powerful to help know that IVF can be so powerful to help so many people have a family. It should so many people have a family. It should so many people have a family. It should be something that is offered to you if be something that is offered to you if be something that is offered to you if indicated and you get the choice. And indicated and you get the choice. And indicated and you get the choice. And so, back to the origin, so, back to the origin, so, back to the origin, it would be incredible to live in a it would be incredible to live in a it would be incredible to live in a world, a country where egg freezing was world, a country where egg freezing was world, a country where egg freezing was offered to women as we do see people are offered to women as we do see people are offered to women as we do see people are waiting longer to start their families. waiting longer to start their families. waiting longer to start their families. It would allow more people It would allow more people It would allow more people to feel less pressure, less pressure to feel less pressure, less pressure to feel less pressure, less pressure with a partnership and on their with a partnership and on their with a partnership and on their relationship, not to feel like, "Oh, relationship, not to feel like, "Oh, relationship, not to feel like, "Oh, this better work out because my clock is this better work out because my clock is this better work out because my clock is ticking." And be able to really feel ticking." And be able to really feel ticking." And be able to really feel like they could chase one dream and not like they could chase one dream and not like they could chase one dream and not at the expense of another. at the expense of another. at the expense of another. I think we're further in this country I think we're further in this country I think we're further in this country than we want to admit from that. We than we want to admit from that. We than we want to admit from that. We can't even get fertility treatments can't even get fertility treatments can't even get fertility treatments covered for patients with cancer when we covered for patients with cancer when we covered for patients with cancer when we know that chemotherapy is going to know that chemotherapy is going to know that chemotherapy is going to deplete their ovarian reserve. We have deplete their ovarian reserve. We have deplete their ovarian reserve. We have some states that we can't even get egg some states that we can't even get egg some states that we can't even get egg freezing covered for them. So, this is freezing covered for them. So, this is freezing covered for them. So, this is state by state? This is state by state by state? This is state by state by state? This is state by state right now. We would We would love right now. We would We would love right now. We would We would love federal protection for everybody. We federal protection for everybody. We federal protection for everybody. We would love to be able to see would love to be able to see would love to be able to see I don't know, to me that's my litmus. I don't know, to me that's my litmus. I don't know, to me that's my litmus. What your state or your country would do What your state or your country would do What your state or your country would do for patients who have cancer, you know, for patients who have cancer, you know, for patients who have cancer, you know, are in this position. And if we're are in this position. And if we're are in this position. And if we're not even willing to move to help them, not even willing to move to help them, not even willing to move to help them, the idea that we could cover it for the idea that we could cover it for the idea that we could cover it for everybody, we're still ages away from everybody, we're still ages away from everybody, we're still ages away from that, I think. that, I think. that, I think. Yeah, because uh it's not I don't know Yeah, because uh it's not I don't know Yeah, because uh it's not I don't know if what we're talking about is forcing if what we're talking about is forcing if what we're talking about is forcing anyone to do anything. Um anyone to do anything. Um anyone to do anything. Um nor is it necessarily the destruction of nor is it necessarily the destruction of nor is it necessarily the destruction of an embryo. I mean, it's there is a world an embryo. I mean, it's there is a world an embryo. I mean, it's there is a world where the embryos are created and kept where the embryos are created and kept where the embryos are created and kept frozen, right? There is a there is no uh frozen, right? There is a there is no uh frozen, right? There is a there is no uh Yeah. We call that embryo banking. I mean, to We call that embryo banking. I mean, to We call that embryo banking. I mean, to specify maybe for somebody who doesn't specify maybe for somebody who doesn't specify maybe for somebody who doesn't understand, right? Egg freezing, getting understand, right? Egg freezing, getting understand, right? Egg freezing, getting those eggs outside the vault to grow, those eggs outside the vault to grow, those eggs outside the vault to grow, taking them out of your body and we taking them out of your body and we taking them out of your body and we freeze them right there at the egg freeze them right there at the egg freeze them right there at the egg state. Making an embryo is Making an embryo is Making an embryo is going to be thawing that egg, going to be thawing that egg, going to be thawing that egg, fertilizing it with sperm, letting it fertilizing it with sperm, letting it fertilizing it with sperm, letting it grow out to the implantation stage, grow out to the implantation stage, grow out to the implantation stage, which is day five or six. Not every egg which is day five or six. Not every egg which is day five or six. Not every egg will survive, fertilize, grow. There's a will survive, fertilize, grow. There's a will survive, fertilize, grow. There's a ton of attrition in culture. So, 90% of ton of attrition in culture. So, 90% of ton of attrition in culture. So, 90% of eggs survive the freeze-thaw. eggs survive the freeze-thaw. eggs survive the freeze-thaw. 75% will fertilize. 50% will make it to 75% will fertilize. 50% will make it to 75% will fertilize. 50% will make it to the implantation stage and then not the implantation stage and then not the implantation stage and then not everyone will be genetically normal everyone will be genetically normal everyone will be genetically normal based on your age and other factors. And based on your age and other factors. And based on your age and other factors. And then even a genetically normal embryo then even a genetically normal embryo then even a genetically normal embryo only has a 65% chance of live birth. only has a 65% chance of live birth. only has a 65% chance of live birth. Like, the science has come far, but Like, the science has come far, but Like, the science has come far, but we're not there all the way. we're not there all the way. we're not there all the way. With that being said, they do morally With that being said, they do morally With that being said, they do morally really feel like an embryo could be a really feel like an embryo could be a really feel like an embryo could be a potential life and they do struggle with potential life and they do struggle with potential life and they do struggle with what to do if they have leftover what to do if they have leftover what to do if they have leftover embryos. And I have some patients who've embryos. And I have some patients who've embryos. And I have some patients who've told me, "Every embryo we make, we're told me, "Every embryo we make, we're told me, "Every embryo we make, we're going to transfer." Okay, well, we want going to transfer." Okay, well, we want going to transfer." Okay, well, we want to be really mindful what we do in that to be really mindful what we do in that to be really mindful what we do in that circumstance. And even though it's circumstance. And even though it's circumstance. And even though it's unlikely, I have a patient right now unlikely, I have a patient right now unlikely, I have a patient right now with four children and one embryo in the with four children and one embryo in the with four children and one embryo in the freezer cuz we froze five knowing that freezer cuz we froze five knowing that freezer cuz we froze five knowing that everyone shouldn't implant based on that everyone shouldn't implant based on that everyone shouldn't implant based on that 65% number, but we've gone four for 65% number, but we've gone four for 65% number, but we've gone four for four. Okay? So, like we have to know that if Okay? So, like we have to know that if Okay? So, like we have to know that if that's what we're doing, we're prepared that's what we're doing, we're prepared that's what we're doing, we're prepared for how the data may fall because data for how the data may fall because data for how the data may fall because data just helps us guide decisions, right? just helps us guide decisions, right? just helps us guide decisions, right? Especially when it comes to live birth, Especially when it comes to live birth, Especially when it comes to live birth, it's a zero or 100. It happens or it's a zero or 100. It happens or it's a zero or 100. It happens or doesn't. Now, if I freeze them as eggs for some Now, if I freeze them as eggs for some Now, if I freeze them as eggs for some patients who have really strong beliefs patients who have really strong beliefs patients who have really strong beliefs and they are afraid of that number five, and they are afraid of that number five, and they are afraid of that number five, we might take more time or time more we might take more time or time more we might take more time or time more money, but we might say, "Let's thaw money, but we might say, "Let's thaw money, but we might say, "Let's thaw them and only fertilize two." them and only fertilize two." them and only fertilize two." Leave everything else frozen. And then Leave everything else frozen. And then Leave everything else frozen. And then whatever makes it embryo, we can whatever makes it embryo, we can whatever makes it embryo, we can transfer. And yes, that's not a transfer. And yes, that's not a transfer. And yes, that's not a cost-effective way to go through the cost-effective way to go through the cost-effective way to go through the process cuz we might be having to pay process cuz we might be having to pay process cuz we might be having to pay for thawing and the fertilization and for thawing and the fertilization and for thawing and the fertilization and the transfer more times because there the transfer more times because there the transfer more times because there may be nothing to transfer based on that may be nothing to transfer based on that may be nothing to transfer based on that attrition. It can let some patients say, "Okay, I It can let some patients say, "Okay, I It can let some patients say, "Okay, I feel better with that process." So, feel better with that process." So, feel better with that process." So, just freezing eggs, to your point, isn't just freezing eggs, to your point, isn't just freezing eggs, to your point, isn't not making embryos, right? And there's not making embryos, right? And there's not making embryos, right? And there's different things we can choose along the different things we can choose along the different things we can choose along the way to make an individual person feel way to make an individual person feel way to make an individual person feel comfortable, but we shouldn't be comfortable, but we shouldn't be comfortable, but we shouldn't be dictating how the field has to function. dictating how the field has to function. dictating how the field has to function. I think it would be incredible if we I think it would be incredible if we I think it would be incredible if we could encourage egg freezing earlier. I could encourage egg freezing earlier. I could encourage egg freezing earlier. I think it would open the door of think it would open the door of think it would open the door of opportunity. And not everybody who opportunity. And not everybody who opportunity. And not everybody who freezes eggs will need them, but the freezes eggs will need them, but the freezes eggs will need them, but the peace of mind knowing that there's a peace of mind knowing that there's a peace of mind knowing that there's a chance is really impactful on the human chance is really impactful on the human chance is really impactful on the human mind. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called Autopilot, which is an AI feature called Autopilot, which is an AI feature called Autopilot, which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring and it makes head if you're snoring and it makes head if you're snoring and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. So, in insurance So, in insurance So, in insurance I would think would want to do this I would think would want to do this I would think would want to do this because um because um because um covering all the other stuff is expensive, too. all the other stuff is expensive, too. all the other stuff is expensive, too. Most insurance doesn't cover IVF. You're Most insurance doesn't cover IVF. You're Most insurance doesn't cover IVF. You're not wrong, right? In principle, if I not wrong, right? In principle, if I not wrong, right? In principle, if I freeze a 25-year-old's eggs, I will have freeze a 25-year-old's eggs, I will have freeze a 25-year-old's eggs, I will have three times as many eggs to work with, three times as many eggs to work with, three times as many eggs to work with, you know, than I would if she's going you know, than I would if she's going you know, than I would if she's going through IVF when she's 37. So, if I'm through IVF when she's 37. So, if I'm through IVF when she's 37. So, if I'm going to pay for her to do IVF at 37, going to pay for her to do IVF at 37, going to pay for her to do IVF at 37, it'll take so many more cycles, I'll it'll take so many more cycles, I'll it'll take so many more cycles, I'll spend so much more money. That one cycle spend so much more money. That one cycle spend so much more money. That one cycle of egg freezing is much more of egg freezing is much more of egg freezing is much more cost-effective if I'm covering them both, but if I'm covering them both, but if I'm covering them both, but we don't even cover the latter. So, many we don't even cover the latter. So, many we don't even cover the latter. So, many times patients, this is such a hard times patients, this is such a hard times patients, this is such a hard stretch for everybody. And look, stretch for everybody. And look, stretch for everybody. And look, the technology is incredible. the technology is incredible. the technology is incredible. As somebody who has an IVF lab, as As somebody who has an IVF lab, as As somebody who has an IVF lab, as somebody who keeps embryos on site, it's somebody who keeps embryos on site, it's somebody who keeps embryos on site, it's I mean, it's outrageously expensive. I mean, it's outrageously expensive. I mean, it's outrageously expensive. I mean, our generator alone is like a mean, our generator alone is like a mean, our generator alone is like a million dollars, right? Because if the million dollars, right? Because if the million dollars, right? Because if the power goes out, like what do we have to power goes out, like what do we have to power goes out, like what do we have to keep going? We always say, "If there's keep going? We always say, "If there's keep going? We always say, "If there's zombies coming, like come to the zombies coming, like come to the zombies coming, like come to the clinic." The technology to keep up with clinic." The technology to keep up with clinic." The technology to keep up with all the advancements, to have trained all the advancements, to have trained all the advancements, to have trained embryologists, I mean, their embryologists, I mean, their embryologists, I mean, their micro-manipulation skills, it's micro-manipulation skills, it's micro-manipulation skills, it's impressive. So, it costs money to run a impressive. So, it costs money to run a impressive. So, it costs money to run a lab like that will provide results. lab like that will provide results. lab like that will provide results. So, the process and the technology is So, the process and the technology is So, the process and the technology is really, really expensive. really, really expensive. really, really expensive. That being said, like I shouldn't be the That being said, like I shouldn't be the That being said, like I shouldn't be the one sitting here making assumptions one sitting here making assumptions one sitting here making assumptions again on what you're going to do with again on what you're going to do with again on what you're going to do with your money. And if somebody's in a your money. And if somebody's in a your money. And if somebody's in a position where they know their egg position where they know their egg position where they know their egg count's low and they should freeze their count's low and they should freeze their count's low and they should freeze their eggs because they're not partnered or eggs because they're not partnered or eggs because they're not partnered or they're not ready to get pregnant and they're not ready to get pregnant and they're not ready to get pregnant and they don't have the financial resources, we can sometimes find more money, right? we can sometimes find more money, right? we can sometimes find more money, right? We make decisions every day when it We make decisions every day when it We make decisions every day when it comes to money. We can't find more time. comes to money. We can't find more time. comes to money. We can't find more time. We can't find more eggs or more ovary. We can't find more eggs or more ovary. We can't find more eggs or more ovary. So again, this idea that, "Well, what So again, this idea that, "Well, what So again, this idea that, "Well, what are they going to do about it if they are they going to do about it if they are they going to do about it if they find out they have a low AMH?" Or, "Oh, find out they have a low AMH?" Or, "Oh, find out they have a low AMH?" Or, "Oh, they can't afford to freeze their eggs they can't afford to freeze their eggs they can't afford to freeze their eggs anyway." Or, "Oh, it's too expensive." anyway." Or, "Oh, it's too expensive." anyway." Or, "Oh, it's too expensive." We all make individual choices on how we We all make individual choices on how we We all make individual choices on how we leverage our different resources, which leverage our different resources, which leverage our different resources, which I consider to be your time, your money, I consider to be your time, your money, I consider to be your time, your money, your physical energy, and your emotional your physical energy, and your emotional your physical energy, and your emotional energy. And every day, you're leveraging energy. And every day, you're leveraging energy. And every day, you're leveraging them. But when it comes to reproductive them. But when it comes to reproductive them. But when it comes to reproductive health, having a family, like health, having a family, like health, having a family, like I feel strongly, you feel strongly, I feel strongly, you feel strongly, I feel strongly, you feel strongly, which I love, that we should be giving which I love, that we should be giving which I love, that we should be giving more access and more options to people more access and more options to people more access and more options to people so that they can pursue this. So, the so that they can pursue this. So, the so that they can pursue this. So, the arguments are across the board, too. arguments are across the board, too. arguments are across the board, too. Like, why not check an AMH in somebody Like, why not check an AMH in somebody Like, why not check an AMH in somebody who's younger? Well, they can't afford who's younger? Well, they can't afford who's younger? Well, they can't afford egg freezing anyway, so what are they egg freezing anyway, so what are they egg freezing anyway, so what are they going to do about it? Again, like we going to do about it? Again, like we going to do about it? Again, like we shouldn't be making the assumptions of shouldn't be making the assumptions of shouldn't be making the assumptions of what somebody will or will not do with what somebody will or will not do with what somebody will or will not do with their resources or with their data. We their resources or with their data. We their resources or with their data. We should be ones helping them get the data should be ones helping them get the data should be ones helping them get the data and interpret the data, understand what and interpret the data, understand what and interpret the data, understand what resources or options exist, and then the resources or options exist, and then the resources or options exist, and then the individual has what they need to make individual has what they need to make individual has what they need to make the decision. the decision. the decision. In the Bay Area where there a of tech In the Bay Area where there a of tech In the Bay Area where there a of tech companies, um there's a uh my companies, um there's a uh my companies, um there's a uh my understanding is there's a an understanding is there's a an understanding is there's a an opportunity at many of these companies opportunity at many of these companies opportunity at many of these companies for female employees to freeze their for female employees to freeze their for female employees to freeze their eggs. That landed much more controversial than That landed much more controversial than That landed much more controversial than I thought it would. Isn't it crazy? I thought it would. Isn't it crazy? I thought it would. Isn't it crazy? &gt;&gt; Um because the assumption, the sort &gt;&gt; Um because the assumption, the sort &gt;&gt; Um because the assumption, the sort of uh of uh of uh to some people uh to some people uh to some people uh the tacit message there is "Don't have the tacit message there is "Don't have the tacit message there is "Don't have kids now. Work work kids now. Work work kids now. Work work like crazy and then have them work like crazy and then have them work like crazy and then have them later, right?" But later, right?" But later, right?" But &gt;&gt; having known some people that work there &gt;&gt; having known some people that work there &gt;&gt; having known some people that work there and froze their eggs in their um late and froze their eggs in their um late and froze their eggs in their um late 20s or early 30s, I think they would 20s or early 30s, I think they would 20s or early 30s, I think they would say, the ones I know would say, "I'm say, the ones I know would say, "I'm say, the ones I know would say, "I'm really grateful that I did that um and really grateful that I did that um and really grateful that I did that um and that the company I worked for paid for that the company I worked for paid for that the company I worked for paid for it. And they got to keep their eggs even it. And they got to keep their eggs even it. And they got to keep their eggs even though they don't work for the company though they don't work for the company though they don't work for the company anymore. So there's that. But it was anymore. So there's that. But it was anymore. So there's that. But it was kind of interesting. So anyway, we're kind of interesting. So anyway, we're kind of interesting. So anyway, we're getting kind of getting kind of getting kind of &gt;&gt; we are. But &gt;&gt; we are. But &gt;&gt; we are. But what we are finding is that Yeah, what we are finding is that Yeah, what we are finding is that Yeah, what data supports is that when companies do data supports is that when companies do data supports is that when companies do leverage a fertility package in their leverage a fertility package in their leverage a fertility package in their benefits, they retain employees longer, benefits, they retain employees longer, benefits, they retain employees longer, employees are happier, and more people employees are happier, and more people employees are happier, and more people utilize the service than would without utilize the service than would without utilize the service than would without it. Meaning people freeze their eggs it. Meaning people freeze their eggs it. Meaning people freeze their eggs when it's offered to them through their when it's offered to them through their when it's offered to them through their company, and that gives them that peace company, and that gives them that peace company, and that gives them that peace of mind. Understanding is not of mind. Understanding is not of mind. Understanding is not everything, but they feel more everything, but they feel more everything, but they feel more comfortable exploring bigger comfortable exploring bigger comfortable exploring bigger opportunities, and they are grateful to opportunities, and they are grateful to opportunities, and they are grateful to the company. They stay with the company the company. They stay with the company the company. They stay with the company longer because that is an investment in longer because that is an investment in longer because that is an investment in your employees. I think it's incredible. your employees. I think it's incredible. your employees. I think it's incredible. In Austin, right, a lot of these tech In Austin, right, a lot of these tech In Austin, right, a lot of these tech companies have second homes. So we see a companies have second homes. So we see a companies have second homes. So we see a lot of these patients also. And I do lot of these patients also. And I do lot of these patients also. And I do think that has changed game for so many think that has changed game for so many think that has changed game for so many people to be able to have access. people to be able to have access. people to be able to have access. Because for many Because for many Because for many it's not ethical or moral, it's not ethical or moral, it's not ethical or moral, it's financial. The often the time when you financial. The often the time when you financial. The often the time when you would freeze your eggs, when it would freeze your eggs, when it would freeze your eggs, when it would give you the highest rate of return, you give you the highest rate of return, you give you the highest rate of return, you don't have the resources to do so. So don't have the resources to do so. So don't have the resources to do so. So having a company that's able to come in having a company that's able to come in having a company that's able to come in and do that is really and do that is really and do that is really I think impactful. I wish more companies I think impactful. I wish more companies I think impactful. I wish more companies would do that. Maybe we can change their would do that. Maybe we can change their would do that. Maybe we can change their minds. I tend to get pretty loud and minds. I tend to get pretty loud and minds. I tend to get pretty loud and pretty consistently loud about the pretty consistently loud about the pretty consistently loud about the things that uh things that uh things that uh I believe in. Once I understand the I believe in. Once I understand the I believe in. Once I understand the landscape, so I plan to be vocal about landscape, so I plan to be vocal about landscape, so I plan to be vocal about it. Um for what it's worth. Uh you it. Um for what it's worth. Uh you it. Um for what it's worth. Uh you mentioned that birth control can reduce mentioned that birth control can reduce mentioned that birth control can reduce AMH levels um on a month-to-month basis. AMH levels um on a month-to-month basis. AMH levels um on a month-to-month basis. Is there Is there Is there and we should define birth control cuz and we should define birth control cuz and we should define birth control cuz it's such a broad category. Um it's such a broad category. Um it's such a broad category. Um but is there any evidence that taking but is there any evidence that taking but is there any evidence that taking hormonal birth control hormonal birth control hormonal birth control can lower chances of pregnancy when can lower chances of pregnancy when can lower chances of pregnancy when somebody comes off birth control? somebody comes off birth control? somebody comes off birth control? In my In my In my friendships and knowledge space, my um friendships and knowledge space, my um friendships and knowledge space, my um and this isn't I have a friend. I just I and this isn't I have a friend. I just I and this isn't I have a friend. I just I know a number of people who have kids know a number of people who have kids know a number of people who have kids now who um were on birth control, came now who um were on birth control, came now who um were on birth control, came off birth control, and got pregnant off birth control, and got pregnant off birth control, and got pregnant right away. right away. right away. &gt;&gt; Right. So I think a lot of people assume &gt;&gt; Right. So I think a lot of people assume &gt;&gt; Right. So I think a lot of people assume that's how it works. But are there any that's how it works. But are there any that's how it works. But are there any uh good examples of how certain forms of uh good examples of how certain forms of uh good examples of how certain forms of birth control can actually suppress birth control can actually suppress birth control can actually suppress fertility in women long after women come fertility in women long after women come fertility in women long after women come off birth control? off birth control? off birth control? &gt;&gt; Excellent question. Okay, let's break &gt;&gt; Excellent question. Okay, let's break &gt;&gt; Excellent question. Okay, let's break the data down from big to little. Number the data down from big to little. Number the data down from big to little. Number one, big studies looking at all one, big studies looking at all one, big studies looking at all different types of contraception, no different types of contraception, no different types of contraception, no higher rate of infertility, again higher rate of infertility, again higher rate of infertility, again defined as failure to get pregnant at 12 defined as failure to get pregnant at 12 defined as failure to get pregnant at 12 months. So you come off your months. So you come off your months. So you come off your contraception at 12 months later when we contraception at 12 months later when we contraception at 12 months later when we look, there's no higher rate of look, there's no higher rate of look, there's no higher rate of infertility than we would have on the infertility than we would have on the infertility than we would have on the population based level. So that data population based level. So that data population based level. So that data leads us to comfortably say birth leads us to comfortably say birth leads us to comfortably say birth control is not causing infertility. Now control is not causing infertility. Now control is not causing infertility. Now if we go and we look more nuanced at if we go and we look more nuanced at if we go and we look more nuanced at different types of contraception. different types of contraception. different types of contraception. If you look at the birth control pill, If you look at the birth control pill, If you look at the birth control pill, what most people are talking about, the what most people are talking about, the what most people are talking about, the birth control pill is a combination of birth control pill is a combination of birth control pill is a combination of synthetic estrogen, ethanol estradiol, synthetic estrogen, ethanol estradiol, synthetic estrogen, ethanol estradiol, and a type of progesterone or a and a type of progesterone or a and a type of progesterone or a progestin. These work by telling the progestin. These work by telling the progestin. These work by telling the brain, essentially tricking it, so the brain, essentially tricking it, so the brain, essentially tricking it, so the brain doesn't send out FSH or LH. And as brain doesn't send out FSH or LH. And as brain doesn't send out FSH or LH. And as we described earlier, those are we described earlier, those are we described earlier, those are important in getting you to ovulate. So important in getting you to ovulate. So important in getting you to ovulate. So you don't ovulate when you have taking you don't ovulate when you have taking you don't ovulate when you have taking the birth control pill, and that's why the birth control pill, and that's why the birth control pill, and that's why it's a very effective contraceptive it's a very effective contraceptive it's a very effective contraceptive choice. However, the half-life of the choice. However, the half-life of the choice. However, the half-life of the birth control pill is only 28 hours. So birth control pill is only 28 hours. So birth control pill is only 28 hours. So it's actually quite short. So you can it's actually quite short. So you can it's actually quite short. So you can miss even just one pill and you could miss even just one pill and you could miss even just one pill and you could ovulate. So when you stop the birth ovulate. So when you stop the birth ovulate. So when you stop the birth control pill, your period should come control pill, your period should come control pill, your period should come back that next month. So immediately you back that next month. So immediately you back that next month. So immediately you should have resumption of ovulation. A should have resumption of ovulation. A should have resumption of ovulation. A couple of problems with this one couple of problems with this one couple of problems with this one is that the birth control pill is that the birth control pill is that the birth control pill has some valid medical uses, has some valid medical uses, has some valid medical uses, has some non-valid ones, but very often, has some non-valid ones, but very often, has some non-valid ones, but very often, especially in the generation of women especially in the generation of women especially in the generation of women that we see right now, they were given that we see right now, they were given that we see right now, they were given the pill potentially for a valid medical the pill potentially for a valid medical the pill potentially for a valid medical reason without any investigation of what reason without any investigation of what reason without any investigation of what it was. So maybe a woman had irregular it was. So maybe a woman had irregular it was. So maybe a woman had irregular cycles or some acne, and her doctor cycles or some acne, and her doctor cycles or some acne, and her doctor said, "Well, here, take the birth said, "Well, here, take the birth said, "Well, here, take the birth control pill, it will help." And it did control pill, it will help." And it did control pill, it will help." And it did help. But just based on that history, I help. But just based on that history, I help. But just based on that history, I would sit here and say, "I bet she has would sit here and say, "I bet she has would sit here and say, "I bet she has PCOS." And the woman though never was told, "I And the woman though never was told, "I And the woman though never was told, "I think you have PCOS. Here's what it is. think you have PCOS. Here's what it is. think you have PCOS. Here's what it is. You probably will not ovulate when you You probably will not ovulate when you You probably will not ovulate when you stop the birth control, and your acne stop the birth control, and your acne stop the birth control, and your acne will come back, and you should talk to a will come back, and you should talk to a will come back, and you should talk to a fertility doctor, and here's lifestyle fertility doctor, and here's lifestyle fertility doctor, and here's lifestyle things we can do to decrease insulin things we can do to decrease insulin things we can do to decrease insulin resistance." Never had that discussion. resistance." Never had that discussion. resistance." Never had that discussion. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So in her mind, had some symptoms, &gt;&gt; So in her mind, had some symptoms, &gt;&gt; So in her mind, had some symptoms, started the pill. Those symptoms started the pill. Those symptoms started the pill. Those symptoms resolved. Now we stop the pill and we're resolved. Now we stop the pill and we're resolved. Now we stop the pill and we're not getting pregnant, and we have not getting pregnant, and we have not getting pregnant, and we have irregular cycles, and we start to blame irregular cycles, and we start to blame irregular cycles, and we start to blame the pill as the reason why, instead of the pill as the reason why, instead of the pill as the reason why, instead of understanding that the pill was maybe understanding that the pill was maybe understanding that the pill was maybe masking it or treating certain aspects masking it or treating certain aspects masking it or treating certain aspects of it. So we do see failure to get to a of it. So we do see failure to get to a of it. So we do see failure to get to a diagnosis in women who were prescribed diagnosis in women who were prescribed diagnosis in women who were prescribed the birth control pill young, and then the birth control pill young, and then the birth control pill young, and then with the idea I'm going to stop the pill with the idea I'm going to stop the pill with the idea I'm going to stop the pill and get pregnant right away. What I like and get pregnant right away. What I like and get pregnant right away. What I like to say is to say is to say is you're not ovulating on the pill. If you're not ovulating on the pill. If you're not ovulating on the pill. If ovulation and knowing when you ovulate ovulation and knowing when you ovulate ovulation and knowing when you ovulate is one of your most sensitive health is one of your most sensitive health is one of your most sensitive health markers and really essential information markers and really essential information markers and really essential information in trying to get pregnant. If you are in trying to get pregnant. If you are in trying to get pregnant. If you are trying to get pregnant, the egg only trying to get pregnant, the egg only trying to get pregnant, the egg only lives for 24 hours. The fertile window lives for 24 hours. The fertile window lives for 24 hours. The fertile window is the 5 days before and the day of is the 5 days before and the day of is the 5 days before and the day of ovulation. Meaning sperm can live in the ovulation. Meaning sperm can live in the ovulation. Meaning sperm can live in the reproductive tract for up to 5 days. reproductive tract for up to 5 days. reproductive tract for up to 5 days. Most will stay around for 2 days. That's Most will stay around for 2 days. That's Most will stay around for 2 days. That's why the 2 days before and the day of why the 2 days before and the day of why the 2 days before and the day of ovulation have a 20 to 30% chance of ovulation have a 20 to 30% chance of ovulation have a 20 to 30% chance of getting pregnant compared to a 0 day, getting pregnant compared to a 0 day, getting pregnant compared to a 0 day, the day after ovulation, 0%. So very the day after ovulation, 0%. So very the day after ovulation, 0%. So very defined fertile window. So if you know defined fertile window. So if you know defined fertile window. So if you know when you're ovulating and you target when you're ovulating and you target when you're ovulating and you target intercourse, you're going to have higher intercourse, you're going to have higher intercourse, you're going to have higher odds and get pregnant faster. Data odds and get pregnant faster. Data odds and get pregnant faster. Data supports that very much so. supports that very much so. supports that very much so. But you don't know how to track your But you don't know how to track your But you don't know how to track your ovulation cuz you've been on the pill. ovulation cuz you've been on the pill. ovulation cuz you've been on the pill. So you don't know how to do that. So I So you don't know how to do that. So I So you don't know how to do that. So I recommend that you stop the pill three recommend that you stop the pill three recommend that you stop the pill three to six months before you're really to six months before you're really to six months before you're really wanting to start your family so you can wanting to start your family so you can wanting to start your family so you can track your cycle, learn to detect track your cycle, learn to detect track your cycle, learn to detect ovulation. And if you do have an ovulation. And if you do have an ovulation. And if you do have an abnormality, you're not now six months abnormality, you're not now six months abnormality, you're not now six months of trying or one year of trying before of trying or one year of trying before of trying or one year of trying before it's evaluated, you can say, "Oh, I it's evaluated, you can say, "Oh, I it's evaluated, you can say, "Oh, I can't detect ovulation or my cycles are can't detect ovulation or my cycles are can't detect ovulation or my cycles are irregular. Let me go get that irregular. Let me go get that irregular. Let me go get that investigated now so we're not kind of investigated now so we're not kind of investigated now so we're not kind of behind in our own timeline." behind in our own timeline." behind in our own timeline." The progesterone IUD is another one that The progesterone IUD is another one that The progesterone IUD is another one that we talk about a lot. The progesterone we talk about a lot. The progesterone we talk about a lot. The progesterone IUD is local progesterone that is placed IUD is local progesterone that is placed IUD is local progesterone that is placed inside the uterus. There's different inside the uterus. There's different inside the uterus. There's different types that can release progesterone in types that can release progesterone in types that can release progesterone in different amounts. It typically different amounts. It typically different amounts. It typically suppresses ovulation in the first 2 suppresses ovulation in the first 2 suppresses ovulation in the first 2 years, but then progesterone levels drop years, but then progesterone levels drop years, but then progesterone levels drop and it tends not to suppress ovulation, and it tends not to suppress ovulation, and it tends not to suppress ovulation, but that chronic progesterone exposure but that chronic progesterone exposure but that chronic progesterone exposure thins the endometrial lining to the thins the endometrial lining to the thins the endometrial lining to the degree that many women do not have degree that many women do not have degree that many women do not have periods anymore. periods anymore. periods anymore. That can be great if you don't like That can be great if you don't like That can be great if you don't like having a period. That can decrease the having a period. That can decrease the having a period. That can decrease the chance of anemia or menstrual cramping. chance of anemia or menstrual cramping. chance of anemia or menstrual cramping. So it can be very So it can be very So it can be very lifestyle positive during those years. lifestyle positive during those years. lifestyle positive during those years. But when you stop the IUD, we do see a But when you stop the IUD, we do see a But when you stop the IUD, we do see a change in endometrial receptivity at change in endometrial receptivity at change in endometrial receptivity at least for 6 months after it's been least for 6 months after it's been least for 6 months after it's been removed, and it can take time to build removed, and it can take time to build removed, and it can take time to build that lining back up. So I always that lining back up. So I always that lining back up. So I always recommend that a progesterone IUD is recommend that a progesterone IUD is recommend that a progesterone IUD is removed at least 6 months before you removed at least 6 months before you removed at least 6 months before you want to get pregnant. Give the want to get pregnant. Give the want to get pregnant. Give the endometrium time to rebuild and regrow, endometrium time to rebuild and regrow, endometrium time to rebuild and regrow, and then you'll have better odds at and then you'll have better odds at and then you'll have better odds at conceiving. We do see a little bit of lower We do see a little bit of lower We do see a little bit of lower pregnancy rates in those first 6 months pregnancy rates in those first 6 months pregnancy rates in those first 6 months of conceiving in women coming off of the of conceiving in women coming off of the of conceiving in women coming off of the IUD. More of them are getting pregnant IUD. More of them are getting pregnant IUD. More of them are getting pregnant in the back 6 months. So kind of shift in the back 6 months. So kind of shift in the back 6 months. So kind of shift your own timeline. your own timeline. your own timeline. And the birth control thing that's And the birth control thing that's And the birth control thing that's always important to mention in this always important to mention in this always important to mention in this conversation is one that's not as conversation is one that's not as conversation is one that's not as common, but it's the Depo-Provera shot. common, but it's the Depo-Provera shot. common, but it's the Depo-Provera shot. So this is a high-dose intramuscular So this is a high-dose intramuscular So this is a high-dose intramuscular progesterone shot that can prevent progesterone shot that can prevent progesterone shot that can prevent ovulation for 3 months. On population ovulation for 3 months. On population ovulation for 3 months. On population based levels, to use it as an effective based levels, to use it as an effective based levels, to use it as an effective contraceptive, must get every 3 months. contraceptive, must get every 3 months. contraceptive, must get every 3 months. But one single dose can prevent But one single dose can prevent But one single dose can prevent ovulation for 18 months. So this is that ovulation for 18 months. So this is that ovulation for 18 months. So this is that one exception where if you want to get one exception where if you want to get one exception where if you want to get pregnant potentially in the next 2 pregnant potentially in the next 2 pregnant potentially in the next 2 years, please don't get Depo-Provera. years, please don't get Depo-Provera. years, please don't get Depo-Provera. Great. Incredibly thorough and clear. Is Great. Incredibly thorough and clear. Is Great. Incredibly thorough and clear. Is there any evidence one way or the other there any evidence one way or the other there any evidence one way or the other that intentional termination of a that intentional termination of a that intentional termination of a pregnancy can disrupt chances of getting pregnancy can disrupt chances of getting pregnancy can disrupt chances of getting pregnant again later? No study supports pregnant again later? No study supports pregnant again later? No study supports that having a termination is going to that having a termination is going to that having a termination is going to negatively impact your fertility later. negatively impact your fertility later. negatively impact your fertility later. One caveat I just want to mention is One caveat I just want to mention is One caveat I just want to mention is that any intrauterine procedure has the that any intrauterine procedure has the that any intrauterine procedure has the potential to damage the endometrium and potential to damage the endometrium and potential to damage the endometrium and result in scar tissue. So that could be result in scar tissue. So that could be result in scar tissue. So that could be having an IUD, could be having a fibroid having an IUD, could be having a fibroid having an IUD, could be having a fibroid removed, could be a prior C-section, it removed, could be a prior C-section, it removed, could be a prior C-section, it could be a prior D&amp;C because you had a could be a prior D&amp;C because you had a could be a prior D&amp;C because you had a pregnancy loss, it could be from a pregnancy loss, it could be from a pregnancy loss, it could be from a termination. Where we see the greatest termination. Where we see the greatest termination. Where we see the greatest risk in all of these circumstances is risk in all of these circumstances is risk in all of these circumstances is from heavy bleeding or from an infection from heavy bleeding or from an infection from heavy bleeding or from an infection associated with it. So in general, most associated with it. So in general, most associated with it. So in general, most terminations are done early, very terminations are done early, very terminations are done early, very routine. Where we are fearful routine. Where we are fearful routine. Where we are fearful is when they are accessed in non-safe is when they are accessed in non-safe is when they are accessed in non-safe environments, we're seeing more environments, we're seeing more environments, we're seeing more infection or heavy bleeding, or even infection or heavy bleeding, or even infection or heavy bleeding, or even when women are having to travel when women are having to travel when women are having to travel statewide to access care, and they're statewide to access care, and they're statewide to access care, and they're getting the procedure done later with a getting the procedure done later with a getting the procedure done later with a higher risk of complication. In Texas, higher risk of complication. In Texas, higher risk of complication. In Texas, where I practice, there's obviously an where I practice, there's obviously an where I practice, there's obviously an abortion ban, and so women who need an abortion ban, and so women who need an abortion ban, and so women who need an elective termination for a medical elective termination for a medical elective termination for a medical reason, I had one patient who's been reason, I had one patient who's been reason, I had one patient who's been very open about her story. Her baby had very open about her story. Her baby had very open about her story. Her baby had anencephaly. So she went through IVF and had a baby So she went through IVF and had a baby So she went through IVF and had a baby that had no brain develop. And they made that had no brain develop. And they made that had no brain develop. And they made the decision that they wanted to the decision that they wanted to the decision that they wanted to terminate that pregnancy since that's terminate that pregnancy since that's terminate that pregnancy since that's not compatible with life. They don't not compatible with life. They don't not compatible with life. They don't want to have to carry the entire want to have to carry the entire want to have to carry the entire pregnancy. They had to travel out of pregnancy. They had to travel out of pregnancy. They had to travel out of state to access care. Their first state to access care. Their first state to access care. Their first appointment was canceled. So they had to appointment was canceled. So they had to appointment was canceled. So they had to make another one in a different state. make another one in a different state. make another one in a different state. Took them much longer than they wanted, Took them much longer than they wanted, Took them much longer than they wanted, had the procedure much later. had the procedure much later. had the procedure much later. And then she had residual scar tissue And then she had residual scar tissue And then she had residual scar tissue inside her uterus that was because it inside her uterus that was because it inside her uterus that was because it was done at a later term that we then was done at a later term that we then was done at a later term that we then had to fix before she could get pregnant had to fix before she could get pregnant had to fix before she could get pregnant again. So I think it's just important to say So I think it's just important to say So I think it's just important to say that across the board that across the board that across the board any intrauterine procedure poses a any intrauterine procedure poses a any intrauterine procedure poses a little bit of a risk. No matter what it little bit of a risk. No matter what it little bit of a risk. No matter what it is, if your periods are different is, if your periods are different is, if your periods are different afterward, the hallmark sign is going to afterward, the hallmark sign is going to afterward, the hallmark sign is going to be a lighter cycle. So no matter what be a lighter cycle. So no matter what be a lighter cycle. So no matter what thing on that list you had done, if your thing on that list you had done, if your thing on that list you had done, if your cycle is now lighter afterward, I am cycle is now lighter afterward, I am cycle is now lighter afterward, I am worried there could be scarring inside worried there could be scarring inside worried there could be scarring inside the uterus, and we'd rather evaluate the uterus, and we'd rather evaluate the uterus, and we'd rather evaluate that in the clinic. We can do a saline that in the clinic. We can do a saline that in the clinic. We can do a saline sonogram to just check and make sure sonogram to just check and make sure sonogram to just check and make sure there's no scar tissue because that will there's no scar tissue because that will there's no scar tissue because that will impact your fertility. impact your fertility. impact your fertility. Thank you. Um Thank you. Um Thank you. Um some practical questions about metabolic some practical questions about metabolic some practical questions about metabolic health, mitochondrial health, and egg health, mitochondrial health, and egg health, mitochondrial health, and egg quality. &gt;&gt; Let's do it. &gt;&gt; Let's do it. &gt;&gt; Let's do it. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um in your book you go into this in some in your book you go into this in some in your book you go into this in some degree of detail, but um when you think degree of detail, but um when you think degree of detail, but um when you think about the things that can really um help about the things that can really um help about the things that can really um help support egg quality, aside from age, support egg quality, aside from age, support egg quality, aside from age, Yeah. um in fact, I should say at any Yeah. um in fact, I should say at any Yeah. um in fact, I should say at any age, uh what are the age, uh what are the age, uh what are the you know, sort of top contour of those? you know, sort of top contour of those? you know, sort of top contour of those? Um you mentioned inflammation is the enemy, you mentioned inflammation is the enemy, you mentioned inflammation is the enemy, but inflammation happens all the time, but inflammation happens all the time, but inflammation happens all the time, and we can't avoid it. Um but we can and we can't avoid it. Um but we can and we can't avoid it. Um but we can certainly avoid exacerbating it. So, certainly avoid exacerbating it. So, certainly avoid exacerbating it. So, what are the things that people can do, what are the things that people can do, what are the things that people can do, not do, and take? We can do the inverse not do, and take? We can do the inverse not do, and take? We can do the inverse of that. Do, not do, and take. Okay. So, of that. Do, not do, and take. Okay. So, of that. Do, not do, and take. Okay. So, yes, inflammation is prevalent in our yes, inflammation is prevalent in our yes, inflammation is prevalent in our world, and the goal is not to avoid all world, and the goal is not to avoid all world, and the goal is not to avoid all of it. In fact, acute inflammation is of it. In fact, acute inflammation is of it. In fact, acute inflammation is required for conception, right? We need required for conception, right? We need required for conception, right? We need acute inflammation with ovulation. If we acute inflammation with ovulation. If we acute inflammation with ovulation. If we just think real just think real just think real physiology, a follicle is rupturing, physiology, a follicle is rupturing, physiology, a follicle is rupturing, allowing the egg to be released and then allowing the egg to be released and then allowing the egg to be released and then reforming. Like, we need our acute reforming. Like, we need our acute reforming. Like, we need our acute inflammatory response to allow that to inflammatory response to allow that to inflammatory response to allow that to happen. To the degree that if women take happen. To the degree that if women take happen. To the degree that if women take NSAIDs around the time of ovulation, NSAIDs around the time of ovulation, NSAIDs around the time of ovulation, Advil, ibuprofen, Aleve, they'll prevent Advil, ibuprofen, Aleve, they'll prevent Advil, ibuprofen, Aleve, they'll prevent the follicle from rupturing. Really? the follicle from rupturing. Really? the follicle from rupturing. Really? &gt;&gt; Yes, so they'll go through the hormonal &gt;&gt; Yes, so they'll go through the hormonal &gt;&gt; Yes, so they'll go through the hormonal changes of ovulation, but the egg will changes of ovulation, but the egg will changes of ovulation, but the egg will not be released. So, that's why we not be released. So, that's why we not be released. So, that's why we recommend, and you know, fun fact or recommend, and you know, fun fact or recommend, and you know, fun fact or important to know, if you're trying to important to know, if you're trying to important to know, if you're trying to get pregnant, you can take those get pregnant, you can take those get pregnant, you can take those medications only when you're on your medications only when you're on your medications only when you're on your period. So, period cramping, fine, but period. So, period cramping, fine, but period. So, period cramping, fine, but we don't want you taking them for the we don't want you taking them for the we don't want you taking them for the rest of the cycle because you can rest of the cycle because you can rest of the cycle because you can prevent ovulation from occurring. How prevent ovulation from occurring. How prevent ovulation from occurring. How many people many people many people in your experience you think know that? in your experience you think know that? in your experience you think know that? &gt;&gt; I don't think very many, honestly, &gt;&gt; I don't think very many, honestly, &gt;&gt; I don't think very many, honestly, right? Which is which is one right? Which is which is one right? Which is which is one &gt;&gt; it's sort of like banner across the sky. &gt;&gt; it's sort of like banner across the sky. &gt;&gt; it's sort of like banner across the sky. Like, these you're not going to lose Like, these you're not going to lose Like, these you're not going to lose eggs by doing a free cycle, collecting eggs by doing a free cycle, collecting eggs by doing a free cycle, collecting free cycle, the um free cycle, the um free cycle, the um I mean, Basic facts about our biology I mean, Basic facts about our biology I mean, Basic facts about our biology that we are never taught. that we are never taught. that we are never taught. &gt;&gt; So, if somebody's trying to get &gt;&gt; So, if somebody's trying to get &gt;&gt; So, if somebody's trying to get pregnant, NSAIDs can be problematic. pregnant, NSAIDs can be problematic. pregnant, NSAIDs can be problematic. &gt;&gt; They can be problematic. They can &gt;&gt; They can be problematic. They can &gt;&gt; They can be problematic. They can prevent the egg from being released with prevent the egg from being released with prevent the egg from being released with ovulation. So, I think that this is important So, I think that this is important So, I think that this is important because I will sometimes have patients because I will sometimes have patients because I will sometimes have patients say, "Well, if inflammation's bad, can I say, "Well, if inflammation's bad, can I say, "Well, if inflammation's bad, can I just take medicine for it?" Right? Like, just take medicine for it?" Right? Like, just take medicine for it?" Right? Like, that in our brain might make sense. that in our brain might make sense. that in our brain might make sense. And I always want to say, "Your immune And I always want to say, "Your immune And I always want to say, "Your immune system is essential for ovulation and system is essential for ovulation and system is essential for ovulation and also for implantation." So, I can't I also for implantation." So, I can't I also for implantation." So, I can't I don't want to turn off your immune don't want to turn off your immune don't want to turn off your immune system. What I want to do though is not system. What I want to do though is not system. What I want to do though is not have it be so burdened with what we call have it be so burdened with what we call have it be so burdened with what we call chronic inflammation, that constant chronic inflammation, that constant chronic inflammation, that constant activation, where it can't even do the activation, where it can't even do the activation, where it can't even do the job that we need it to do. So, I like to job that we need it to do. So, I like to job that we need it to do. So, I like to think about this as that inflammatory think about this as that inflammatory think about this as that inflammatory burden, and it's so we're all exposed to burden, and it's so we're all exposed to burden, and it's so we're all exposed to some, but how do we to your degree some, but how do we to your degree some, but how do we to your degree make it better? make it better? make it better? How do we add to it and make it worse? How do we add to it and make it worse? How do we add to it and make it worse? And really framing ourselves so that we And really framing ourselves so that we And really framing ourselves so that we can cultivate and I like to think about can cultivate and I like to think about can cultivate and I like to think about it as resilience within your body. I mean, as resilience within your body. I mean, as resilience within your body. I mean, you're going to be exposed to you're going to be exposed to you're going to be exposed to inflammation. Life is going to throw inflammation. Life is going to throw inflammation. Life is going to throw things at you, but you want to cultivate things at you, but you want to cultivate things at you, but you want to cultivate these best practices of your life so these best practices of your life so these best practices of your life so that you are reducing inflammation to that you are reducing inflammation to that you are reducing inflammation to the degree that you had, and this goes the degree that you had, and this goes the degree that you had, and this goes hand in hand with insulin resistance, hand in hand with insulin resistance, hand in hand with insulin resistance, which we'll get into. which we'll get into. which we'll get into. And I usually divide it into like what I And I usually divide it into like what I And I usually divide it into like what I call my five non-negotiables of sleep, call my five non-negotiables of sleep, call my five non-negotiables of sleep, stress, muscle, food, and toxins. And stress, muscle, food, and toxins. And stress, muscle, food, and toxins. And thinking about how we leverage these to thinking about how we leverage these to thinking about how we leverage these to our benefit by giving people the our benefit by giving people the our benefit by giving people the knowledge that they can knowledge that they can knowledge that they can if they understand their bodies, they if they understand their bodies, they if they understand their bodies, they can then be empowered to make choices can then be empowered to make choices can then be empowered to make choices that are in line with their goals. that are in line with their goals. that are in line with their goals. And so, I really I'll just want to say And so, I really I'll just want to say And so, I really I'll just want to say really importantly, really importantly, really importantly, I hate the narrative that there's I hate the narrative that there's I hate the narrative that there's nothing you can do for your fertility or nothing you can do for your fertility or nothing you can do for your fertility or that it's all luck because the truth is that it's all luck because the truth is that it's all luck because the truth is even if we can't control everything, even if we can't control everything, even if we can't control everything, we have a huge control over our we have a huge control over our we have a huge control over our metabolic and cellular health, which as metabolic and cellular health, which as metabolic and cellular health, which as we just said plays a huge role in our we just said plays a huge role in our we just said plays a huge role in our ability to get pregnant for both men and ability to get pregnant for both men and ability to get pregnant for both men and women. So, taking control of what we women. So, taking control of what we women. So, taking control of what we can, I think is really important can, I think is really important can, I think is really important information and information and information and one person can take with that and make one person can take with that and make one person can take with that and make the choices they want to make. But the choices they want to make. But the choices they want to make. But the worst thing that I hear every single day worst thing that I hear every single day worst thing that I hear every single day is people sitting across from me saying, is people sitting across from me saying, is people sitting across from me saying, "Gosh, I wish I'd known that "Gosh, I wish I'd known that "Gosh, I wish I'd known that information. I would have made a information. I would have made a information. I would have made a different decision." Why do we make different decision." Why do we make different decision." Why do we make people go through a failed IVF cycle, people go through a failed IVF cycle, people go through a failed IVF cycle, they have no embryos form, and only then they have no embryos form, and only then they have no embryos form, and only then do they make lifestyle changes when we do they make lifestyle changes when we do they make lifestyle changes when we know the lifespan of a sperm is 90 days know the lifespan of a sperm is 90 days know the lifespan of a sperm is 90 days and sperm are so sensitive. And then we and sperm are so sensitive. And then we and sperm are so sensitive. And then we know that even though eggs are in your know that even though eggs are in your know that even though eggs are in your body your whole life, the 60 days before body your whole life, the 60 days before body your whole life, the 60 days before you get pregnant is when the egg is most you get pregnant is when the egg is most you get pregnant is when the egg is most susceptible to the world around you. So, susceptible to the world around you. So, susceptible to the world around you. So, this is this time period that this is this time period that this is this time period that I like to call trimester zero, the time I like to call trimester zero, the time I like to call trimester zero, the time before you're getting pregnant where the before you're getting pregnant where the before you're getting pregnant where the choices you make can influence your egg choices you make can influence your egg choices you make can influence your egg and sperm quality the most. And what you and sperm quality the most. And what you and sperm quality the most. And what you said earlier, if we're making them even said earlier, if we're making them even said earlier, if we're making them even earlier in life, can we influence earlier in life, can we influence earlier in life, can we influence ovarian function longer? I think there ovarian function longer? I think there ovarian function longer? I think there is good thought to that. But how do we is good thought to that. But how do we is good thought to that. But how do we leverage these choices and diving into leverage these choices and diving into leverage these choices and diving into them? Number one for me is sleep, and I think Number one for me is sleep, and I think Number one for me is sleep, and I think that this is an important one because it that this is an important one because it that this is an important one because it can leverage that inflammatory burden in can leverage that inflammatory burden in can leverage that inflammatory burden in both ways, and I know you're a big fan both ways, and I know you're a big fan both ways, and I know you're a big fan of sleep, so this isn't going to take of sleep, so this isn't going to take of sleep, so this isn't going to take much to convince you. When you sleep, much to convince you. When you sleep, much to convince you. When you sleep, this is when your body's going to get this is when your body's going to get this is when your body's going to get rid of some excess chronic inflammation, rid of some excess chronic inflammation, rid of some excess chronic inflammation, lowers our inflammatory markers. We know lowers our inflammatory markers. We know lowers our inflammatory markers. We know that when we get less sleep, that when we get less sleep, that when we get less sleep, it's going to cause us to have more it's going to cause us to have more it's going to cause us to have more cellular stress, more oxidative stress. cellular stress, more oxidative stress. cellular stress, more oxidative stress. Your gonadotropins, so FSH and LH, are Your gonadotropins, so FSH and LH, are Your gonadotropins, so FSH and LH, are released from the brain in the early released from the brain in the early released from the brain in the early morning hours. So, when you don't sleep morning hours. So, when you don't sleep morning hours. So, when you don't sleep long enough, you're not going to have long enough, you're not going to have long enough, you're not going to have the same hormonal response. And we know the same hormonal response. And we know the same hormonal response. And we know really directly, men who get less sleep, really directly, men who get less sleep, really directly, men who get less sleep, they have lower testosterone levels and they have lower testosterone levels and they have lower testosterone levels and lower sperm counts. Women who get less lower sperm counts. Women who get less lower sperm counts. Women who get less sleep get fewer eggs at IVF cycle. And sleep get fewer eggs at IVF cycle. And sleep get fewer eggs at IVF cycle. And we see that if you say you have poor we see that if you say you have poor we see that if you say you have poor sleep, you have double the rate of sleep, you have double the rate of sleep, you have double the rate of infertility. If you just objectively infertility. If you just objectively infertility. If you just objectively say, "Yeah, I have poor sleep," you have say, "Yeah, I have poor sleep," you have say, "Yeah, I have poor sleep," you have double the rate. And that people who are double the rate. And that people who are double the rate. And that people who are not sleeping well, either partner, it not sleeping well, either partner, it not sleeping well, either partner, it will take them longer to get pregnant. will take them longer to get pregnant. will take them longer to get pregnant. They have lower fecundability, that They have lower fecundability, that They have lower fecundability, that month-to-month pregnancy rate. So, it's month-to-month pregnancy rate. So, it's month-to-month pregnancy rate. So, it's not just me sitting over here saying, not just me sitting over here saying, not just me sitting over here saying, "Oh, yeah, you need to sleep better." "Oh, yeah, you need to sleep better." "Oh, yeah, you need to sleep better." Like, your physiology is meant to sleep. It is your physiology is meant to sleep. It is your physiology is meant to sleep. It is a sign to your brain, if we go back and a sign to your brain, if we go back and a sign to your brain, if we go back and we view that hypothalamic response as we view that hypothalamic response as we view that hypothalamic response as central command station, looking for central command station, looking for central command station, looking for clues that your life is stable enough, clues that your life is stable enough, clues that your life is stable enough, you're healthy enough to carry a you're healthy enough to carry a you're healthy enough to carry a pregnancy for a woman, which is a huge pregnancy for a woman, which is a huge pregnancy for a woman, which is a huge metabolic spend. It's looking to make metabolic spend. It's looking to make metabolic spend. It's looking to make sure you're taking care of yourself sure you're taking care of yourself sure you're taking care of yourself primarily, and sleep is one of the most primarily, and sleep is one of the most primarily, and sleep is one of the most powerful markers that we can move. powerful markers that we can move. powerful markers that we can move. 7 to 9 hours. Most women need closer to 7 to 9 hours. Most women need closer to 7 to 9 hours. Most women need closer to 7 and 1/2, especially in the luteal 7 and 1/2, especially in the luteal 7 and 1/2, especially in the luteal phase. Making progesterone is a big body phase. Making progesterone is a big body phase. Making progesterone is a big body spend. We really have to cultivate better We really have to cultivate better We really have to cultivate better sleep. You know, all the things you talk about. You know, all the things you talk about. You know, all the things you talk about. Dark room, sound machine, a sleep mask, Dark room, sound machine, a sleep mask, Dark room, sound machine, a sleep mask, a cooler temperature. a cooler temperature. a cooler temperature. Takes two to tango, so if you sleep in Takes two to tango, so if you sleep in Takes two to tango, so if you sleep in the bed with somebody, they need to be the bed with somebody, they need to be the bed with somebody, they need to be on board. You need to go to bed at the on board. You need to go to bed at the on board. You need to go to bed at the same time, you need to have similar same time, you need to have similar same time, you need to have similar sleep practices. sleep practices. sleep practices. And we know that day-to-day consistency And we know that day-to-day consistency And we know that day-to-day consistency is also impactful in fertility. So, not is also impactful in fertility. So, not is also impactful in fertility. So, not just the length of time, but really just the length of time, but really just the length of time, but really having that good circadian rhythm is so having that good circadian rhythm is so having that good circadian rhythm is so important for your hormones. important for your hormones. important for your hormones. Melatonin is obviously released before Melatonin is obviously released before Melatonin is obviously released before you go to bed. Slow doses of melatonin you go to bed. Slow doses of melatonin you go to bed. Slow doses of melatonin supplementation can impact fertility, so supplementation can impact fertility, so supplementation can impact fertility, so doses of 1 to 3 mg 30 minutes before you doses of 1 to 3 mg 30 minutes before you doses of 1 to 3 mg 30 minutes before you go to bed can improve your odds of go to bed can improve your odds of go to bed can improve your odds of getting pregnant as well, can improve getting pregnant as well, can improve getting pregnant as well, can improve egg quality. And we know that naturally egg quality. And we know that naturally egg quality. And we know that naturally you make more melatonin when you ovulate you make more melatonin when you ovulate you make more melatonin when you ovulate to kind of counter some of the oxidative to kind of counter some of the oxidative to kind of counter some of the oxidative stress to the ovary. stress to the ovary. stress to the ovary. Really have to be careful though, a lot Really have to be careful though, a lot Really have to be careful though, a lot of over-the-counter products have like of over-the-counter products have like of over-the-counter products have like 10 times the amount of melatonin, so I 10 times the amount of melatonin, so I 10 times the amount of melatonin, so I always want to tread lightly with that always want to tread lightly with that always want to tread lightly with that one in recommending it to patients. one in recommending it to patients. one in recommending it to patients. Often a pediatric dose is like 1 mg, and Often a pediatric dose is like 1 mg, and Often a pediatric dose is like 1 mg, and that's the perfect amount just to that's the perfect amount just to that's the perfect amount just to augment. Again, we're not trying to augment. Again, we're not trying to augment. Again, we're not trying to replace your body's melatonin. We want replace your body's melatonin. We want replace your body's melatonin. We want to augment it and kind of help your body to augment it and kind of help your body to augment it and kind of help your body I always like to think about like a I always like to think about like a I always like to think about like a toddler, really get good consistency toddler, really get good consistency toddler, really get good consistency with your wind-down routine so that you with your wind-down routine so that you with your wind-down routine so that you can get enough sleep. I don't want to can get enough sleep. I don't want to can get enough sleep. I don't want to disrupt your flow, but if a woman is disrupt your flow, but if a woman is disrupt your flow, but if a woman is already sleeping well, should she take already sleeping well, should she take already sleeping well, should she take melatonin? I would say for the average melatonin? I would say for the average melatonin? I would say for the average person, probably don't need to. I would person, probably don't need to. I would person, probably don't need to. I would say the exception to the rule would be say the exception to the rule would be say the exception to the rule would be that if we know we have increased that if we know we have increased that if we know we have increased chronic inflammation, maybe we have chronic inflammation, maybe we have chronic inflammation, maybe we have endometriosis or an inflammatory endometriosis or an inflammatory endometriosis or an inflammatory autoimmune disease, or we're going autoimmune disease, or we're going autoimmune disease, or we're going through IVF with unexplained through IVF with unexplained through IVF with unexplained infertility, or ever been kind of told infertility, or ever been kind of told infertility, or ever been kind of told you have quote bad egg quality, then the you have quote bad egg quality, then the you have quote bad egg quality, then the anti-inflammatory properties of it might anti-inflammatory properties of it might anti-inflammatory properties of it might be advantageous. Since NSAIDs can be advantageous. Since NSAIDs can be advantageous. Since NSAIDs can disrupt the disrupt the disrupt the inflammation requirement for ovulation, inflammation requirement for ovulation, inflammation requirement for ovulation, um I'm curious about other things that are I'm curious about other things that are I'm curious about other things that are known to potently reduce inflammation. known to potently reduce inflammation. known to potently reduce inflammation. Um I think enough terrible things have Um I think enough terrible things have Um I think enough terrible things have been said about cold plunges um that we been said about cold plunges um that we been said about cold plunges um that we don't need to add any more, but we're don't need to add any more, but we're don't need to add any more, but we're seeking reality here. Uh and I don't seeking reality here. Uh and I don't seeking reality here. Uh and I don't have and despite common belief, I don't have and despite common belief, I don't have and despite common belief, I don't have anything inherently attached to have anything inherently attached to have anything inherently attached to cold plunges. I do them sometimes, but cold plunges. I do them sometimes, but cold plunges. I do them sometimes, but we know that one shouldn't do them after we know that one shouldn't do them after we know that one shouldn't do them after resistance training resistance training resistance training um or any kind of exercise where you um or any kind of exercise where you um or any kind of exercise where you want the inflammation to get the want the inflammation to get the want the inflammation to get the adaptation to the exercise. We know adaptation to the exercise. We know adaptation to the exercise. We know that. And it's a pretty potent inhibitor that. And it's a pretty potent inhibitor that. And it's a pretty potent inhibitor of inflammation. So, of inflammation. So, of inflammation. So, is there any reason to think that in the is there any reason to think that in the is there any reason to think that in the time where somebody's trying to conceive time where somebody's trying to conceive time where somebody's trying to conceive that perhaps they should avoid the cold that perhaps they should avoid the cold that perhaps they should avoid the cold plunge? I usually recommend against them plunge? I usually recommend against them plunge? I usually recommend against them for reasons stated here. I think there's for reasons stated here. I think there's for reasons stated here. I think there's very few things we have that are going very few things we have that are going very few things we have that are going to really turn off that acute to really turn off that acute to really turn off that acute inflammatory response to the degree that inflammatory response to the degree that inflammatory response to the degree that NSAIDs do, but we should proceed with NSAIDs do, but we should proceed with NSAIDs do, but we should proceed with caution in doing those things. Most caution in doing those things. Most caution in doing those things. Most everything else is trying to just get everything else is trying to just get everything else is trying to just get rid of the excess inflammation we have, rid of the excess inflammation we have, rid of the excess inflammation we have, but if something's dampening down into but if something's dampening down into but if something's dampening down into that acute inflammatory response, then I that acute inflammatory response, then I that acute inflammatory response, then I think we have to be a lot more judicious think we have to be a lot more judicious think we have to be a lot more judicious in saying, "Yeah, go for this." So, I'm in saying, "Yeah, go for this." So, I'm in saying, "Yeah, go for this." So, I'm not a fan of cold plunges when trying to not a fan of cold plunges when trying to not a fan of cold plunges when trying to get pregnant. A lot of people will be get pregnant. A lot of people will be get pregnant. A lot of people will be very happy to hear that cuz I don't very happy to hear that cuz I don't very happy to hear that cuz I don't Unlike the sauna, nobody likes the cold Unlike the sauna, nobody likes the cold Unlike the sauna, nobody likes the cold plunge. &gt;&gt; I hate a cold plunge. I tried it I tried &gt;&gt; I hate a cold plunge. I tried it I tried &gt;&gt; I hate a cold plunge. I tried it I tried it one time, and that was one time too it one time, and that was one time too it one time, and that was one time too many. &gt;&gt; I would say if you if you like it, &gt;&gt; I would say if you if you like it, &gt;&gt; I would say if you if you like it, great. If you think you benefit, great, great. If you think you benefit, great, great. If you think you benefit, great, but otherwise, don't worry about it. Um but otherwise, don't worry about it. Um but otherwise, don't worry about it. Um one thing that's commonly used is um one thing that's commonly used is um one thing that's commonly used is um curcumin. Yeah. curcumin. Yeah. curcumin. Yeah. And it's a pretty potent And it's a pretty potent And it's a pretty potent anti-inflammatory. Do you recommend anti-inflammatory. Do you recommend anti-inflammatory. Do you recommend people stay away from Let's not cooking people stay away from Let's not cooking people stay away from Let's not cooking with curcumin, but the high-dose with curcumin, but the high-dose with curcumin, but the high-dose curcumin that comes in a lot of curcumin that comes in a lot of curcumin that comes in a lot of supplements. of supplements. of supplements. &gt;&gt; usually recommend it in a supplement &gt;&gt; usually recommend it in a supplement &gt;&gt; usually recommend it in a supplement form. Like, I never recommend it. I form. Like, I never recommend it. I form. Like, I never recommend it. I think if you have a doctor who's giving think if you have a doctor who's giving think if you have a doctor who's giving it for very specific purpose, you might it for very specific purpose, you might it for very specific purpose, you might be a unique person who has excess be a unique person who has excess be a unique person who has excess inflammation they're trying to target, inflammation they're trying to target, inflammation they're trying to target, but that's not something that I but that's not something that I but that's not something that I recommend. But cooking with it is fine. recommend. But cooking with it is fine. recommend. But cooking with it is fine. NAD and NR NAD and NR NAD and NR are I get asked about them thousands of I get asked about them thousands of I get asked about them thousands of times per week and I'm times per week and I'm times per week and I'm more or less a fan of NR or NMN if one more or less a fan of NR or NMN if one more or less a fan of NR or NMN if one is trying to I don't know I don't think is trying to I don't know I don't think is trying to I don't know I don't think it will extend lifespan but it does seem it will extend lifespan but it does seem it will extend lifespan but it does seem to at least in my experience increase to at least in my experience increase to at least in my experience increase energy these kinds of things um energy these kinds of things um energy these kinds of things um but it's NR in particular there's data but it's NR in particular there's data but it's NR in particular there's data that it can be very anti-inflammatory so that it can be very anti-inflammatory so that it can be very anti-inflammatory so if a woman is trying to conceive should if a woman is trying to conceive should if a woman is trying to conceive should she stay away from NMN NAD and NR cuz I she stay away from NMN NAD and NR cuz I she stay away from NMN NAD and NR cuz I often see it listed in fertility often see it listed in fertility often see it listed in fertility protocols. &gt;&gt; Animal data looks like NAD and NMN can &gt;&gt; Animal data looks like NAD and NMN can &gt;&gt; Animal data looks like NAD and NMN can be advantageous especially for be advantageous especially for be advantageous especially for unexplained infertility which to be unexplained infertility which to be unexplained infertility which to be clear is different than I just want to clear is different than I just want to clear is different than I just want to get pregnant right in unexplained get pregnant right in unexplained get pregnant right in unexplained infertility you're not conceiving we do infertility you're not conceiving we do infertility you're not conceiving we do the basic test anatomy ovulation ovarian the basic test anatomy ovulation ovarian the basic test anatomy ovulation ovarian reserve semen analysis they're all fine reserve semen analysis they're all fine reserve semen analysis they're all fine so I view that as so I view that as so I view that as chronic inflammation unless proven chronic inflammation unless proven chronic inflammation unless proven otherwise and so that's a unique otherwise and so that's a unique otherwise and so that's a unique situation that patients may have situation that patients may have situation that patients may have potential benefit. potential benefit. potential benefit. But unlike certain things But unlike certain things But unlike certain things across the population that we can feel across the population that we can feel across the population that we can feel really comfortable recommending I don't really comfortable recommending I don't really comfortable recommending I don't recommend that to everybody so I think recommend that to everybody so I think recommend that to everybody so I think that there might be utility in certain that there might be utility in certain that there might be utility in certain subgroups who are kind of really falling subgroups who are kind of really falling subgroups who are kind of really falling off the curve and we think there's off the curve and we think there's off the curve and we think there's excess inflammation that it could make excess inflammation that it could make excess inflammation that it could make sense for so I don't ever say no and I sense for so I don't ever say no and I sense for so I don't ever say no and I sometimes use it. But on like the flip sometimes use it. But on like the flip sometimes use it. But on like the flip hand we could say like CoQ10 which has hand we could say like CoQ10 which has hand we could say like CoQ10 which has robust human data that is advantageous robust human data that is advantageous robust human data that is advantageous without a negative benefit that's an without a negative benefit that's an without a negative benefit that's an easier place to leverage your supplement easier place to leverage your supplement easier place to leverage your supplement dollars if you're going to spend cuz dollars if you're going to spend cuz dollars if you're going to spend cuz most of us don't want to spend endless most of us don't want to spend endless most of us don't want to spend endless amounts on all the things that we can amounts on all the things that we can amounts on all the things that we can craft for our supplement list but the craft for our supplement list but the craft for our supplement list but the human data is yet to be out although human data is yet to be out although human data is yet to be out although animal data looks promising for the animal data looks promising for the animal data looks promising for the right patients. I'm glad you mentioned right patients. I'm glad you mentioned right patients. I'm glad you mentioned coenzyme Q10 CoQ10 and L-carnitine are coenzyme Q10 CoQ10 and L-carnitine are coenzyme Q10 CoQ10 and L-carnitine are the two the two the two at least I'm aware of there's some at least I'm aware of there's some at least I'm aware of there's some decent data on decent data on decent data on supporting sperm and egg quality supporting sperm and egg quality supporting sperm and egg quality so do you encourage patients to start so do you encourage patients to start so do you encourage patients to start taking that what 60 days before trying taking that what 60 days before trying taking that what 60 days before trying to conceive and then continuing that to conceive and then continuing that to conceive and then continuing that through pregnancy? We usually stop CoQ10 through pregnancy? We usually stop CoQ10 through pregnancy? We usually stop CoQ10 in pregnancy just because of lack of in pregnancy just because of lack of in pregnancy just because of lack of data we're very cautious in pregnancy data we're very cautious in pregnancy data we're very cautious in pregnancy of not exposing you to anything of not exposing you to anything of not exposing you to anything additional you may not need so we just additional you may not need so we just additional you may not need so we just want to be really mindful of that. want to be really mindful of that. want to be really mindful of that. But I think it's in my like everybody But I think it's in my like everybody But I think it's in my like everybody should take before you get pregnant yep should take before you get pregnant yep should take before you get pregnant yep at your trimester zero your hey we want at your trimester zero your hey we want at your trimester zero your hey we want to get pregnant soon we should take a to get pregnant soon we should take a to get pregnant soon we should take a prenatal vitamin that has folic acid we prenatal vitamin that has folic acid we prenatal vitamin that has folic acid we should take CoQ10 we should take omega-3 should take CoQ10 we should take omega-3 should take CoQ10 we should take omega-3 fatty acids we should take vitamin D. fatty acids we should take vitamin D. fatty acids we should take vitamin D. These are all going to optimize make These are all going to optimize make These are all going to optimize make giving you the nutrients you need for a giving you the nutrients you need for a giving you the nutrients you need for a pregnancy helping support my good pregnancy helping support my good pregnancy helping support my good mitochondrial health which is important mitochondrial health which is important mitochondrial health which is important for egg quality without risk of harm to for egg quality without risk of harm to for egg quality without risk of harm to any of these specific supplements so any of these specific supplements so any of these specific supplements so these are the universal we're trying and these are the universal we're trying and these are the universal we're trying and then for sperm health L-carnitine we then for sperm health L-carnitine we then for sperm health L-carnitine we like a lot and then zinc and selenium like a lot and then zinc and selenium like a lot and then zinc and selenium can have benefits as well. can have benefits as well. can have benefits as well. I know you cover specifics in the book I know you cover specifics in the book I know you cover specifics in the book so we'll leave it to people to so we'll leave it to people to so we'll leave it to people to find it there. find it there. find it there. &gt;&gt; everybody who's like very curious based &gt;&gt; everybody who's like very curious based &gt;&gt; everybody who's like very curious based on disease state and more info. on disease state and more info. on disease state and more info. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor Function. acknowledge our sponsor Function. acknowledge our sponsor Function. Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives insights into your heart health hormone insights into your heart health hormone insights into your heart health hormone health autoimmune function nutrient health autoimmune function nutrient health autoimmune function nutrient levels and much more. They've also levels and much more. They've also levels and much more. They've also recently added access to advanced MRI recently added access to advanced MRI recently added access to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function not only provides and CT scans. Function not only provides and CT scans. Function not only provides testing of over 160 biomarkers key to testing of over 160 biomarkers key to testing of over 160 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health it also your physical and mental health it also your physical and mental health it also analyzes these results and provides analyzes these results and provides analyzes these results and provides recommendations for improving your recommendations for improving your recommendations for improving your health from top doctors. For example in health from top doctors. For example in health from top doctors. For example in a recent test with Function I learned a recent test with Function I learned a recent test with Function I learned that some of my blood lipids were that some of my blood lipids were that some of my blood lipids were slightly out of range as a result I slightly out of range as a result I slightly out of range as a result I decided to start supplementing with decided to start supplementing with decided to start supplementing with nattokinase which can naturally help nattokinase which can naturally help nattokinase which can naturally help reduce LDL cholesterol and it did in a reduce LDL cholesterol and it did in a reduce LDL cholesterol and it did in a follow-up test I could confirm that this follow-up test I could confirm that this follow-up test I could confirm that this strategy worked my blood lipids are now strategy worked my blood lipids are now strategy worked my blood lipids are now back where I want them in range. back where I want them in range. back where I want them in range. Comprehensive lab testing of the sort Comprehensive lab testing of the sort Comprehensive lab testing of the sort that Function offers is so important for that Function offers is so important for that Function offers is so important for health and while I've been doing it for health and while I've been doing it for health and while I've been doing it for years it's always been overly years it's always been overly years it's always been overly complicated and expensive but now with complicated and expensive but now with complicated and expensive but now with Function it's extremely easy and Function it's extremely easy and Function it's extremely easy and affordable. To learn more visit affordable. To learn more visit affordable. To learn more visit functionhealth.com/huberman and use the code Huberman for a $50 and use the code Huberman for a $50 and use the code Huberman for a $50 credit towards your membership. credit towards your membership. credit towards your membership. I'm sure there are I'm sure there are I'm sure there are sort of standards and a lot of sort of standards and a lot of sort of standards and a lot of communication in your field about you communication in your field about you communication in your field about you know how many follicles to try and know how many follicles to try and know how many follicles to try and mature if one does IVF and if one does IVF and if one does IVF and or is pulling eggs I don't know if or is pulling eggs I don't know if or is pulling eggs I don't know if that's the right term forgive me there that's the right term forgive me there that's the right term forgive me there it is again I you know it's pulling eggs it is again I you know it's pulling eggs it is again I you know it's pulling eggs taking eggs out carefully and for sake taking eggs out carefully and for sake taking eggs out carefully and for sake of freezing or fertilization of freezing or fertilization of freezing or fertilization um but how much conversation is there at but how much conversation is there at but how much conversation is there at the various meetings and in the journals the various meetings and in the journals the various meetings and in the journals about things like coenzyme Q10 about things like coenzyme Q10 about things like coenzyme Q10 L-carnitine I'm not trying to punch L-carnitine I'm not trying to punch L-carnitine I'm not trying to punch holes in these I'm obviously a big fan holes in these I'm obviously a big fan holes in these I'm obviously a big fan of supplements and my friends joke when of supplements and my friends joke when of supplements and my friends joke when people ask me which supplements do you people ask me which supplements do you people ask me which supplements do you take they just shout all of them he take they just shout all of them he take they just shout all of them he takes all of them which is not true I takes all of them which is not true I takes all of them which is not true I don't take all of them but I've been don't take all of them but I've been don't take all of them but I've been experimenting with them since I was in experimenting with them since I was in experimenting with them since I was in my teens and they're not the be-all my teens and they're not the be-all my teens and they're not the be-all end-all but some work so how much end-all but some work so how much end-all but some work so how much conversation is there about things like conversation is there about things like conversation is there about things like coenzyme Q10 L-carnitine coenzyme Q10 L-carnitine coenzyme Q10 L-carnitine is there a consensus or is there sort of is there a consensus or is there sort of is there a consensus or is there sort of a distribution of old school new school a distribution of old school new school a distribution of old school new school and I am very curious and I am very curious and I am very curious not trying to be political or not trying to be political or not trying to be political or politically correct whether or not this politically correct whether or not this politically correct whether or not this divides on male female fertility docs or divides on male female fertility docs or divides on male female fertility docs or like the culture within a field often like the culture within a field often like the culture within a field often tells us a lot so I'm not asking you to tells us a lot so I'm not asking you to tells us a lot so I'm not asking you to throw any of your colleagues under the throw any of your colleagues under the throw any of your colleagues under the bus but if you have to No. bus but if you have to No. bus but if you have to No. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I will say this over the past 10 years &gt;&gt; I will say this over the past 10 years &gt;&gt; I will say this over the past 10 years we've seen a huge change in how we talk we've seen a huge change in how we talk we've seen a huge change in how we talk about fertility even at meetings you about fertility even at meetings you about fertility even at meetings you know the first ASRM which is the know the first ASRM which is the know the first ASRM which is the American Society for Reproductive American Society for Reproductive American Society for Reproductive Meeting that I went to was probably 15 Meeting that I went to was probably 15 Meeting that I went to was probably 15 16 years ago and it's was so IVF heavy 16 years ago and it's was so IVF heavy 16 years ago and it's was so IVF heavy now to be fair like the science was now to be fair like the science was now to be fair like the science was rapidly evolving like genetic testing rapidly evolving like genetic testing rapidly evolving like genetic testing was just introduced for embryos but was just introduced for embryos but was just introduced for embryos but as we also see more as we also see more as we also see more patients and the general public really patients and the general public really patients and the general public really curious about well what can I do and I curious about well what can I do and I curious about well what can I do and I think this is such a good question think this is such a good question think this is such a good question because I look at people and say IVF is because I look at people and say IVF is because I look at people and say IVF is incredible but I can only work with the incredible but I can only work with the incredible but I can only work with the eggs and sperm you give me so come to eggs and sperm you give me so come to eggs and sperm you give me so come to the table with the best eggs and sperm the table with the best eggs and sperm the table with the best eggs and sperm you can right control all of these you can right control all of these you can right control all of these variables. That public curiosity drives research to That public curiosity drives research to That public curiosity drives research to a degree a degree a degree because if you're hearing it from your because if you're hearing it from your because if you're hearing it from your patients that's the formation of patients that's the formation of patients that's the formation of research questions right what we're research questions right what we're research questions right what we're looking at now granted all data that looking at now granted all data that looking at now granted all data that exists is limited in its own form exists is limited in its own form exists is limited in its own form right in general we look at cohort right in general we look at cohort right in general we look at cohort studies of course people who tend to studies of course people who tend to studies of course people who tend to take CoQ10 have other advantageous take CoQ10 have other advantageous take CoQ10 have other advantageous lifestyle factors than people who do lifestyle factors than people who do lifestyle factors than people who do not. When we do randomized control not. When we do randomized control not. When we do randomized control trials though which we often do in the trials though which we often do in the trials though which we often do in the IVF subset because we can look at more IVF subset because we can look at more IVF subset because we can look at more distinct criteria I can say well distinct criteria I can say well distinct criteria I can say well how many how many eggs were mature or how many how many eggs were mature or how many how many eggs were mature or how many embryos formed or how many were how many embryos formed or how many were how many embryos formed or how many were genetically normal or the pregnancy rate genetically normal or the pregnancy rate genetically normal or the pregnancy rate per embryo transfer which is a little per embryo transfer which is a little per embryo transfer which is a little bit of a finer point than just how many bit of a finer point than just how many bit of a finer point than just how many people got pregnant per month. people got pregnant per month. people got pregnant per month. We definitely see robust data that We definitely see robust data that We definitely see robust data that certain supplementation CoQ10 vitamin D certain supplementation CoQ10 vitamin D certain supplementation CoQ10 vitamin D omega-3 fatty acids omega-3 fatty acids omega-3 fatty acids those are clearly associated with those are clearly associated with those are clearly associated with improved reproductive outcomes and I improved reproductive outcomes and I improved reproductive outcomes and I we're starting to see more we're starting to see more we're starting to see more I don't want to say fringe but of the I don't want to say fringe but of the I don't want to say fringe but of the specifics right inositol for PCOS specifics right inositol for PCOS specifics right inositol for PCOS decreases insulin resistance huge decreases insulin resistance huge decreases insulin resistance huge benefit N-acetylcysteine for benefit N-acetylcysteine for benefit N-acetylcysteine for endometriosis or chronic inflammatory endometriosis or chronic inflammatory endometriosis or chronic inflammatory disease so we're seeing more interest in disease so we're seeing more interest in disease so we're seeing more interest in the nuance it's a hard question on the nuance it's a hard question on the nuance it's a hard question on the field I think there's definitely an old field I think there's definitely an old field I think there's definitely an old school versus a new school approach. school versus a new school approach. school versus a new school approach. I've always I've always I've always been slightly controversial because I've been slightly controversial because I've been slightly controversial because I've always been educating I think at the end always been educating I think at the end always been educating I think at the end of the day my job's not to say just do of the day my job's not to say just do of the day my job's not to say just do IVF my job's to explain what's going on IVF my job's to explain what's going on IVF my job's to explain what's going on what the options are and help you make what the options are and help you make what the options are and help you make that decision. that decision. that decision. I think a lot of older I think a lot of older I think a lot of older trained physicians practice medicine in trained physicians practice medicine in trained physicians practice medicine in the day where this field specifically the day where this field specifically the day where this field specifically patients did not have knowledge and patients did not have knowledge and patients did not have knowledge and access to knowledge therefore when a access to knowledge therefore when a access to knowledge therefore when a doctor said do this they just blindly doctor said do this they just blindly doctor said do this they just blindly said okay said okay said okay and they view that as a simpler way to and they view that as a simpler way to and they view that as a simpler way to practice and therefore can be very practice and therefore can be very practice and therefore can be very dismissive of patient questions when dismissive of patient questions when dismissive of patient questions when they are say what about CoQ10 they are say what about CoQ10 they are say what about CoQ10 or any merit of the other lifestyle or any merit of the other lifestyle or any merit of the other lifestyle factors that we talk about the plethora factors that we talk about the plethora factors that we talk about the plethora of research that exists which is more of research that exists which is more of research that exists which is more and more now is that these lifestyle and more now is that these lifestyle and more now is that these lifestyle factors matter a lot that decreasing factors matter a lot that decreasing factors matter a lot that decreasing inflammation can influence your inflammation can influence your inflammation can influence your fertility from a how your hormones fertility from a how your hormones fertility from a how your hormones function how your ovaries respond when function how your ovaries respond when function how your ovaries respond when you're how many eggs you pull out to the what how many eggs you pull out to the what how many eggs you pull out to the what you say how many embryos you form you say how many embryos you form you say how many embryos you form and that supplementation is one piece of and that supplementation is one piece of and that supplementation is one piece of the puzzle it's not the end all be all I the puzzle it's not the end all be all I the puzzle it's not the end all be all I think we can probably think we can probably think we can probably should always you know focus first on should always you know focus first on should always you know focus first on where we can move the needle the biggest where we can move the needle the biggest where we can move the needle the biggest so those more core lifestyle practices so those more core lifestyle practices so those more core lifestyle practices this should be tenant number one when we this should be tenant number one when we this should be tenant number one when we feel like we've mastered those and we feel like we've mastered those and we feel like we've mastered those and we want to add to the puzzle that's when we want to add to the puzzle that's when we want to add to the puzzle that's when we can start to say what supplements help can start to say what supplements help can start to say what supplements help me and one thing that I really encourage me and one thing that I really encourage me and one thing that I really encourage is allowing ourselves space in each is allowing ourselves space in each is allowing ourselves space in each patient to be their own N-of-1 patient to be their own N-of-1 patient to be their own N-of-1 experiment meaning how can I get so in experiment meaning how can I get so in experiment meaning how can I get so in tune with my body that I can say this tune with my body that I can say this tune with my body that I can say this makes me feel this way and trust that makes me feel this way and trust that makes me feel this way and trust that sense for yourself because we are all sense for yourself because we are all sense for yourself because we are all unique and our response will be unique and our response will be unique and our response will be different to different medications or different to different medications or different to different medications or different interventions and learning to different interventions and learning to different interventions and learning to trust that and think about what's trust that and think about what's trust that and think about what's working for you working for you working for you or oh this isn't or oh this isn't or oh this isn't that's really important when it comes to that's really important when it comes to that's really important when it comes to optimizing your own health regardless of optimizing your own health regardless of optimizing your own health regardless of what tenant of health that we're talking what tenant of health that we're talking what tenant of health that we're talking about. If we'd been sitting here 15 about. If we'd been sitting here 15 about. If we'd been sitting here 15 years ago and I said years ago and I said years ago and I said you know red light therapy can be useful you know red light therapy can be useful you know red light therapy can be useful for skin and for skin and for skin and for offsetting age-related vision loss um offsetting age-related vision loss um offsetting age-related vision loss um any reasonable physician would be like any reasonable physician would be like any reasonable physician would be like that's nonsense. that's nonsense. that's nonsense. &gt;&gt; Um I spoke to an ophthalmologist &gt;&gt; Um I spoke to an ophthalmologist &gt;&gt; Um I spoke to an ophthalmologist yesterday there's been a clinical trial yesterday there's been a clinical trial yesterday there's been a clinical trial using red light and infrared light for using red light and infrared light for using red light and infrared light for what's called dry AMD a dry macular what's called dry AMD a dry macular what's called dry AMD a dry macular degeneration to offset age-related vision loss and it to offset age-related vision loss and it to offset age-related vision loss and it is looks promising I mean it doesn't is looks promising I mean it doesn't is looks promising I mean it doesn't reverse age-related vision loss reverse age-related vision loss reverse age-related vision loss completely but completely but completely but seems to help the mitochondria in the seems to help the mitochondria in the seems to help the mitochondria in the photoreceptors people are holding onto photoreceptors people are holding onto photoreceptors people are holding onto some vision that they would lose there some vision that they would lose there some vision that they would lose there was a cover of what I am told is the was a cover of what I am told is the was a cover of what I am told is the premier dermatology journal exploring premier dermatology journal exploring premier dermatology journal exploring the recent studies on red light and the recent studies on red light and the recent studies on red light and infrared light so it's a common practice infrared light so it's a common practice infrared light so it's a common practice now so it takes time but this stuff was now so it takes time but this stuff was now so it takes time but this stuff was considered super woo nation nonsense by considered super woo nation nonsense by considered super woo nation nonsense by most {quote} traditional physicians 10 most {quote} traditional physicians 10 most {quote} traditional physicians 10 15 years ago. In the field that you're 15 years ago. In the field that you're 15 years ago. In the field that you're in, how are things like red light in, how are things like red light in, how are things like red light infrared light therapy infrared light therapy infrared light therapy looked at currently and if they are looked at currently and if they are looked at currently and if they are used, where is it directed? Mhm. Is it used, where is it directed? Mhm. Is it used, where is it directed? Mhm. Is it actually on top of the ovaries? Is that actually on top of the ovaries? Is that actually on top of the ovaries? Is that the idea or that it's a more of a the idea or that it's a more of a the idea or that it's a more of a systemic effect? systemic effect? systemic effect? &gt;&gt; Great question. &gt;&gt; Great question. &gt;&gt; Great question. I think again, let's just think about I think again, let's just think about I think again, let's just think about the fact that chronic inflammation the fact that chronic inflammation the fact that chronic inflammation impacts your body when it comes to your impacts your body when it comes to your impacts your body when it comes to your hormones and your fertility multiple hormones and your fertility multiple hormones and your fertility multiple ways, right? So, if you have chronic ways, right? So, if you have chronic ways, right? So, if you have chronic inflammation, it's going to interfere inflammation, it's going to interfere inflammation, it's going to interfere with hypothalamic receptivity. So, your with hypothalamic receptivity. So, your with hypothalamic receptivity. So, your brain can't interpret your hormonal brain can't interpret your hormonal brain can't interpret your hormonal signals as well. It's also going to send signals as well. It's also going to send signals as well. It's also going to send out signals differently. You're also out signals differently. You're also out signals differently. You're also going to have distinct ovarian changes going to have distinct ovarian changes going to have distinct ovarian changes and how the ovary responds and then of and how the ovary responds and then of and how the ovary responds and then of course for the egg quality. So, the course for the egg quality. So, the course for the egg quality. So, the bigger answer of like what type of bigger answer of like what type of bigger answer of like what type of therapy matters maybe depends on the therapy matters maybe depends on the therapy matters maybe depends on the outcome that we're looking at or how outcome that we're looking at or how outcome that we're looking at or how we're trying to show benefit. And in we're trying to show benefit. And in we're trying to show benefit. And in short, that is inconclusive, but all short, that is inconclusive, but all short, that is inconclusive, but all appears to be beneficial for the reasons appears to be beneficial for the reasons appears to be beneficial for the reasons you stated, whether it is to improve you stated, whether it is to improve you stated, whether it is to improve ovulation patterns, which we've seen ovulation patterns, which we've seen ovulation patterns, which we've seen signs showing that. signs showing that. signs showing that. That's more of the systemic probably. That's more of the systemic probably. That's more of the systemic probably. Like you're sitting in front of your red Like you're sitting in front of your red Like you're sitting in front of your red light panel, that's going to decrease light panel, that's going to decrease light panel, that's going to decrease some whole body inflammation. That's the some whole body inflammation. That's the some whole body inflammation. That's the inflammation that's most likely inflammation that's most likely inflammation that's most likely contributing to some of the brain contributing to some of the brain contributing to some of the brain sensitivity. So, you're improving the ovulatory So, you're improving the ovulatory So, you're improving the ovulatory pattern. There have been some studies pattern. There have been some studies pattern. There have been some studies looking at ovarian directed red light looking at ovarian directed red light looking at ovarian directed red light therapy, so through the abdomen. But therapy, so through the abdomen. But therapy, so through the abdomen. But there is now, I mean we don't have there is now, I mean we don't have there is now, I mean we don't have definitive data, but there's even a definitive data, but there's even a definitive data, but there's even a vaginal ultrasound wand that's got red vaginal ultrasound wand that's got red vaginal ultrasound wand that's got red light therapy. So, we don't have data on light therapy. So, we don't have data on light therapy. So, we don't have data on that yet, but seeing that yet, but seeing that yet, but seeing intravaginally you're much closer to the intravaginally you're much closer to the intravaginally you're much closer to the ovaries, that's why we do ovaries, that's why we do ovaries, that's why we do [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] vaginal ultrasound monitoring for IVF to vaginal ultrasound monitoring for IVF to vaginal ultrasound monitoring for IVF to try to see if directing the response try to see if directing the response try to see if directing the response closer to the ovary can have more closer to the ovary can have more closer to the ovary can have more benefit or could potentially benefit egg benefit or could potentially benefit egg benefit or could potentially benefit egg quality more. quality more. quality more. I think most people are going to say, I think most people are going to say, I think most people are going to say, you know, we don't have definitive data you know, we don't have definitive data you know, we don't have definitive data yet. Yet everything's pointing to likely yet. Yet everything's pointing to likely yet. Yet everything's pointing to likely benefit. Mhm. benefit. Mhm. benefit. Mhm. I don't know if this study could be I don't know if this study could be I don't know if this study could be done, but done, but done, but um one arm of this my podcast company funds one arm of this my podcast company funds one arm of this my podcast company funds research and one thing I'd love to see research and one thing I'd love to see research and one thing I'd love to see the experiment done is um the experiment done is um the experiment done is um either maintaining or doing either maintaining or doing either maintaining or doing fertilization of eggs under red light fertilization of eggs under red light fertilization of eggs under red light because so much of the proper because so much of the proper because so much of the proper chromosomal arrangement seem to be chromosomal arrangement seem to be chromosomal arrangement seem to be dependent on mitochondrial health. dependent on mitochondrial health. dependent on mitochondrial health. That's a short-term exposure. But um the That's a short-term exposure. But um the That's a short-term exposure. But um the more I learn about the different more I learn about the different more I learn about the different wavelengths of light and how they impact wavelengths of light and how they impact wavelengths of light and how they impact mitochondria and I think about the mitochondria and I think about the mitochondria and I think about the horrible lab lighting that I lived under horrible lab lighting that I lived under horrible lab lighting that I lived under for many years of my life. I think are for many years of my life. I think are for many years of my life. I think are these such precious embryos is there a way to such precious embryos is there a way to such precious embryos is there a way to put them under um beneficial lighting as put them under um beneficial lighting as put them under um beneficial lighting as opposed to either neutral or I'm not opposed to either neutral or I'm not opposed to either neutral or I'm not saying detrimental lighting, but I don't saying detrimental lighting, but I don't saying detrimental lighting, but I don't know. It'd be a fun study to fund if know. It'd be a fun study to fund if know. It'd be a fun study to fund if um if there's a way to do it. um if there's a way to do it. um if there's a way to do it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think it definitely could Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think it definitely could Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think it definitely could Okay. I think it definitely could be done. You I think it definitely could be done. You I think it definitely could be done. You mean we have incubators. They mean we have incubators. They mean we have incubators. They that could definitely be done and where that could definitely be done and where that could definitely be done and where you fertilize, too. I was going to say you fertilize, too. I was going to say you fertilize, too. I was going to say off topic, my daughter did her science off topic, my daughter did her science off topic, my daughter did her science fair project on chicken eggs, but they fair project on chicken eggs, but they fair project on chicken eggs, but they looked at blue light, green light, and looked at blue light, green light, and looked at blue light, green light, and natural light natural light natural light &gt;&gt; Ooh, cool. &gt;&gt; Ooh, cool. &gt;&gt; Ooh, cool. &gt;&gt; if they, you know, they're all &gt;&gt; if they, you know, they're all &gt;&gt; if they, you know, they're all fertilized, but to see if their fertilized, but to see if their fertilized, but to see if their hatchability was different and the group hatchability was different and the group hatchability was different and the group that was exposed to blue light actually that was exposed to blue light actually that was exposed to blue light actually had the highest hatchability and you had the highest hatchability and you had the highest hatchability and you know, UV light was actually the lowest. know, UV light was actually the lowest. know, UV light was actually the lowest. But in their research, what so But in their research, what so But in their research, what so fascinating is that red light is really fascinating is that red light is really fascinating is that red light is really detrimental to chicken eggs. So, detrimental to chicken eggs. So, detrimental to chicken eggs. So, anyways, I think Yeah, well that's why anyways, I think Yeah, well that's why anyways, I think Yeah, well that's why science is fun. Oh, congratulations to science is fun. Oh, congratulations to science is fun. Oh, congratulations to her. She should write it up. You know, her. She should write it up. You know, her. She should write it up. You know, there's a journal where kids can write there's a journal where kids can write there's a journal where kids can write up their Yeah, I'll send you a link to up their Yeah, I'll send you a link to up their Yeah, I'll send you a link to it. She'll be published and it. She'll be published and it. She'll be published and that's what's so cool about science. that's what's so cool about science. that's what's so cool about science. Sometimes we think, oh the red light is Sometimes we think, oh the red light is Sometimes we think, oh the red light is going to be the beneficial one, the UV going to be the beneficial one, the UV going to be the beneficial one, the UV light is going to or the blue light is light is going to or the blue light is light is going to or the blue light is going to be the bad one, but then going to be the bad one, but then going to be the bad one, but then you know, vitamin D production is you know, vitamin D production is you know, vitamin D production is dependent on blue and UV. So, you know, dependent on blue and UV. So, you know, dependent on blue and UV. So, you know, nature's mysterious. You know, that's nature's mysterious. You know, that's nature's mysterious. You know, that's awesome. &gt;&gt; It keeps it interesting for us. &gt;&gt; It keeps it interesting for us. &gt;&gt; It keeps it interesting for us. &gt;&gt; Awesome. Is she going to become a &gt;&gt; Awesome. Is she going to become a &gt;&gt; Awesome. Is she going to become a scientist? Or she's already a scientist, scientist? Or she's already a scientist, scientist? Or she's already a scientist, but &gt;&gt; 11, but she's a scientist right now. I &gt;&gt; 11, but she's a scientist right now. I &gt;&gt; 11, but she's a scientist right now. I love it. I love it. I'll send you that love it. I love it. I'll send you that love it. I love it. I'll send you that link. It'd be cool if she would write link. It'd be cool if she would write link. It'd be cool if she would write that up. that up. that up. Um So, red light maybe. Yeah. And I should So, red light maybe. Yeah. And I should So, red light maybe. Yeah. And I should point out I red light and infrared comes point out I red light and infrared comes point out I red light and infrared comes from sunlight. So, from sunlight. So, from sunlight. So, and of course there's circadian good and of course there's circadian good and of course there's circadian good circadian effects of getting sunlight. circadian effects of getting sunlight. circadian effects of getting sunlight. All circadian benefits of getting All circadian benefits of getting All circadian benefits of getting sunlight are pro-fertility, pro-hormonal sunlight are pro-fertility, pro-hormonal sunlight are pro-fertility, pro-hormonal health. Yes. Yeah, I don't want to give health. Yes. Yeah, I don't want to give health. Yes. Yeah, I don't want to give people the impression that they have to people the impression that they have to people the impression that they have to purchase a panel. purchase a panel. purchase a panel. Um there's no hidden agenda here. Um there's no hidden agenda here. Um there's no hidden agenda here. So, those are the things that one can So, those are the things that one can So, those are the things that one can take that do not, I think broadly as take that do not, I think broadly as take that do not, I think broadly as don't smoke, don't drink. I was shocked, don't smoke, don't drink. I was shocked, don't smoke, don't drink. I was shocked, but I need to ask um to learn but I need to ask um to learn but I need to ask um to learn what I found was that 15 15% of women in what I found was that 15 15% of women in what I found was that 15 15% of women in the United States report having used the United States report having used the United States report having used cannabis in some form or another while cannabis in some form or another while cannabis in some form or another while pregnant. Does that concern you? pregnant. Does that concern you? pregnant. Does that concern you? Cannabis use is probably the most Cannabis use is probably the most Cannabis use is probably the most concerning thing that I see in clinical concerning thing that I see in clinical concerning thing that I see in clinical practice. So, both you can just say if practice. So, both you can just say if practice. So, both you can just say if that many are using it in pregnancy, that many are using it in pregnancy, that many are using it in pregnancy, let's extrapolate to how many are using let's extrapolate to how many are using let's extrapolate to how many are using it beforehand. And ultimately something it beforehand. And ultimately something it beforehand. And ultimately something that we are just now getting robust data that we are just now getting robust data that we are just now getting robust data on because it's hard to study something on because it's hard to study something on because it's hard to study something when it's illegal. when it's illegal. when it's illegal. All cannabis use is hugely detrimental All cannabis use is hugely detrimental All cannabis use is hugely detrimental to sperm for sure across the board, to sperm for sure across the board, to sperm for sure across the board, right? Both production, the quantity of right? Both production, the quantity of right? Both production, the quantity of sperm, testosterone production, also the testosterone production, also the testosterone production, also the quality of the sperm, specifically the quality of the sperm, specifically the quality of the sperm, specifically the DNA fragmentation inside the head of the DNA fragmentation inside the head of the DNA fragmentation inside the head of the sperm to the degree that female partners sperm to the degree that female partners sperm to the degree that female partners who conceive from a male partner who's who conceive from a male partner who's who conceive from a male partner who's using cannabis have much higher using cannabis have much higher using cannabis have much higher miscarriage rates than partners who do miscarriage rates than partners who do miscarriage rates than partners who do not utilize cannabis. And I will say not utilize cannabis. And I will say not utilize cannabis. And I will say clinically in the IVF lab when I see clinically in the IVF lab when I see clinically in the IVF lab when I see embryos halt at that male developmental embryos halt at that male developmental embryos halt at that male developmental stage on day three, we say, "Oh, here's stage on day three, we say, "Oh, here's stage on day three, we say, "Oh, here's a young couple. They've got no embryos a young couple. They've got no embryos a young couple. They've got no embryos and we were expecting them to have and we were expecting them to have and we were expecting them to have some." When we go back nine out of 10 some." When we go back nine out of 10 some." When we go back nine out of 10 times, he is using cannabis that he times, he is using cannabis that he times, he is using cannabis that he previously denied. So, it is one of the previously denied. So, it is one of the previously denied. So, it is one of the most movable factors right now in this most movable factors right now in this most movable factors right now in this country for improving, you know, country for improving, you know, country for improving, you know, fertility outcomes. For women, cannabis fertility outcomes. For women, cannabis fertility outcomes. For women, cannabis use in the prior year can decrease the use in the prior year can decrease the use in the prior year can decrease the eggs you get at egg retrieval by 25% eggs you get at egg retrieval by 25% eggs you get at egg retrieval by 25% and can decrease fertilization rates by and can decrease fertilization rates by and can decrease fertilization rates by 28% and can increase miscarriage rates, and can increase miscarriage rates, and can increase miscarriage rates, therefore decreasing live birth rates. therefore decreasing live birth rates. therefore decreasing live birth rates. So, huge numbers in science, right? I mean huge numbers in science, right? I mean huge numbers in science, right? I mean like we get excited when something's a like we get excited when something's a like we get excited when something's a few, you know, percentage points few, you know, percentage points few, you know, percentage points different, but these numbers are different, but these numbers are different, but these numbers are really high. really high. really high. To the degree that it's really easy to To the degree that it's really easy to To the degree that it's really easy to sit here and say if you're trying to get sit here and say if you're trying to get sit here and say if you're trying to get pregnant the fastest, if you want to pregnant the fastest, if you want to pregnant the fastest, if you want to have the best pregnancy outcomes or even have the best pregnancy outcomes or even have the best pregnancy outcomes or even you want to have the best hormones you want to have the best hormones you want to have the best hormones you can, have longevity of your ovaries or can, have longevity of your ovaries or can, have longevity of your ovaries or have the best sperm counts or the most have the best sperm counts or the most have the best sperm counts or the most testosterone, cannabis use should not be testosterone, cannabis use should not be testosterone, cannabis use should not be a part of that. And THC crosses the a part of that. And THC crosses the a part of that. And THC crosses the placenta directly. placenta directly. placenta directly. And THC levels in, you know, edibles are And THC levels in, you know, edibles are And THC levels in, you know, edibles are usually the highest. So, I think it's usually the highest. So, I think it's usually the highest. So, I think it's really important that sometimes people really important that sometimes people really important that sometimes people are like, "Oh, well I don't smoke it, so are like, "Oh, well I don't smoke it, so are like, "Oh, well I don't smoke it, so I'm okay." We want to be really careful I'm okay." We want to be really careful I'm okay." We want to be really careful that this is not something your body is that this is not something your body is that this is not something your body is meant to be exposed to when we want to meant to be exposed to when we want to meant to be exposed to when we want to think about the core of how your body is think about the core of how your body is think about the core of how your body is meant to function. meant to function. meant to function. Critical message. Thank you so much. I Critical message. Thank you so much. I Critical message. Thank you so much. I I've been put through the ringer around I've been put through the ringer around I've been put through the ringer around this cannabis thing cuz I've hosted this cannabis thing cuz I've hosted this cannabis thing cuz I've hosted people that said it does increase the people that said it does increase the people that said it does increase the risk of psychosis in certain typically risk of psychosis in certain typically risk of psychosis in certain typically young males, although not everyone. I've young males, although not everyone. I've young males, although not everyone. I've been accused of all sorts of things been accused of all sorts of things been accused of all sorts of things related to that, then had someone on who related to that, then had someone on who related to that, then had someone on who confirmed that, someone who refuted it confirmed that, someone who refuted it confirmed that, someone who refuted it and um cannabis I believe is um cannabis I believe is um cannabis I believe is recently rescheduled from schedule one recently rescheduled from schedule one recently rescheduled from schedule one no at the federal level it's assigned to no at the federal level it's assigned to no at the federal level it's assigned to no medical application medical application medical application to schedule three. So, there's going to schedule three. So, there's going to schedule three. So, there's going to be a lot more cannabis use going be a lot more cannabis use going be a lot more cannabis use going forward. It's so critical that people forward. It's so critical that people forward. It's so critical that people hear this. And the argument I always hear this. And the argument I always hear this. And the argument I always hear and it's always dudes hear and it's always dudes hear and it's always dudes typically on X, they'll say typically on X, they'll say typically on X, they'll say um that they smoked a lot of weed and um that they smoked a lot of weed and um that they smoked a lot of weed and they got their they got their they got their or took edibles and they got their wife or took edibles and they got their wife or took edibles and they got their wife or girlfriend pregnant X number of times or girlfriend pregnant X number of times or girlfriend pregnant X number of times and it sort of becomes this sort of and it sort of becomes this sort of and it sort of becomes this sort of point of boasting and then I never want point of boasting and then I never want point of boasting and then I never want to make the comment, but I'll make it to make the comment, but I'll make it to make the comment, but I'll make it now. It's like, "Yeah, but you're now. It's like, "Yeah, but you're now. It's like, "Yeah, but you're talking about brain development in your talking about brain development in your talking about brain development in your kid." And I'm not saying your kid is kid." And I'm not saying your kid is kid." And I'm not saying your kid is dumb, but I'm saying they're maybe not dumb, but I'm saying they're maybe not dumb, but I'm saying they're maybe not as smart as they could be or as um as smart as they could be or as um as smart as they could be or as um healthy as they could be. I'll just say healthy as they could be. I'll just say healthy as they could be. I'll just say that cuz I'm talking to the guys out that cuz I'm talking to the guys out that cuz I'm talking to the guys out there and that's how we talk to one there and that's how we talk to one there and that's how we talk to one another. Yeah, you had a bunch of kids, another. Yeah, you had a bunch of kids, another. Yeah, you had a bunch of kids, but they could be a lot healthier. And but they could be a lot healthier. And but they could be a lot healthier. And so, I think to me it just seems like so, I think to me it just seems like so, I think to me it just seems like anything that one could do since it's a anything that one could do since it's a anything that one could do since it's a ostensibly a short-term decision ostensibly a short-term decision ostensibly a short-term decision certainly for the certainly for the certainly for the man, right? The woman who's going to man, right? The woman who's going to man, right? The woman who's going to breastfeed should probably avoid breastfeed should probably avoid breastfeed should probably avoid cannabis during breastfeeding, too. You cannabis during breastfeeding, too. You cannabis during breastfeeding, too. You see where I'm going with this. The see where I'm going with this. The see where I'm going with this. The outcome is so important, right? And when outcome is so important, right? And when outcome is so important, right? And when we want to think about even just male we want to think about even just male we want to think about even just male cannabis use. Yes, sperm count, etc. cannabis use. Yes, sperm count, etc. cannabis use. Yes, sperm count, etc. Decreases the sperm quality. That sperm Decreases the sperm quality. That sperm Decreases the sperm quality. That sperm quality is important for programming of quality is important for programming of quality is important for programming of the embryo for how the placenta the embryo for how the placenta the embryo for how the placenta develops. If the placenta is not as develops. If the placenta is not as develops. If the placenta is not as good, you know, association with earlier good, you know, association with earlier good, you know, association with earlier birth. I mean, it's just not worth the birth. I mean, it's just not worth the birth. I mean, it's just not worth the risk when the outcome is so important, risk when the outcome is so important, risk when the outcome is so important, right? We're all weighing risk every day right? We're all weighing risk every day right? We're all weighing risk every day with different decisions. To me, there's with different decisions. To me, there's with different decisions. To me, there's a lot harder decisions you have to make, a lot harder decisions you have to make, a lot harder decisions you have to make, but you know, nicotine use, cannabis use, you know, nicotine use, cannabis use, you know, nicotine use, cannabis use, alcohol use, like the data here, none of alcohol use, like the data here, none of alcohol use, like the data here, none of that is advantageous for your health, that is advantageous for your health, that is advantageous for your health, especially if we're looking primarily especially if we're looking primarily especially if we're looking primarily through a fertility lens, a hormone through a fertility lens, a hormone through a fertility lens, a hormone lens, or even or [clears throat] lens, or even or [clears throat] lens, or even or [clears throat] specifically a pregnancy lens. Like specifically a pregnancy lens. Like specifically a pregnancy lens. Like there's no place for it. there's no place for it. there's no place for it. You can choose to do what you want with You can choose to do what you want with You can choose to do what you want with that data, right? And people will always that data, right? And people will always that data, right? And people will always say, "I know so-and-so who did this and say, "I know so-and-so who did this and say, "I know so-and-so who did this and they got pregnant." And there will they got pregnant." And there will they got pregnant." And there will always be those people. always be those people. always be those people. But you're the one making decisions for But you're the one making decisions for But you're the one making decisions for your journey. And the recommendation your journey. And the recommendation your journey. And the recommendation even stronger if you are having even stronger if you are having even stronger if you are having infertility, if you are older, depending infertility, if you are older, depending infertility, if you are older, depending on your scenario because you want to on your scenario because you want to on your scenario because you want to control what you can because you can't control what you can because you can't control what you can because you can't control everything. So, I call those the control everything. So, I call those the control everything. So, I call those the behavioral toxins that there's really no behavioral toxins that there's really no behavioral toxins that there's really no place that we need to add these to the place that we need to add these to the place that we need to add these to the world if we're talking about how do we world if we're talking about how do we world if we're talking about how do we get my body to function optimally. It's get my body to function optimally. It's get my body to function optimally. It's interesting that um certain substances interesting that um certain substances interesting that um certain substances get politicized. You know, in the past politicized. You know, in the past politicized. You know, in the past experience this thing that you can tell experience this thing that you can tell experience this thing that you can tell with some degree of friction. Um in the with some degree of friction. Um in the with some degree of friction. Um in the past cannabis was associated with the past cannabis was associated with the past cannabis was associated with the left. It was like pro-cannabis was left. It was like pro-cannabis was left. It was like pro-cannabis was left. Now, pro-cannabis is actually very Now, pro-cannabis is actually very Now, pro-cannabis is actually very strongly correlated with the strongly correlated with the strongly correlated with the &gt;&gt; with the with the um the laws anyway &gt;&gt; with the with the um the laws anyway &gt;&gt; with the with the um the laws anyway this rescheduling is very and you watch this rescheduling is very and you watch this rescheduling is very and you watch the media just kind of pivot and it's the media just kind of pivot and it's the media just kind of pivot and it's just very clear that they're not paying just very clear that they're not paying just very clear that they're not paying that the media is in the traditional that the media is in the traditional that the media is in the traditional media isn't paying attention to the to media isn't paying attention to the to media isn't paying attention to the to the actual data. It's sort of like, "How the actual data. It's sort of like, "How the actual data. It's sort of like, "How can we use this as a weapon?" On both can we use this as a weapon?" On both can we use this as a weapon?" On both sides. On both sides. And so, depending sides. On both sides. And so, depending sides. On both sides. And so, depending on where people get their news, it can on where people get their news, it can on where people get their news, it can be very confusing to people um be very confusing to people um be very confusing to people um along those lines. along those lines. along those lines. For whatever reason, nicotine has become For whatever reason, nicotine has become For whatever reason, nicotine has become kind of this right-wing associated kind of this right-wing associated kind of this right-wing associated thing. &gt;&gt; I know. I recently spoke to about 4,000 &gt;&gt; I know. I recently spoke to about 4,000 &gt;&gt; I know. I recently spoke to about 4,000 young men and women young men and women young men and women and I would say about 30 to 40% of them I would say about 30 to 40% of them I would say about 30 to 40% of them raised their hand that they're using raised their hand that they're using raised their hand that they're using oral nicotine every single day anywhere oral nicotine every single day anywhere oral nicotine every single day anywhere from probably I did I did some crude analysis probably I did I did some crude analysis probably I did I did some crude analysis by hand by hand by hand so these aren't you know hard data but so these aren't you know hard data but so these aren't you know hard data but it was somewhere between 12 and 70 mg of it was somewhere between 12 and 70 mg of it was somewhere between 12 and 70 mg of nicotine a day. Wild. So for women in nicotine a day. Wild. So for women in nicotine a day. Wild. So for women in particular is oral nicotine use detrimental to is oral nicotine use detrimental to is oral nicotine use detrimental to either egg quality or probability of either egg quality or probability of either egg quality or probability of successful pregnancy? It's definitely successful pregnancy? It's definitely successful pregnancy? It's definitely correlated because of how it works in correlated because of how it works in correlated because of how it works in the brain to you know ovulation getting the brain to you know ovulation getting the brain to you know ovulation getting pregnant hormone response. So it should pregnant hormone response. So it should pregnant hormone response. So it should not be something that we're adding to not be something that we're adding to not be something that we're adding to you know our day-to-day life in any form you know our day-to-day life in any form you know our day-to-day life in any form if we're trying to get pregnant. if we're trying to get pregnant. if we're trying to get pregnant. Most the egg quality data from nicotine Most the egg quality data from nicotine Most the egg quality data from nicotine comes from cigarette smoking so I think comes from cigarette smoking so I think comes from cigarette smoking so I think it's a little bit more nuanced because it's a little bit more nuanced because it's a little bit more nuanced because smoking directly we want to look at that smoking directly we want to look at that smoking directly we want to look at that you know I would say it's one of the few you know I would say it's one of the few you know I would say it's one of the few things that gets into the vault and things that gets into the vault and things that gets into the vault and decreases our egg count. I used to say decreases our egg count. I used to say decreases our egg count. I used to say chronic inflammation can get in there chronic inflammation can get in there chronic inflammation can get in there but you know nicotine cigarette smoking but you know nicotine cigarette smoking but you know nicotine cigarette smoking definitely does. You go into definitely does. You go into definitely does. You go into menopause early you'll get fewer eggs menopause early you'll get fewer eggs menopause early you'll get fewer eggs the egg quality is detrimental. It makes the egg quality is detrimental. It makes the egg quality is detrimental. It makes sense based on what nicotine does to sense based on what nicotine does to sense based on what nicotine does to your body and how it kind of changes your body and how it kind of changes your body and how it kind of changes your cellular response that it probably your cellular response that it probably your cellular response that it probably is impacting your egg quality also even is impacting your egg quality also even is impacting your egg quality also even with these oral nicotine pouches you with these oral nicotine pouches you with these oral nicotine pouches you know that we're seeing everybody utilize know that we're seeing everybody utilize know that we're seeing everybody utilize and it's tanking sperm counts. I mean and it's tanking sperm counts. I mean and it's tanking sperm counts. I mean that one's really clear. that one's really clear. that one's really clear. I mean then it of course everyone's I mean then it of course everyone's I mean then it of course everyone's talking about the reduction in uh talking about the reduction in uh talking about the reduction in uh in just in just in just population growth which when I was population growth which when I was population growth which when I was growing up we were told that like the growing up we were told that like the growing up we were told that like the earth is going to be overcrowded now earth is going to be overcrowded now earth is going to be overcrowded now we're told that there's not going to be we're told that there's not going to be we're told that there's not going to be enough people everyone's going to be enough people everyone's going to be enough people everyone's going to be alone on their phones. I don't think alone on their phones. I don't think alone on their phones. I don't think either extreme is true um either extreme is true um either extreme is true um but these are these are vitally but these are these are vitally but these are these are vitally important things for people to think important things for people to think important things for people to think about cuz these are easy decisions to about cuz these are easy decisions to about cuz these are easy decisions to make and they can be short-term make and they can be short-term make and they can be short-term decisions. &gt;&gt; They are. You know we make decisions &gt;&gt; They are. You know we make decisions &gt;&gt; They are. You know we make decisions every day and you don't have to be every day and you don't have to be every day and you don't have to be perfect and you don't have to be all or perfect and you don't have to be all or perfect and you don't have to be all or nothing and it doesn't have to be nothing and it doesn't have to be nothing and it doesn't have to be forever. A lot of these things once you forever. A lot of these things once you forever. A lot of these things once you really start making a bunch of them and really start making a bunch of them and really start making a bunch of them and decreasing inflammation you will decreasing inflammation you will decreasing inflammation you will tangibly feel better. I think we are tangibly feel better. I think we are tangibly feel better. I think we are creatures of our own world and humans by creatures of our own world and humans by creatures of our own world and humans by nature adjust to the environment we put nature adjust to the environment we put nature adjust to the environment we put our body into. So even things like we our body into. So even things like we our body into. So even things like we talked about sleep but you know chronic talked about sleep but you know chronic talked about sleep but you know chronic stress how it's directly associated with stress how it's directly associated with stress how it's directly associated with insulin resistance how building skeletal insulin resistance how building skeletal insulin resistance how building skeletal muscle is one of the top ways you can muscle is one of the top ways you can muscle is one of the top ways you can reverse insulin resistance. It's the reverse insulin resistance. It's the reverse insulin resistance. It's the best mechanism for hormonal health we best mechanism for hormonal health we best mechanism for hormonal health we have is to build more skeletal muscle. have is to build more skeletal muscle. have is to build more skeletal muscle. These things can impact your fertility These things can impact your fertility These things can impact your fertility and your health long-term. And so once and your health long-term. And so once and your health long-term. And so once we start to make these little decisions we start to make these little decisions we start to make these little decisions eating more fiber anti-inflammatory eating more fiber anti-inflammatory eating more fiber anti-inflammatory foods cutting down the ultra-processed foods cutting down the ultra-processed foods cutting down the ultra-processed foods removing the toxins changing the foods removing the toxins changing the foods removing the toxins changing the toxic behaviors sleeping more really toxic behaviors sleeping more really toxic behaviors sleeping more really trying to manage stress in a more trying to manage stress in a more trying to manage stress in a more productive way. productive way. productive way. Together when your inflammatory burden Together when your inflammatory burden Together when your inflammatory burden lowers people feel better and then they lowers people feel better and then they lowers people feel better and then they get it then they say oh like this get it then they say oh like this get it then they say oh like this running on just caffeine and eating running on just caffeine and eating running on just caffeine and eating whatever food I could on the go and not whatever food I could on the go and not whatever food I could on the go and not getting enough sleep and then using 100 getting enough sleep and then using 100 getting enough sleep and then using 100 nicotine like that was my body giving me nicotine like that was my body giving me nicotine like that was my body giving me 100 red flags that it is working 100 red flags that it is working 100 red flags that it is working overtime to deal with what I'm handing overtime to deal with what I'm handing overtime to deal with what I'm handing it. So how's it supposed to do its it. So how's it supposed to do its it. So how's it supposed to do its normal day-to-day function which at its normal day-to-day function which at its normal day-to-day function which at its purest that's where your body should try purest that's where your body should try purest that's where your body should try to be especially when it comes to trying to be especially when it comes to trying to be especially when it comes to trying to get pregnant and have the best egg to get pregnant and have the best egg to get pregnant and have the best egg and sperm quality. and sperm quality. and sperm quality. I would never ask you to assign any I would never ask you to assign any I would never ask you to assign any validity to something for which there's validity to something for which there's validity to something for which there's no data but in your experience your no data but in your experience your no data but in your experience your clinical and scientific experience clinical and scientific experience clinical and scientific experience is there something that you've heard is there something that you've heard is there something that you've heard from your patients and then observed in from your patients and then observed in from your patients and then observed in terms of outcomes that is intriguing to terms of outcomes that is intriguing to terms of outcomes that is intriguing to you that if that you would like to see you that if that you would like to see you that if that you would like to see more science on? more science on? more science on? &gt;&gt; Um and the reason I ask this is &gt;&gt; Um and the reason I ask this is &gt;&gt; Um and the reason I ask this is there's this um incredible intuition there's this um incredible intuition there's this um incredible intuition that comes from just being in regular that comes from just being in regular that comes from just being in regular contact with a certain process. For contact with a certain process. For contact with a certain process. For instance anytime I've spoken to an instance anytime I've spoken to an instance anytime I've spoken to an embryologist who does the kind of work embryologist who does the kind of work embryologist who does the kind of work that they do in your clinic that they do in your clinic that they do in your clinic they read journals and there's a process they read journals and there's a process they read journals and there's a process they learn protocols but they also they learn protocols but they also they learn protocols but they also they develop an intuition to pick that sperm develop an intuition to pick that sperm develop an intuition to pick that sperm to wait just a little bit longer maybe to wait just a little bit longer maybe to wait just a little bit longer maybe even maybe even fertilizing that egg at even maybe even fertilizing that egg at even maybe even fertilizing that egg at the end of the day the end of the day the end of the day &gt;&gt; Oh I know it's a couple of hours. &gt;&gt; Oh I know it's a couple of hours. &gt;&gt; Oh I know it's a couple of hours. It's a little small it's a little this It's a little small it's a little this It's a little small it's a little this is the this is the art not this is the this is the art not this is the this is the art not &gt;&gt; je ne sais quoi Right right the art not &gt;&gt; je ne sais quoi Right right the art not &gt;&gt; je ne sais quoi Right right the art not the science of it the same way you know the science of it the same way you know the science of it the same way you know cooking is chemistry but there's an art cooking is chemistry but there's an art cooking is chemistry but there's an art to it too and that nothing can replace to it too and that nothing can replace to it too and that nothing can replace those millions of hours in contact with those millions of hours in contact with those millions of hours in contact with the process. So you've had so many hours the process. So you've had so many hours the process. So you've had so many hours in this process at every level. Um is in this process at every level. Um is in this process at every level. Um is there something that intrigues you and there something that intrigues you and there something that intrigues you and that you'd like to see more science on? that you'd like to see more science on? that you'd like to see more science on? I love that question. I love that question. I love that question. One thing I think I want most people to One thing I think I want most people to One thing I think I want most people to take away then I'll answer the question take away then I'll answer the question take away then I'll answer the question is that is that is that you can make tangible improvement in you can make tangible improvement in you can make tangible improvement in your fertility. your fertility. your fertility. By looking at these lifestyle factors By looking at these lifestyle factors By looking at these lifestyle factors and coming up with a plan to try to and coming up with a plan to try to and coming up with a plan to try to decrease your inflammatory burden you decrease your inflammatory burden you decrease your inflammatory burden you can have a different outcome and I think can have a different outcome and I think can have a different outcome and I think that conversation's even more important that conversation's even more important that conversation's even more important if you're waiting longer to get pregnant if you're waiting longer to get pregnant if you're waiting longer to get pregnant or if you're at an older age or you have or if you're at an older age or you have or if you're at an older age or you have lower ovarian reserve because knowing lower ovarian reserve because knowing lower ovarian reserve because knowing that you are controlling all these that you are controlling all these that you are controlling all these variables to put the best egg and sperm variables to put the best egg and sperm variables to put the best egg and sperm forward is really important. The most forward is really important. The most forward is really important. The most intriguing part of the conversation for intriguing part of the conversation for intriguing part of the conversation for me right now is GLP-1s and their use for me right now is GLP-1s and their use for me right now is GLP-1s and their use for potential chronic inflammatory disease potential chronic inflammatory disease potential chronic inflammatory disease like endometriosis. like endometriosis. like endometriosis. As a field we quickly accepted that they As a field we quickly accepted that they As a field we quickly accepted that they are hugely powerful for PCOS and states are hugely powerful for PCOS and states are hugely powerful for PCOS and states of obvious insulin resistance for of obvious insulin resistance for of obvious insulin resistance for reasons that make sense to everybody. reasons that make sense to everybody. reasons that make sense to everybody. They also help obviously patients lose They also help obviously patients lose They also help obviously patients lose weight. Fat cells make estrogen they weight. Fat cells make estrogen they weight. Fat cells make estrogen they impact the ovulatory process. Fat cells impact the ovulatory process. Fat cells impact the ovulatory process. Fat cells are inflammatory. So all the things that are inflammatory. So all the things that are inflammatory. So all the things that we said were negative. So by simply we said were negative. So by simply we said were negative. So by simply losing weight we can restore ovulation losing weight we can restore ovulation losing weight we can restore ovulation we can have improved IVF outcomes and it we can have improved IVF outcomes and it we can have improved IVF outcomes and it is just a more effective mechanism for is just a more effective mechanism for is just a more effective mechanism for weight loss. So weight loss. So weight loss. So easy to jump on and say I have a patient easy to jump on and say I have a patient easy to jump on and say I have a patient who needs to lose weight. I have a who needs to lose weight. I have a who needs to lose weight. I have a patient with PCOS GLP-1 agonist can be a patient with PCOS GLP-1 agonist can be a patient with PCOS GLP-1 agonist can be a very powerful tool to that. Where I see very powerful tool to that. Where I see very powerful tool to that. Where I see right now are patients who have known right now are patients who have known right now are patients who have known endometriosis or what I call probable endo they have or what I call probable endo they have or what I call probable endo they have unexplained infertility. 50% of those unexplained infertility. 50% of those unexplained infertility. 50% of those patients will end up having patients will end up having patients will end up having endometriosis. Maybe you know one of the problems with Maybe you know one of the problems with Maybe you know one of the problems with endo is gold standard is a surgical endo is gold standard is a surgical endo is gold standard is a surgical diagnosis only. We don't have a lab test diagnosis only. We don't have a lab test diagnosis only. We don't have a lab test for endometriosis. for endometriosis. for endometriosis. But when we are getting unexplained IVF But when we are getting unexplained IVF But when we are getting unexplained IVF outcomes that do not match what we would outcomes that do not match what we would outcomes that do not match what we would expect or we have these known chronic expect or we have these known chronic expect or we have these known chronic inflammatory diseases inflammatory diseases inflammatory diseases I will have patients go on a GLP-1 low I will have patients go on a GLP-1 low I will have patients go on a GLP-1 low dose for 3 months dose for 3 months dose for 3 months we should take stop them and then go we should take stop them and then go we should take stop them and then go through a cycle with different IVF through a cycle with different IVF through a cycle with different IVF outcomes. We will see more embryos in outcomes. We will see more embryos in outcomes. We will see more embryos in the lab and we don't have to study to the lab and we don't have to study to the lab and we don't have to study to say that but say that but say that but talking to colleagues across the country talking to colleagues across the country talking to colleagues across the country we know that GLP-1s can be very we know that GLP-1s can be very we know that GLP-1s can be very anti-inflammatory and the way to kind of anti-inflammatory and the way to kind of anti-inflammatory and the way to kind of target that what appears to be that target that what appears to be that target that what appears to be that inflammatory burden and I think that inflammatory burden and I think that inflammatory burden and I think that there will be utility there within the there will be utility there within the there will be utility there within the context of these chronic inflammatory context of these chronic inflammatory context of these chronic inflammatory disease that might be able to help a disease that might be able to help a disease that might be able to help a patient population that we've struggled patient population that we've struggled patient population that we've struggled with difficulty to get to a with difficulty to get to a with difficulty to get to a diagnosis or limited data points on what diagnosis or limited data points on what diagnosis or limited data points on what to do with it. So the data's not out yet to do with it. So the data's not out yet to do with it. So the data's not out yet but it is a tool I add to the box but it is a tool I add to the box but it is a tool I add to the box especially if we're not getting outcomes especially if we're not getting outcomes especially if we're not getting outcomes we would expect and we don't have we would expect and we don't have we would expect and we don't have another reason why. So do you think another reason why. So do you think another reason why. So do you think there could be direct effects of the there could be direct effects of the there could be direct effects of the GLP-1s in reducing inflammation that are GLP-1s in reducing inflammation that are GLP-1s in reducing inflammation that are independent of less adipose tissue? independent of less adipose tissue? independent of less adipose tissue? &gt;&gt; some of these patients do not have much &gt;&gt; some of these patients do not have much &gt;&gt; some of these patients do not have much adipose tissue. So I think obviously adipose tissue. So I think obviously adipose tissue. So I think obviously that person's going to get even more that person's going to get even more that person's going to get even more benefit if they have adipose tissue to benefit if they have adipose tissue to benefit if they have adipose tissue to lose that's causing inflammation but I lose that's causing inflammation but I lose that's causing inflammation but I think especially if we think about think especially if we think about think especially if we think about autoimmune disease where people's immune autoimmune disease where people's immune autoimmune disease where people's immune system their inflammatory response is system their inflammatory response is system their inflammatory response is mistriggering I think that there's mistriggering I think that there's mistriggering I think that there's benefit for the GLP-1s in that benefit for the GLP-1s in that benefit for the GLP-1s in that population specifically that is giving population specifically that is giving population specifically that is giving them an added benefit to decrease them an added benefit to decrease them an added benefit to decrease inflammation in a really profound way. inflammation in a really profound way. inflammation in a really profound way. It's really interesting cuz I would have It's really interesting cuz I would have It's really interesting cuz I would have thought GLP-1s reducing body fat for a woman who GLP-1s reducing body fat for a woman who GLP-1s reducing body fat for a woman who doesn't isn't carrying excess body fat doesn't isn't carrying excess body fat doesn't isn't carrying excess body fat that might actually be detrimental to that might actually be detrimental to that might actually be detrimental to getting pregnant. getting pregnant. getting pregnant. &gt;&gt; fair point that we have to be really &gt;&gt; fair point that we have to be really &gt;&gt; fair point that we have to be really careful when it comes to careful when it comes to careful when it comes to skinny culture. I mean we are seeing skinny culture. I mean we are seeing skinny culture. I mean we are seeing just societal norms shift again to be just societal norms shift again to be just societal norms shift again to be very thin after being more you know body very thin after being more you know body very thin after being more you know body positive be of a healthy weight. body positive be of a healthy weight. body positive be of a healthy weight. We're definitely seeing celebrities go We're definitely seeing celebrities go We're definitely seeing celebrities go back to being extremely thin and we know back to being extremely thin and we know back to being extremely thin and we know at both extremes of body weight again at both extremes of body weight again at both extremes of body weight again the hypothalamus is your checkpoint. If the hypothalamus is your checkpoint. If the hypothalamus is your checkpoint. If you don't have enough body fat we are you don't have enough body fat we are you don't have enough body fat we are worried that you cannot maintain a worried that you cannot maintain a worried that you cannot maintain a pregnancy so it can stop how it's pregnancy so it can stop how it's pregnancy so it can stop how it's sending off hormones and again we can sending off hormones and again we can sending off hormones and again we can see like a luteal phase defect is that see like a luteal phase defect is that see like a luteal phase defect is that first warning sign before you're in true first warning sign before you're in true first warning sign before you're in true hypothalamic amenorrhea. So you have to hypothalamic amenorrhea. So you have to hypothalamic amenorrhea. So you have to be really careful in that patient group be really careful in that patient group be really careful in that patient group and it has to be done with the right and it has to be done with the right and it has to be done with the right person who's a lot of experience with person who's a lot of experience with person who's a lot of experience with GLP-1s are super low doses. The goal is GLP-1s are super low doses. The goal is GLP-1s are super low doses. The goal is not weight loss it's really a different not weight loss it's really a different not weight loss it's really a different goal. And again I don't have a paper to goal. And again I don't have a paper to goal. And again I don't have a paper to like prove it but we are seeing that like prove it but we are seeing that like prove it but we are seeing that clinical experience to say clinical experience to say clinical experience to say at the end of the day because there's at the end of the day because there's at the end of the day because there's merit in trying to decrease inflammation merit in trying to decrease inflammation merit in trying to decrease inflammation especially in people who we suspect is especially in people who we suspect is especially in people who we suspect is contributing to the circumstance they contributing to the circumstance they contributing to the circumstance they are in. And you said low dose GLP. are in. And you said low dose GLP. are in. And you said low dose GLP. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are these available in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are these available in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are these available in generic form now or they just still are generic form now or they just still are generic form now or they just still are they still under patent where they have they still under patent where they have they still under patent where they have to be to be to be &gt;&gt; know the answer to that one. &gt;&gt; know the answer to that one. &gt;&gt; know the answer to that one. &gt;&gt; Okay. I don't know I know compounding &gt;&gt; Okay. I don't know I know compounding &gt;&gt; Okay. I don't know I know compounding pharmacies are making them. I know today pharmacies are making them. I know today pharmacies are making them. I know today the gray market for peptides in today the gray market for peptides in today the gray market for peptides in this country was shut down so no more this country was shut down so no more this country was shut down so no more you can no longer buy that just for you can no longer buy that just for you can no longer buy that just for research purposes research purposes research purposes but compounding pharmacies seem to be but compounding pharmacies seem to be but compounding pharmacies seem to be protected but I just asked because of the GLPs at but I just asked because of the GLPs at but I just asked because of the GLPs at least the non-generic forms in their least the non-generic forms in their least the non-generic forms in their full dosage my understanding is that full dosage my understanding is that full dosage my understanding is that they can be rather expensive. Yes. But they can be rather expensive. Yes. But they can be rather expensive. Yes. But the lower dosages from the lower dosages from the lower dosages from in generic form perhaps are more for I in generic form perhaps are more for I in generic form perhaps are more for I would I have to be more affordable. would I have to be more affordable. would I have to be more affordable. &gt;&gt; One would think yeah and I think again &gt;&gt; One would think yeah and I think again &gt;&gt; One would think yeah and I think again these add-on or there's a lot of kitchen these add-on or there's a lot of kitchen these add-on or there's a lot of kitchen sink approach we do in fertility sink approach we do in fertility sink approach we do in fertility medicine right? I've used human growth medicine right? I've used human growth medicine right? I've used human growth hormone for years and years and years hormone for years and years and years hormone for years and years and years right? There's no FDA approval to use right? There's no FDA approval to use right? There's no FDA approval to use HGH for egg quality. Yet we see that it HGH for egg quality. Yet we see that it HGH for egg quality. Yet we see that it can improve egg quality in the right can improve egg quality in the right can improve egg quality in the right patient in the lab. So if somebody has a patient in the lab. So if somebody has a patient in the lab. So if somebody has a cycle and they don't get as many mature cycle and they don't get as many mature cycle and they don't get as many mature eggs or their embryos don't do as well eggs or their embryos don't do as well eggs or their embryos don't do as well my partner actually did a study where my partner actually did a study where my partner actually did a study where she put them through the same protocol she put them through the same protocol she put them through the same protocol so the same medications in a subsequent so the same medications in a subsequent so the same medications in a subsequent cycle and the only change was adding cycle and the only change was adding cycle and the only change was adding human growth hormone and had improved human growth hormone and had improved human growth hormone and had improved embryo development and maturity of eggs. embryo development and maturity of eggs. embryo development and maturity of eggs. Amazing. So it's like an IUI night or Amazing. So it's like an IUI night or Amazing. So it's like an IUI night or something like that. Like some low dose something like that. Like some low dose something like that. Like some low dose of HGH during that. I see. of HGH during that. I see. of HGH during that. I see. &gt;&gt; Just during the stems. So it's like 2 &gt;&gt; Just during the stems. So it's like 2 &gt;&gt; Just during the stems. So it's like 2 weeks of use. And so then now that's weeks of use. And so then now that's weeks of use. And so then now that's starting to be extrapolated and people starting to be extrapolated and people starting to be extrapolated and people are starting to look at it are starting to look at it are starting to look at it longer or before stem. You know, and so longer or before stem. You know, and so longer or before stem. You know, and so we have to take that I love the fact we have to take that I love the fact we have to take that I love the fact that my field's always viewed cutting that my field's always viewed cutting that my field's always viewed cutting edge research. You know, it's a edge research. You know, it's a edge research. You know, it's a double-edged sword. Like there's some double-edged sword. Like there's some double-edged sword. Like there's some good and there's some bad. We really good and there's some bad. We really good and there's some bad. We really want to think about mechanistically if want to think about mechanistically if want to think about mechanistically if it could potentially help having, you it could potentially help having, you it could potentially help having, you know, a low threshold to attempt it in know, a low threshold to attempt it in know, a low threshold to attempt it in patients who are getting at the end of patients who are getting at the end of patients who are getting at the end of their journey specifically, right? When their journey specifically, right? When their journey specifically, right? When they've done all the basics. they've done all the basics. they've done all the basics. They're controlling the lifestyle They're controlling the lifestyle They're controlling the lifestyle factors. I will say one thing I dislike factors. I will say one thing I dislike factors. I will say one thing I dislike is this just do IVF mentality, meaning is this just do IVF mentality, meaning is this just do IVF mentality, meaning nothing you can do can impact your egg nothing you can do can impact your egg nothing you can do can impact your egg quality. Let's just do IVF and then quality. Let's just do IVF and then quality. Let's just do IVF and then we're compounding dollars and dollars we're compounding dollars and dollars we're compounding dollars and dollars and dollars. and dollars. and dollars. Yet we're not eating anti-inflammatory Yet we're not eating anti-inflammatory Yet we're not eating anti-inflammatory food and we're drinking wine every night food and we're drinking wine every night food and we're drinking wine every night and we're not getting enough sleep, and we're not getting enough sleep, and we're not getting enough sleep, right? Like so I think that we've got to right? Like so I think that we've got to right? Like so I think that we've got to really look at these, you know, five really look at these, you know, five really look at these, you know, five non-negotiable areas and optimize them non-negotiable areas and optimize them non-negotiable areas and optimize them to the degree we can knowing each day to the degree we can knowing each day to the degree we can knowing each day will be different, but building our body will be different, but building our body will be different, but building our body the resilience to be able to respond as the resilience to be able to respond as the resilience to be able to respond as it's appropriate to. Cuz sometimes it's appropriate to. Cuz sometimes it's appropriate to. Cuz sometimes you'll fly to Texas and get less sleep you'll fly to Texas and get less sleep you'll fly to Texas and get less sleep or you'll go out to eat and, you know, or you'll go out to eat and, you know, or you'll go out to eat and, you know, you'll eat differently and your body's you'll eat differently and your body's you'll eat differently and your body's meant to handle those challenges, but it meant to handle those challenges, but it meant to handle those challenges, but it can't when it's constantly challenged can't when it's constantly challenged can't when it's constantly challenged every single day all the moments of the every single day all the moments of the every single day all the moments of the day. So there's a ton of experimental day. So there's a ton of experimental day. So there's a ton of experimental stuff that we do that's really cool and stuff that we do that's really cool and stuff that we do that's really cool and some of it will be introduced into some of it will be introduced into some of it will be introduced into practice in 10 years. You know, probably practice in 10 years. You know, probably practice in 10 years. You know, probably 15 years ago if I had said human growth 15 years ago if I had said human growth 15 years ago if I had said human growth hormone, people would have scoffed and hormone, people would have scoffed and hormone, people would have scoffed and now it's commonly added on when we're now it's commonly added on when we're now it's commonly added on when we're not getting the outcome we want and not getting the outcome we want and not getting the outcome we want and that's how medicine should be. We should that's how medicine should be. We should that's how medicine should be. We should not be afraid to say that the perfect not be afraid to say that the perfect not be afraid to say that the perfect study doesn't have to exist if it physi- study doesn't have to exist if it physi- study doesn't have to exist if it physi- the physiology makes sense, if there's the physiology makes sense, if there's the physiology makes sense, if there's suggested studies, if we explain it to suggested studies, if we explain it to suggested studies, if we explain it to the patients, the patients, the patients, we help have shared decision-making with we help have shared decision-making with we help have shared decision-making with them because if we're always waiting them because if we're always waiting them because if we're always waiting for the perfect RCT, there will be for the perfect RCT, there will be for the perfect RCT, there will be thousands of patients we could have thousands of patients we could have thousands of patients we could have helped in the interim that we didn't. helped in the interim that we didn't. helped in the interim that we didn't. What are your thoughts on platelet-rich What are your thoughts on platelet-rich What are your thoughts on platelet-rich plasma? &gt;&gt; Oh, such a good question. &gt;&gt; Oh, such a good question. &gt;&gt; Oh, such a good question. Which is not stem cells, by the way. Which is not stem cells, by the way. Which is not stem cells, by the way. Sorry to just shout out there. People Sorry to just shout out there. People Sorry to just shout out there. People think it's stem cells. Stem cells are think it's stem cells. Stem cells are think it's stem cells. Stem cells are not allowed not allowed not allowed by the FDA in the United States. A by the FDA in the United States. A by the FDA in the United States. A vision clinic, they were injecting them vision clinic, they were injecting them vision clinic, they were injecting them into the eye for macular degeneration into the eye for macular degeneration into the eye for macular degeneration and the patients all went blind and I'm and the patients all went blind and I'm and the patients all went blind and I'm very familiar with those cases. It was very familiar with those cases. It was very familiar with those cases. It was that specific clinic that shut down stem that specific clinic that shut down stem that specific clinic that shut down stem cell. You can't advertise stem cells cell. You can't advertise stem cells cell. You can't advertise stem cells online anymore. So now they just P- but online anymore. So now they just P- but online anymore. So now they just P- but PRP is not stem cells. Forgive forgive PRP is not stem cells. Forgive forgive PRP is not stem cells. Forgive forgive me for interrupting. PRP has two me for interrupting. PRP has two me for interrupting. PRP has two potential different mechanisms by which potential different mechanisms by which potential different mechanisms by which it can be used and it's different. So it can be used and it's different. So it can be used and it's different. So one is intrauterine PRP, where we are one is intrauterine PRP, where we are one is intrauterine PRP, where we are injecting it into the uterine cavity injecting it into the uterine cavity injecting it into the uterine cavity similar to how we put an embryo inside similar to how we put an embryo inside similar to how we put an embryo inside or how you would do an intrauterine or how you would do an intrauterine or how you would do an intrauterine insemination. So small catheter, not insemination. So small catheter, not insemination. So small catheter, not invasive, just but kind of goes through invasive, just but kind of goes through invasive, just but kind of goes through the cervix right into the uterus. The the cervix right into the uterus. The the cervix right into the uterus. The other is looking at ovarian PRP, which other is looking at ovarian PRP, which other is looking at ovarian PRP, which is a more invasive procedure. This is a more invasive procedure. This is a more invasive procedure. This is using the same needle like we do for using the same needle like we do for using the same needle like we do for IVF. Yet instead of extracting the IVF. Yet instead of extracting the IVF. Yet instead of extracting the follicular fluid and the eggs, I'm follicular fluid and the eggs, I'm follicular fluid and the eggs, I'm putting the PRP into the ovaries. putting the PRP into the ovaries. putting the PRP into the ovaries. Looking at it for two different reasons, Looking at it for two different reasons, Looking at it for two different reasons, implantation failure or potential implantation failure or potential implantation failure or potential Asherman's scarring of the uterus in the Asherman's scarring of the uterus in the Asherman's scarring of the uterus in the uterine PRP group and looking at it for, uterine PRP group and looking at it for, uterine PRP group and looking at it for, you know, low ovarian reserve or you know, low ovarian reserve or you know, low ovarian reserve or age-related fertility in the PRP of the age-related fertility in the PRP of the age-related fertility in the PRP of the ovary group. Where it shows the most ovary group. Where it shows the most ovary group. Where it shows the most promise is intrauterine PRP. So which is promise is intrauterine PRP. So which is promise is intrauterine PRP. So which is nice because it's less invasive. That's nice because it's less invasive. That's nice because it's less invasive. That's the minority of people who are having the minority of people who are having the minority of people who are having recurrent implantation failure. recurrent implantation failure. recurrent implantation failure. You know, most people don't have success You know, most people don't have success You know, most people don't have success because they don't make enough embryos. because they don't make enough embryos. because they don't make enough embryos. That's the rate-limiting step for most That's the rate-limiting step for most That's the rate-limiting step for most people with IVF. Meaning if you have people with IVF. Meaning if you have people with IVF. Meaning if you have three genetically normal embryos, almost three genetically normal embryos, almost three genetically normal embryos, almost 95% of people will have a live birth. So 95% of people will have a live birth. So 95% of people will have a live birth. So we're talking about a very small subset we're talking about a very small subset we're talking about a very small subset of the population here, but showing the of the population here, but showing the of the population here, but showing the most promise though not universally most promise though not universally most promise though not universally accepted and isn't done everywhere. accepted and isn't done everywhere. accepted and isn't done everywhere. Ovarian PRP is a little bit more nuanced Ovarian PRP is a little bit more nuanced Ovarian PRP is a little bit more nuanced because clinics can charge a lot for it. It's a clinics can charge a lot for it. It's a clinics can charge a lot for it. It's a procedure. You need anesthesia. I'm procedure. You need anesthesia. I'm procedure. You need anesthesia. I'm putting a needle in the ovary. I'm putting a needle in the ovary. I'm putting a needle in the ovary. I'm always a lot more always a lot more always a lot more skeptical of potentially damaging the skeptical of potentially damaging the skeptical of potentially damaging the ovary or, you know, potential developing ovary or, you know, potential developing ovary or, you know, potential developing eggs. Although no study has supported eggs. Although no study has supported eggs. Although no study has supported that it does do that. There are some that it does do that. There are some that it does do that. There are some more hypothetical concerns with that more hypothetical concerns with that more hypothetical concerns with that versus uterine, where you're not really versus uterine, where you're not really versus uterine, where you're not really damaging any structure, you're just damaging any structure, you're just damaging any structure, you're just adding it. adding it. adding it. That being said, ovarian PRP is That being said, ovarian PRP is That being said, ovarian PRP is currently being studied. We don't have currently being studied. We don't have currently being studied. We don't have definitive data. Potentially could be definitive data. Potentially could be definitive data. Potentially could be something to consider if you're really something to consider if you're really something to consider if you're really approaching that end game. You know, approaching that end game. You know, approaching that end game. You know, you're [clears throat] really not you're [clears throat] really not you're [clears throat] really not getting the outcome you want. You are getting the outcome you want. You are getting the outcome you want. You are older. You have low ovarian reserve. older. You have low ovarian reserve. older. You have low ovarian reserve. There are people who have some success There are people who have some success There are people who have some success stories. So I think it's again stories. So I think it's again stories. So I think it's again the exception, not the rule. Has the exception, not the rule. Has the exception, not the rule. Has potential benefit, but yet to be potential benefit, but yet to be potential benefit, but yet to be determined. A few years back, uh there were some A few years back, uh there were some A few years back, uh there were some more discussion about the age of the more discussion about the age of the more discussion about the age of the sperm and the probability of autism. sperm and the probability of autism. sperm and the probability of autism. &gt;&gt; Yes. Could you update me on the uh &gt;&gt; Yes. Could you update me on the uh &gt;&gt; Yes. Could you update me on the uh the data? Yeah, after age 50, we see a the data? Yeah, after age 50, we see a the data? Yeah, after age 50, we see a few different increases for sperm few different increases for sperm few different increases for sperm specifically. So advanced paternal age specifically. So advanced paternal age specifically. So advanced paternal age is real both when it comes to how you is real both when it comes to how you is real both when it comes to how you make sperm, but also the quality of that make sperm, but also the quality of that make sperm, but also the quality of that sperm. We see overall on a population sperm. We see overall on a population sperm. We see overall on a population base increases of autism, of autosomal base increases of autism, of autosomal base increases of autism, of autosomal dominant new mutations, specifically dominant new mutations, specifically dominant new mutations, specifically certain types of like dwarfism or very certain types of like dwarfism or very certain types of like dwarfism or very specific um diseases that are ultimately specific um diseases that are ultimately specific um diseases that are ultimately overall rare that can happen. overall rare that can happen. overall rare that can happen. And then you also can see an increase in And then you also can see an increase in And then you also can see an increase in some other mental health diseases like some other mental health diseases like some other mental health diseases like schizophrenia. That data is scary. Not the end-all, That data is scary. Not the end-all, That data is scary. Not the end-all, be-all. At the end of the day, when you be-all. At the end of the day, when you be-all. At the end of the day, when you have an opportunity have an opportunity have an opportunity to bank sperm younger, it would make to bank sperm younger, it would make to bank sperm younger, it would make sense and utilize that preferentially. sense and utilize that preferentially. sense and utilize that preferentially. You know, if somebody came to me and You know, if somebody came to me and You know, if somebody came to me and let's say they had banked sperm and it's let's say they had banked sperm and it's let's say they had banked sperm and it's gone now and I have a 52-year-old man gone now and I have a 52-year-old man gone now and I have a 52-year-old man across from me. I mean, this is who we across from me. I mean, this is who we across from me. I mean, this is who we want to have children with, then this is want to have children with, then this is want to have children with, then this is who we want to have children with and we who we want to have children with and we who we want to have children with and we accept that risk cuz on a population so accept that risk cuz on a population so accept that risk cuz on a population so very low, right? A small percentage very low, right? A small percentage very low, right? A small percentage point increase means still the most point increase means still the most point increase means still the most probable chance is you're going to have probable chance is you're going to have probable chance is you're going to have a very healthy baby. It plays more into a very healthy baby. It plays more into a very healthy baby. It plays more into the idea that nobody's fertility is the idea that nobody's fertility is the idea that nobody's fertility is finite, that, you know, age-related finite, that, you know, age-related finite, that, you know, age-related impacts impact everybody. I would say impacts impact everybody. I would say impacts impact everybody. I would say the same thing is that if the mechanism the same thing is that if the mechanism the same thing is that if the mechanism is the DNA essentially or the is the DNA essentially or the is the DNA essentially or the quality of the sperm, then those quality of the sperm, then those quality of the sperm, then those lifestyle tenants in the 90 days prior lifestyle tenants in the 90 days prior lifestyle tenants in the 90 days prior to getting sperm or banking it or using to getting sperm or banking it or using to getting sperm or banking it or using it in IVF cycle probably matter the most it in IVF cycle probably matter the most it in IVF cycle probably matter the most and I would make sure I would want to be and I would make sure I would want to be and I would make sure I would want to be controlling all of those factors I was controlling all of those factors I was controlling all of those factors I was so I wasn't adding to risk. No cannabis, so I wasn't adding to risk. No cannabis, so I wasn't adding to risk. No cannabis, reduced heat, um all the things that reduced heat, um all the things that reduced heat, um all the things that mutate DNA. mutate DNA. mutate DNA. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Nicotine out, that kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Nicotine out, that kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Nicotine out, that kind of thing. Um yeah, it's interesting. I think about yeah, it's interesting. I think about yeah, it's interesting. I think about the sort of high signal to noise the sort of high signal to noise the sort of high signal to noise anecdotes. Um things like, oh, you know, um Um things like, oh, you know, um Um things like, oh, you know, um so-and-so smoked weed every day and has so-and-so smoked weed every day and has so-and-so smoked weed every day and has eight kids or uh you know, or um you eight kids or uh you know, or um you eight kids or uh you know, or um you know, so-and-so had kids when he had know, so-and-so had kids when he had know, so-and-so had kids when he had another kid when he was whatever. I'm another kid when he was whatever. I'm another kid when he was whatever. I'm thinking of some actors or something thinking of some actors or something thinking of some actors or something that I don't follow this stuff closely. that I don't follow this stuff closely. that I don't follow this stuff closely. He was when he was like 78 or something. He was when he was like 78 or something. He was when he was like 78 or something. The the problem with stories like that The the problem with stories like that The the problem with stories like that is that they grab people's is that they grab people's is that they grab people's attention cuz they're high signal to attention cuz they're high signal to attention cuz they're high signal to noise and they distract from the stuff noise and they distract from the stuff noise and they distract from the stuff that like really matters to most that like really matters to most that like really matters to most everybody. Like everybody. Like everybody. Like freezing eggs is not going to take more freezing eggs is not going to take more freezing eggs is not going to take more eggs out of your reserve than you need. eggs out of your reserve than you need. eggs out of your reserve than you need. The NSAIDs, I mean, I'm just like still The NSAIDs, I mean, I'm just like still The NSAIDs, I mean, I'm just like still wide-eyed about this NSAID thing. It's wide-eyed about this NSAID thing. It's wide-eyed about this NSAID thing. It's something to avoid while trying to get something to avoid while trying to get something to avoid while trying to get pregnant. &gt;&gt; do another one. Uh &gt;&gt; do another one. Uh &gt;&gt; do another one. Uh biotin levels of taking a biotin levels of taking a biotin levels of taking a biotin supplementation of 300 micrograms or supplementation of 300 micrograms or supplementation of 300 micrograms or more for 7 days can actually influence more for 7 days can actually influence more for 7 days can actually influence your lab assays for sex hormones or for your lab assays for sex hormones or for your lab assays for sex hormones or for any steroid hormone, actually. So when I any steroid hormone, actually. So when I any steroid hormone, actually. So when I will sometimes see patients who are will sometimes see patients who are will sometimes see patients who are going through an IVF cycle and their going through an IVF cycle and their going through an IVF cycle and their estradiol levels are not matching what estradiol levels are not matching what estradiol levels are not matching what we're seeing for follicular development, we're seeing for follicular development, we're seeing for follicular development, if we go and talk to them and they're if we go and talk to them and they're if we go and talk to them and they're taking hair, skin, and nail supplements taking hair, skin, and nail supplements taking hair, skin, and nail supplements or something with a high dose of biotin or something with a high dose of biotin or something with a high dose of biotin because commercial supplementa- like because commercial supplementa- like because commercial supplementa- like you know, there's certain very popular you know, there's certain very popular you know, there's certain very popular hair supplements that have, you know, 10 hair supplements that have, you know, 10 hair supplements that have, you know, 10 to 30 times that amount in them. to 30 times that amount in them. to 30 times that amount in them. These is binding to the lab test. So These is binding to the lab test. So These is binding to the lab test. So we're getting false reads on these labs. we're getting false reads on these labs. we're getting false reads on these labs. Not changing in your body, but it Not changing in your body, but it Not changing in your body, but it actually This is an REI board question, actually This is an REI board question, actually This is an REI board question, an oral board question. Is that it binds an oral board question. Is that it binds an oral board question. Is that it binds to the steroid assay. So this can happen to the steroid assay. So this can happen to the steroid assay. So this can happen to estradiol, to progesterone, to HCG, to estradiol, to progesterone, to HCG, to estradiol, to progesterone, to HCG, to TSH, to testosterone. So if you are to TSH, to testosterone. So if you are to TSH, to testosterone. So if you are back where we started and you want to back where we started and you want to back where we started and you want to get data about your body, maybe you feel get data about your body, maybe you feel get data about your body, maybe you feel off or you're going through IVF or you off or you're going through IVF or you off or you're going through IVF or you want to get a hormone panel done, if want to get a hormone panel done, if want to get a hormone panel done, if you're taking a supplement that has more you're taking a supplement that has more you're taking a supplement that has more than 300 micrograms of biotin, you're than 300 micrograms of biotin, you're than 300 micrograms of biotin, you're going to have results that are going to have results that are going to have results that are inaccurate and we cannot trust. So inaccurate and we cannot trust. So inaccurate and we cannot trust. So really making sure that you're looking really making sure that you're looking really making sure that you're looking at what's in your supplements and biotin at what's in your supplements and biotin at what's in your supplements and biotin is that specific one that I want to make is that specific one that I want to make is that specific one that I want to make sure we're not taking excess amounts of. sure we're not taking excess amounts of. sure we're not taking excess amounts of. Wow. Um as long as we're talking about Wow. Um as long as we're talking about Wow. Um as long as we're talking about things that people take or put on their things that people take or put on their things that people take or put on their body, uh the last time we sat down and body, uh the last time we sat down and body, uh the last time we sat down and spoke, we had a conversation about spoke, we had a conversation about spoke, we had a conversation about endocrine disruptors. endocrine disruptors. endocrine disruptors. &gt;&gt; people really loved and hated us for &gt;&gt; people really loved and hated us for &gt;&gt; people really loved and hated us for that. &gt;&gt; I will say cuz it's tricky with &gt;&gt; I will say cuz it's tricky with &gt;&gt; I will say cuz it's tricky with comments. Again, signal to noise. I comments. Again, signal to noise. I comments. Again, signal to noise. I think many, many more, meaning millions think many, many more, meaning millions think many, many more, meaning millions of people appreciated it as opposed to of people appreciated it as opposed to of people appreciated it as opposed to had issues with it. I mean, it is had issues with it. I mean, it is had issues with it. I mean, it is you can tell how frustrated I get with you can tell how frustrated I get with you can tell how frustrated I get with My frustration is not with medicine or My frustration is not with medicine or My frustration is not with medicine or with science. It's with the um lack of with science. It's with the um lack of with science. It's with the um lack of open ears Mhm. in a certain generation open ears Mhm. in a certain generation open ears Mhm. in a certain generation of physicians and scientists. I mean, of physicians and scientists. I mean, of physicians and scientists. I mean, my colleagues at Stanford are very my colleagues at Stanford are very my colleagues at Stanford are very open-minded. And by the way, many of open-minded. And by the way, many of open-minded. And by the way, many of them call me saying like, what should I them call me saying like, what should I them call me saying like, what should I take for this? Or like, I love that. take for this? Or like, I love that. take for this? Or like, I love that. &gt;&gt; I do that's not TRT for testosterone? &gt;&gt; I do that's not TRT for testosterone? &gt;&gt; I do that's not TRT for testosterone? And like I mean, it's they're humans, And like I mean, it's they're humans, And like I mean, it's they're humans, too. And I think the issue around too. And I think the issue around too. And I think the issue around endocrine disruptors for the longest endocrine disruptors for the longest endocrine disruptors for the longest time was seen as kind of hippie science time was seen as kind of hippie science time was seen as kind of hippie science with no data. And then now, because the with no data. And then now, because the with no data. And then now, because the Environmental Working Group started Environmental Working Group started Environmental Working Group started getting really vocal about this and getting really vocal about this and getting really vocal about this and Shanna Swan, who's, you know, a Shanna Swan, who's, you know, a Shanna Swan, who's, you know, a long-time researcher. Yeah. long-time researcher. Yeah. long-time researcher. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um but then there was this sort of &gt;&gt; Um but then there was this sort of &gt;&gt; Um but then there was this sort of political backlash because somehow political backlash because somehow political backlash because somehow people decided to slot her and the people decided to slot her and the people decided to slot her and the Environmental Working Group as kind of Environmental Working Group as kind of Environmental Working Group as kind of anti-standard science. You sit down with anti-standard science. You sit down with anti-standard science. You sit down with her, this is far the thing from the her, this is far the thing from the her, this is far the thing from the truth. Like she's all about data. So I truth. Like she's all about data. So I truth. Like she's all about data. So I think as we think as we think as we toe into this uh you know, endocrine toe into this uh you know, endocrine toe into this uh you know, endocrine disruptor thing, I mean, disruptor thing, I mean, disruptor thing, I mean, I'll just say it for you and then if you I'll just say it for you and then if you I'll just say it for you and then if you if you want to add, like none of what if you want to add, like none of what if you want to add, like none of what we're about to talk about negates we're about to talk about negates we're about to talk about negates anything about standard medicine. It's anything about standard medicine. It's anything about standard medicine. It's just way ways and places to be uh just way ways and places to be uh just way ways and places to be uh additionally cautious about things that additionally cautious about things that additionally cautious about things that you are around and might you are around and might you are around and might &gt;&gt; You make decisions every day. You should &gt;&gt; You make decisions every day. You should &gt;&gt; You make decisions every day. You should be making it from a place of knowledge. be making it from a place of knowledge. be making it from a place of knowledge. And the things that you're exposed to And the things that you're exposed to And the things that you're exposed to more frequently matter the most, right? more frequently matter the most, right? more frequently matter the most, right? So a one-time exposure cuz you used hand So a one-time exposure cuz you used hand So a one-time exposure cuz you used hand soap and it had lavender, tea tree oil, soap and it had lavender, tea tree oil, soap and it had lavender, tea tree oil, or whatever, I'm much less concerned or whatever, I'm much less concerned or whatever, I'm much less concerned about than the products you buy for your about than the products you buy for your about than the products you buy for your home that you're using every single day. home that you're using every single day. home that you're using every single day. Because when it comes to endocrine Because when it comes to endocrine Because when it comes to endocrine disruptors, a lot of it is the quantity disruptors, a lot of it is the quantity disruptors, a lot of it is the quantity of exposure that really adds up and this of exposure that really adds up and this of exposure that really adds up and this typically comes from frequency because typically comes from frequency because typically comes from frequency because typically it's low levels in a variety typically it's low levels in a variety typically it's low levels in a variety of different products. But they of different products. But they of different products. But they absolutely can disrupt hormone function. absolutely can disrupt hormone function. absolutely can disrupt hormone function. They cause longer time to pregnancy. They cause longer time to pregnancy. They cause longer time to pregnancy. There's now been robust data looking at, There's now been robust data looking at, There's now been robust data looking at, you know, one of the biggest cohort you know, one of the biggest cohort you know, one of the biggest cohort studies we have and it's, you know, studies we have and it's, you know, studies we have and it's, you know, called the Earth study where they're called the Earth study where they're called the Earth study where they're looking at different environmental looking at different environmental looking at different environmental compounds on reproductive health and compounds on reproductive health and compounds on reproductive health and they're looking at cohorts of people they're looking at cohorts of people they're looking at cohorts of people trying to get pregnant naturally and trying to get pregnant naturally and trying to get pregnant naturally and they did a sub-study looking at they did a sub-study looking at they did a sub-study looking at endocrine disrupting chemicals endocrine disrupting chemicals endocrine disrupting chemicals specifically of those people who went on specifically of those people who went on specifically of those people who went on to do IVF and showed that those who had to do IVF and showed that those who had to do IVF and showed that those who had higher levels of endocrine disrupting higher levels of endocrine disrupting higher levels of endocrine disrupting chemicals had a harder time getting chemicals had a harder time getting chemicals had a harder time getting pregnant even with IVF and their IVF pregnant even with IVF and their IVF pregnant even with IVF and their IVF markers, fewer eggs retrieved, fewer markers, fewer eggs retrieved, fewer markers, fewer eggs retrieved, fewer embryos, poorer sperm counts. So it's embryos, poorer sperm counts. So it's embryos, poorer sperm counts. So it's definitely not hippie science at this definitely not hippie science at this definitely not hippie science at this point. It's well demonstrated that it point. It's well demonstrated that it point. It's well demonstrated that it impacts our bodies in multiple ways. And impacts our bodies in multiple ways. And impacts our bodies in multiple ways. And as I recall, the things to be cautious as I recall, the things to be cautious as I recall, the things to be cautious of are lavender, evening primrose, or of are lavender, evening primrose, or of are lavender, evening primrose, or basically anything with a scent. basically anything with a scent. basically anything with a scent. Essential oils for the most part tend to Essential oils for the most part tend to Essential oils for the most part tend to be fine, but it is lavender, tea tree, be fine, but it is lavender, tea tree, be fine, but it is lavender, tea tree, and evening primrose that have more and evening primrose that have more and evening primrose that have more endocrine properties for them. When it endocrine properties for them. When it endocrine properties for them. When it comes to other products, scented comes to other products, scented comes to other products, scented products have a lot of phthalates in products have a lot of phthalates in products have a lot of phthalates in them and then that's an endocrine them and then that's an endocrine them and then that's an endocrine disrupting chemical. And an important disrupting chemical. And an important disrupting chemical. And an important note here, which is wild to me because note here, which is wild to me because note here, which is wild to me because we see so much greenwashing on products we see so much greenwashing on products we see so much greenwashing on products where they'll slap a label on it and where they'll slap a label on it and where they'll slap a label on it and they'll say unscented. But unscented they'll say unscented. But unscented they'll say unscented. But unscented is a scent to mask other scents. is a scent to mask other scents. is a scent to mask other scents. &gt;&gt; Really? So unscented just means you've &gt;&gt; Really? So unscented just means you've &gt;&gt; Really? So unscented just means you've masked a scent. What you really want to masked a scent. What you really want to masked a scent. What you really want to look for is fragrance-free because look for is fragrance-free because look for is fragrance-free because fragrance-free means we added no fragrance-free means we added no fragrance-free means we added no fragrance to it. To be called unscented, fragrance to it. To be called unscented, fragrance to it. To be called unscented, we could have added something to counter we could have added something to counter we could have added something to counter the fragrance that was in it. the fragrance that was in it. the fragrance that was in it. Amazing. And Uber drivers? I'm Amazing. And Uber drivers? I'm Amazing. And Uber drivers? I'm not saying riding in your Uber with your not saying riding in your Uber with your not saying riding in your Uber with your terrible air freshener is going to terrible air freshener is going to terrible air freshener is going to prevent people from getting pregnant prevent people from getting pregnant prevent people from getting pregnant or conceiving with their partner, but or conceiving with their partner, but or conceiving with their partner, but um take the freshener out of your Uber cuz take the freshener out of your Uber cuz take the freshener out of your Uber cuz you might not be able to have children. you might not be able to have children. you might not be able to have children. Yeah, no, I was saying for the drivers Yeah, no, I was saying for the drivers Yeah, no, I was saying for the drivers are the ones exposed to it the most. are the ones exposed to it the most. are the ones exposed to it the most. &gt;&gt; these things, you know, another like one &gt;&gt; these things, you know, another like one &gt;&gt; these things, you know, another like one of the top exposures of BPA right now is of the top exposures of BPA right now is of the top exposures of BPA right now is actually thermal paper. So receipts. So actually thermal paper. So receipts. So actually thermal paper. So receipts. So think about receipts at the grocery think about receipts at the grocery think about receipts at the grocery store or the airline counter. So for one store or the airline counter. So for one store or the airline counter. So for one of them, you know, of them, you know, of them, you know, getting it one time and touching it is getting it one time and touching it is getting it one time and touching it is probably not a big deal. But for the probably not a big deal. But for the probably not a big deal. But for the people who are do that job and are people who are do that job and are people who are do that job and are exposed all the time to thermal paper, exposed all the time to thermal paper, exposed all the time to thermal paper, that actually can be such a high level that actually can be such a high level that actually can be such a high level exposure. So it's a good example where I exposure. So it's a good example where I exposure. So it's a good example where I say you need to use gloves if you that's say you need to use gloves if you that's say you need to use gloves if you that's your industry that you're going to be your industry that you're going to be your industry that you're going to be exposed to thermal paper a lot. So same exposed to thermal paper a lot. So same exposed to thermal paper a lot. So same thing for it, let's say the Uber driver. thing for it, let's say the Uber driver. thing for it, let's say the Uber driver. This is what you're spending your time This is what you're spending your time This is what you're spending your time doing, you don't need that fragrance for doing, you don't need that fragrance for doing, you don't need that fragrance for your own health and certainly we don't your own health and certainly we don't your own health and certainly we don't want to get in the Uber with I know I'm so to get in the Uber with I know I'm so to get in the Uber with I know I'm so mean if this smells, I'll like I'll mean if this smells, I'll like I'll mean if this smells, I'll like I'll star them lower which because it's like star them lower which because it's like star them lower which because it's like I think you should know, you know. I think you should know, you know. I think you should know, you know. You're paying for a service. I mean, I You're paying for a service. I mean, I You're paying for a service. I mean, I usually roll the window down, stick my usually roll the window down, stick my usually roll the window down, stick my head out the window. If they're head out the window. If they're head out the window. If they're coughing, I hate being sick and I'm like coughing, I hate being sick and I'm like coughing, I hate being sick and I'm like I didn't pay to get sick. So I didn't pay to get sick. So I didn't pay to get sick. So I try to be polite about it, but you I try to be polite about it, but you I try to be polite about it, but you know, there's just know, there's just know, there's just But again, we control the things we can, But again, we control the things we can, But again, we control the things we can, right? So let's control the fragrance in right? So let's control the fragrance in right? So let's control the fragrance in our home and in our products because to our home and in our products because to our home and in our products because to your point, we can't control what's in your point, we can't control what's in your point, we can't control what's in the Uber. And so we're not going to the Uber. And so we're not going to the Uber. And so we're not going to stress about it and that's the argument stress about it and that's the argument stress about it and that's the argument I get number one is that you're causing I get number one is that you're causing I get number one is that you're causing people to be stressed about toxins that people to be stressed about toxins that people to be stressed about toxins that otherwise they wouldn't be. And I again, otherwise they wouldn't be. And I again, otherwise they wouldn't be. And I again, like that's paternalistic. Like toxins like that's paternalistic. Like toxins like that's paternalistic. Like toxins are impactful to your health. I should are impactful to your health. I should are impactful to your health. I should give you the data so that you can give you the data so that you can give you the data so that you can cultivate the day-to-day life that is to cultivate the day-to-day life that is to cultivate the day-to-day life that is to the degree where you don't stress about the degree where you don't stress about the degree where you don't stress about it when you're on the plane or you're in it when you're on the plane or you're in it when you're on the plane or you're in an Uber or you're at a party because an Uber or you're at a party because an Uber or you're at a party because that one-off isn't such a big deal that one-off isn't such a big deal that one-off isn't such a big deal because you're not exposed to it every because you're not exposed to it every because you're not exposed to it every single day inside of your home. single day inside of your home. single day inside of your home. I like to think that people want I like to think that people want I like to think that people want information. Um I realize they can feel overwhelmed Um I realize they can feel overwhelmed Um I realize they can feel overwhelmed by too much information, but in the end, by too much information, but in the end, by too much information, but in the end, even though what we're talking about even though what we're talking about even though what we're talking about here seems like a lot of to-dos and not here seems like a lot of to-dos and not here seems like a lot of to-dos and not to dos, it there's a logic to it. I to dos, it there's a logic to it. I to dos, it there's a logic to it. I think the logical backbone is you do think the logical backbone is you do think the logical backbone is you do what you can. Um you do your best to what you can. Um you do your best to what you can. Um you do your best to control the key variables. control the key variables. control the key variables. Um I mean, the point about cannabis I Um I mean, the point about cannabis I Um I mean, the point about cannabis I think is really important that think is really important that think is really important that especially men hear um because I think especially men hear um because I think especially men hear um because I think most people don't know. And women don't most people don't know. And women don't most people don't know. And women don't know they should get their AMH checked. know they should get their AMH checked. know they should get their AMH checked. I mean, that's changing because of I mean, that's changing because of I mean, that's changing because of people like you being out there doing people like you being out there doing people like you being out there doing public education, but I like to think public education, but I like to think public education, but I like to think that people want knowledge. I really do. that people want knowledge. I really do. that people want knowledge. I really do. &gt;&gt; I actually think people do want &gt;&gt; I actually think people do want &gt;&gt; I actually think people do want knowledge and I don't think they're the knowledge and I don't think they're the knowledge and I don't think they're the ones giving the counterargument, to be ones giving the counterargument, to be ones giving the counterargument, to be honest, right? I think it's our honest, right? I think it's our honest, right? I think it's our colleagues who say, "Oh, people don't colleagues who say, "Oh, people don't colleagues who say, "Oh, people don't want to hear that." Or they make want to hear that." Or they make want to hear that." Or they make assumptions. And again, in today's world assumptions. And again, in today's world assumptions. And again, in today's world where we have data, like why are we where we have data, like why are we where we have data, like why are we talking about assumptions? Let's give talking about assumptions? Let's give talking about assumptions? Let's give people data and let them make the people data and let them make the people data and let them make the choices they make. Yeah, ignorance is choices they make. Yeah, ignorance is choices they make. Yeah, ignorance is not bliss when you're running up against not bliss when you're running up against not bliss when you're running up against a health challenge. a health challenge. a health challenge. &gt;&gt; Yeah, if you haven't had your own health &gt;&gt; Yeah, if you haven't had your own health &gt;&gt; Yeah, if you haven't had your own health challenge, maybe it's hard to understand challenge, maybe it's hard to understand challenge, maybe it's hard to understand what it is. And for infertility for most what it is. And for infertility for most what it is. And for infertility for most people, this is their first time their people, this is their first time their people, this is their first time their health is really being challenged, health is really being challenged, health is really being challenged, usually because of the age range of usually because of the age range of usually because of the age range of which it is. I mean, that was my story. which it is. I mean, that was my story. which it is. I mean, that was my story. A decade later, I got diagnosed with A decade later, I got diagnosed with A decade later, I got diagnosed with celiac disease despite having celiac disease despite having celiac disease despite having unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. I unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. I unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. I can tell you that this can, you know, can tell you that this can, you know, can tell you that this can, you know, colliding with my fertility fellowship colliding with my fertility fellowship colliding with my fertility fellowship when I advocated for doing vitamin when I advocated for doing vitamin when I advocated for doing vitamin research and all this epidemiology, I research and all this epidemiology, I research and all this epidemiology, I saw the word inflammation in all of that saw the word inflammation in all of that saw the word inflammation in all of that text, yet we weren't talking about it text, yet we weren't talking about it text, yet we weren't talking about it with our patients. And I went on this with our patients. And I went on this with our patients. And I went on this journey to get rid of Teflon in our journey to get rid of Teflon in our journey to get rid of Teflon in our kitchens. I studied PFCs and we changed kitchens. I studied PFCs and we changed kitchens. I studied PFCs and we changed the foods that we ate, changed how we the foods that we ate, changed how we the foods that we ate, changed how we exercised and how we slept. And one of exercised and how we slept. And one of exercised and how we slept. And one of the things that I cut out learning to the things that I cut out learning to the things that I cut out learning to listen to my body was gluten at the listen to my body was gluten at the listen to my body was gluten at the time. Even though I would have never time. Even though I would have never time. Even though I would have never said I had like GI symptoms from it. I said I had like GI symptoms from it. I said I had like GI symptoms from it. I just said, "Oh, I felt more inflamed." just said, "Oh, I felt more inflamed." just said, "Oh, I felt more inflamed." Like vague symptoms, kind of headache, Like vague symptoms, kind of headache, Like vague symptoms, kind of headache, kind of more fatigued. And when I kind of more fatigued. And when I kind of more fatigued. And when I conceived my children before we ever had conceived my children before we ever had conceived my children before we ever had to do IVF, we got pregnant naturally in to do IVF, we got pregnant naturally in to do IVF, we got pregnant naturally in that time period when I didn't have that time period when I didn't have that time period when I didn't have gluten. So gluten. So gluten. So decade later, I get the diagnosis that decade later, I get the diagnosis that decade later, I get the diagnosis that was actually contributing to why we had was actually contributing to why we had was actually contributing to why we had these different pregnancy losses. So it these different pregnancy losses. So it these different pregnancy losses. So it wasn't unexplained at all. And not that wasn't unexplained at all. And not that wasn't unexplained at all. And not that everybody needs to cut gluten out, but everybody needs to cut gluten out, but everybody needs to cut gluten out, but understanding how chronic inflammation understanding how chronic inflammation understanding how chronic inflammation impacts our bodies and learning to impacts our bodies and learning to impacts our bodies and learning to listen to our body is one of the most listen to our body is one of the most listen to our body is one of the most powerful tools that we have and it powerful tools that we have and it powerful tools that we have and it starts with, you know, education and starts with, you know, education and starts with, you know, education and knowledge, learning how to advocate for knowledge, learning how to advocate for knowledge, learning how to advocate for ourselves, right? When you know what's ourselves, right? When you know what's ourselves, right? When you know what's normal, you can sit in front of somebody normal, you can sit in front of somebody normal, you can sit in front of somebody and say this isn't normal and mean it and say this isn't normal and mean it and say this isn't normal and mean it with your full heart. And then how do with your full heart. And then how do with your full heart. And then how do you optimize all the things at home? Cuz you optimize all the things at home? Cuz you optimize all the things at home? Cuz back to the other point, even if you back to the other point, even if you back to the other point, even if you need IVF, need IVF, need IVF, I can only work with the eggs and sperm I can only work with the eggs and sperm I can only work with the eggs and sperm you give me. And maybe if we're focusing you give me. And maybe if we're focusing you give me. And maybe if we're focusing on some of the stuff earlier, there's on some of the stuff earlier, there's on some of the stuff earlier, there's probably a subset of people who can get probably a subset of people who can get probably a subset of people who can get pregnant without IVF or who can freeze pregnant without IVF or who can freeze pregnant without IVF or who can freeze eggs and have an easier journey because eggs and have an easier journey because eggs and have an easier journey because they had this information and they made they had this information and they made they had this information and they made choices based off of it. What I'm choices based off of it. What I'm choices based off of it. What I'm realizing hearing you today is that we realizing hearing you today is that we realizing hearing you today is that we need to listen to our bodies. Women need to listen to our bodies. Women need to listen to our bodies. Women need to listen to their bodies cuz we're to listen to their bodies cuz we're to listen to their bodies cuz we're mainly talking about women's health mainly talking about women's health mainly talking about women's health here. Men do too, but we're talking here. Men do too, but we're talking here. Men do too, but we're talking about women. But also learn to be about women. But also learn to be about women. But also learn to be scientists of our bodies. scientists of our bodies. scientists of our bodies. &gt;&gt; Yes. And when it comes to nutrition, I'm &gt;&gt; Yes. And when it comes to nutrition, I'm &gt;&gt; Yes. And when it comes to nutrition, I'm very curious because of your example, very curious because of your example, very curious because of your example, do you think there's any value to people do you think there's any value to people do you think there's any value to people experimenting with a quote-unquote experimenting with a quote-unquote experimenting with a quote-unquote cleaner diet if for no other reason than cleaner diet if for no other reason than cleaner diet if for no other reason than to figure out which ingredients don't to figure out which ingredients don't to figure out which ingredients don't work for them? Meaning, if you have work for them? Meaning, if you have work for them? Meaning, if you have granola for breakfast and a side of eggs granola for breakfast and a side of eggs granola for breakfast and a side of eggs and some toast or one day you have eggs and some toast or one day you have eggs and some toast or one day you have eggs and the next day you have toast or both, and the next day you have toast or both, and the next day you have toast or both, whatever. And then for lunch you're whatever. And then for lunch you're whatever. And then for lunch you're having a sandwich and then for dinner having a sandwich and then for dinner having a sandwich and then for dinner you're having some pasta with some sauce you're having some pasta with some sauce you're having some pasta with some sauce and you don't feel well. You don't know and you don't feel well. You don't know and you don't feel well. You don't know what the problem is. So I'm not what the problem is. So I'm not what the problem is. So I'm not advocating for, you know, a Spartan diet advocating for, you know, a Spartan diet advocating for, you know, a Spartan diet where it's like, you know, chicken where it's like, you know, chicken where it's like, you know, chicken breast next to rice next to broccoli breast next to rice next to broccoli breast next to rice next to broccoli with a tablespoon of olive oil next to with a tablespoon of olive oil next to with a tablespoon of olive oil next to it, although that sounds pretty okay. it, although that sounds pretty okay. it, although that sounds pretty okay. There's worse. There's worse. But when There's worse. There's worse. But when There's worse. There's worse. But when you eat that way you eat that way you eat that way for a short period of time, that sort of for a short period of time, that sort of for a short period of time, that sort of cleaner and more or less individual cleaner and more or less individual cleaner and more or less individual ingredients, Mhm. I do think that you ingredients, Mhm. I do think that you ingredients, Mhm. I do think that you can get insight into what works for you can get insight into what works for you can get insight into what works for you and what doesn't independent of all the and what doesn't independent of all the and what doesn't independent of all the other information out there. Like for other information out there. Like for other information out there. Like for instance, there's certain forms of instance, there's certain forms of instance, there's certain forms of fibrous foods, I definitely believe in fibrous foods, I definitely believe in fibrous foods, I definitely believe in fiber, that I just don't feel well. fiber, that I just don't feel well. fiber, that I just don't feel well. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then my sister, who is not a &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then my sister, who is not a &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then my sister, who is not a scientist, um she'll chuckle at that, scientist, um she'll chuckle at that, scientist, um she'll chuckle at that, but she had this intuition about but she had this intuition about but she had this intuition about histamine Mhm. that has now been histamine Mhm. that has now been histamine Mhm. that has now been confirmed by two guests on this podcast confirmed by two guests on this podcast confirmed by two guests on this podcast who are MD PhDs who work on these sorts who are MD PhDs who work on these sorts who are MD PhDs who work on these sorts of issues. of issues. of issues. Um in one case, pain, in other case, gut Um in one case, pain, in other case, gut Um in one case, pain, in other case, gut inflammation. And she was convinced that inflammation. And she was convinced that inflammation. And she was convinced that she had some histaminergic thing that she had some histaminergic thing that she had some histaminergic thing that she read about in some book. she read about in some book. she read about in some book. Suggests I take this histamine enzyme Suggests I take this histamine enzyme Suggests I take this histamine enzyme tablet before I eat and it's opened up tablet before I eat and it's opened up tablet before I eat and it's opened up this whole array of other foods that I this whole array of other foods that I this whole array of other foods that I can eat. But for years I would get super can eat. But for years I would get super can eat. But for years I would get super sleepy after I would eat certain foods. sleepy after I would eat certain foods. sleepy after I would eat certain foods. I'm like, "This makes no sense. I like I'm like, "This makes no sense. I like I'm like, "This makes no sense. I like starches. I like fiber." Turns out I starches. I like fiber." Turns out I starches. I like fiber." Turns out I have a sort of mild histamine have a sort of mild histamine have a sort of mild histamine sensitivity to like four different sensitivity to like four different sensitivity to like four different foods. I don't think you can figure that foods. I don't think you can figure that foods. I don't think you can figure that out unless you separate out the out unless you separate out the out unless you separate out the ingredients. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. It's like I planted this &gt;&gt; Absolutely. It's like I planted this &gt;&gt; Absolutely. It's like I planted this question for you even though I didn't question for you even though I didn't question for you even though I didn't because I advocate, especially if you because I advocate, especially if you because I advocate, especially if you are falling off the curve, right? I are falling off the curve, right? I are falling off the curve, right? I think if you're trying to learn to think if you're trying to learn to think if you're trying to learn to listen to your body, you say, "I want to listen to your body, you say, "I want to listen to your body, you say, "I want to optimize my own health." For a very optimize my own health." For a very optimize my own health." For a very temporary but restricted clean eating temporary but restricted clean eating temporary but restricted clean eating pattern where you're having lots of pattern where you're having lots of pattern where you're having lots of fruits and vegetables and fiber and fruits and vegetables and fiber and fruits and vegetables and fiber and you're cutting down some of the things you're cutting down some of the things you're cutting down some of the things that cause more commonly cause certain that cause more commonly cause certain that cause more commonly cause certain reactions, cutting out gluten, cutting reactions, cutting out gluten, cutting reactions, cutting out gluten, cutting out dairy, cutting back on red meat. And out dairy, cutting back on red meat. And out dairy, cutting back on red meat. And then you add them back in and start to then you add them back in and start to then you add them back in and start to listen to how your body is functioning. listen to how your body is functioning. listen to how your body is functioning. But you have to really kind of eliminate But you have to really kind of eliminate But you have to really kind of eliminate first and then you can add back and see, first and then you can add back and see, first and then you can add back and see, "Oh, I feel better, worse, the same." "Oh, I feel better, worse, the same." "Oh, I feel better, worse, the same." Okay, well, if it's worse, that's maybe Okay, well, if it's worse, that's maybe Okay, well, if it's worse, that's maybe not something you should have. And then not something you should have. And then not something you should have. And then learn to listen for it. The tenets of a learn to listen for it. The tenets of a learn to listen for it. The tenets of a fertility diet are really not fertility diet are really not fertility diet are really not eye-opening, right? Fiber is hugely eye-opening, right? Fiber is hugely eye-opening, right? Fiber is hugely important for the gut microbiome and important for the gut microbiome and important for the gut microbiome and hormone health and inflammation and hormone health and inflammation and hormone health and inflammation and insulin resistance. So high fruits and insulin resistance. So high fruits and insulin resistance. So high fruits and vegetables, high fiber diet, whole grain vegetables, high fiber diet, whole grain vegetables, high fiber diet, whole grain carbohydrates over your refined carbohydrates over your refined carbohydrates over your refined carbohydrates, ultra-processed foods carbohydrates, ultra-processed foods carbohydrates, ultra-processed foods don't have a place in the modern diet, don't have a place in the modern diet, don't have a place in the modern diet, added artificial sugars, those added artificial sugars, those added artificial sugars, those non-nutritive sweeteners, they don't non-nutritive sweeteners, they don't non-nutritive sweeteners, they don't have a place in this. We want to have a place in this. We want to have a place in this. We want to have quality of our protein. Most people quality of our protein. Most people quality of our protein. Most people could benefit from some increased plant could benefit from some increased plant could benefit from some increased plant protein due to the increased fiber than protein due to the increased fiber than protein due to the increased fiber than they actually get in the standard they actually get in the standard they actually get in the standard American diet, but meat is not American diet, but meat is not American diet, but meat is not universally bad nor necessarily good. universally bad nor necessarily good. universally bad nor necessarily good. It's the quality of the meat that It's the quality of the meat that It's the quality of the meat that probably matters a lot. probably matters a lot. probably matters a lot. The meat data to notice is that for The meat data to notice is that for The meat data to notice is that for every serving of plant-based protein every serving of plant-based protein every serving of plant-based protein over animal, people tended to ovulate over animal, people tended to ovulate over animal, people tended to ovulate better and had higher fertility rates. better and had higher fertility rates. better and had higher fertility rates. Probably more suggestive of an overall Probably more suggestive of an overall Probably more suggestive of an overall healthier fiber first dietary pattern on healthier fiber first dietary pattern on healthier fiber first dietary pattern on the population base level because the population base level because the population base level because ultra-processed foods don't have a lot ultra-processed foods don't have a lot ultra-processed foods don't have a lot of fiber in them or any fiber in them. of fiber in them or any fiber in them. of fiber in them or any fiber in them. Animal-based products don't have fiber Animal-based products don't have fiber Animal-based products don't have fiber in them, so we want to be mindful of in them, so we want to be mindful of in them, so we want to be mindful of that ratio. Red meat's the really that ratio. Red meat's the really that ratio. Red meat's the really controversial one and increased servings controversial one and increased servings controversial one and increased servings of red meat, of course, dietary studies of red meat, of course, dietary studies of red meat, of course, dietary studies quartile it lowest exposure, highest quartile it lowest exposure, highest quartile it lowest exposure, highest exposure. Highest exposure groups had exposure. Highest exposure groups had exposure. Highest exposure groups had poor embryos develop, worse outcomes poor embryos develop, worse outcomes poor embryos develop, worse outcomes with IVF and an increase in staging of with IVF and an increase in staging of with IVF and an increase in staging of endometriosis when they went to surgery. endometriosis when they went to surgery. endometriosis when they went to surgery. That doesn't mean to me that all red That doesn't mean to me that all red That doesn't mean to me that all red meat is bad, but it probably is for a meat is bad, but it probably is for a meat is bad, but it probably is for a subset of people more inflammatory, subset of people more inflammatory, subset of people more inflammatory, causes more IGF-1. We want to be mindful causes more IGF-1. We want to be mindful causes more IGF-1. We want to be mindful of it. The question I always get is does of it. The question I always get is does of it. The question I always get is does source matter? I mean, probably, but we source matter? I mean, probably, but we source matter? I mean, probably, but we weren't looking at it in any of those weren't looking at it in any of those weren't looking at it in any of those studies. So, I think being very mindful studies. So, I think being very mindful studies. So, I think being very mindful of where your animal-based protein is of where your animal-based protein is of where your animal-based protein is coming from is really important in coming from is really important in coming from is really important in today's kind of food world. kind of food world. kind of food world. Not all foods are created equal even Not all foods are created equal even Not all foods are created equal even when they fall into the same category. when they fall into the same category. when they fall into the same category. And it's worth saying that healthy fats And it's worth saying that healthy fats And it's worth saying that healthy fats are really, really important, right? are really, really important, right? are really, really important, right? Cholesterol's the backbone for steroid Cholesterol's the backbone for steroid Cholesterol's the backbone for steroid hormones, so you need cholesterol in hormones, so you need cholesterol in hormones, so you need cholesterol in your body. So, we really want to your body. So, we really want to your body. So, we really want to encourage those mono-unsaturated, encourage those mono-unsaturated, encourage those mono-unsaturated, poly-unsaturated fatty acids. So, the poly-unsaturated fatty acids. So, the poly-unsaturated fatty acids. So, the nuts, olive oil, fish, algae, chia nuts, olive oil, fish, algae, chia nuts, olive oil, fish, algae, chia seeds, flax, those things have such seeds, flax, those things have such seeds, flax, those things have such so many benefits when it comes to the so many benefits when it comes to the so many benefits when it comes to the omega-3 fatty acids they have, but also omega-3 fatty acids they have, but also omega-3 fatty acids they have, but also that they're great healthy sources of that they're great healthy sources of that they're great healthy sources of cholesterol, which your body needs. And cholesterol, which your body needs. And cholesterol, which your body needs. And in fact, if you don't intake enough, in fact, if you don't intake enough, in fact, if you don't intake enough, you're not going to make progesterone as you're not going to make progesterone as you're not going to make progesterone as well. It'll be really minute. You need well. It'll be really minute. You need well. It'll be really minute. You need progesterone for implantation, don't progesterone for implantation, don't progesterone for implantation, don't have enough unsaturated fat in your have enough unsaturated fat in your have enough unsaturated fat in your diet, you're not going to make as much diet, you're not going to make as much diet, you're not going to make as much progesterone. So, there's some nuance progesterone. So, there's some nuance progesterone. So, there's some nuance there, but to the heart of your there, but to the heart of your there, but to the heart of your question, I'm a huge advocate for that question, I'm a huge advocate for that question, I'm a huge advocate for that especially if you're struggling with especially if you're struggling with especially if you're struggling with something you're not feeling your best, something you're not feeling your best, something you're not feeling your best, if you say you kind of hit the marker on if you say you kind of hit the marker on if you say you kind of hit the marker on a lot of these inflammatory symptoms and a lot of these inflammatory symptoms and a lot of these inflammatory symptoms and you don't know what's going on, it can you don't know what's going on, it can you don't know what's going on, it can be a really helpful tool once you're be a really helpful tool once you're be a really helpful tool once you're controlling the other ones to try to controlling the other ones to try to controlling the other ones to try to leverage. But again, leverage. But again, leverage. But again, sleep, stress, building muscle, avoiding sleep, stress, building muscle, avoiding sleep, stress, building muscle, avoiding those excess toxins, like those are huge those excess toxins, like those are huge those excess toxins, like those are huge piece of the puzzle, too. And a lot of piece of the puzzle, too. And a lot of piece of the puzzle, too. And a lot of them go hand in hand, right? A lot of them go hand in hand, right? A lot of them go hand in hand, right? A lot of times we times we times we eat a food that's also wrapped in eat a food that's also wrapped in eat a food that's also wrapped in something that has, you know, toxic something that has, you know, toxic something that has, you know, toxic chemicals in it. So, we really want to chemicals in it. So, we really want to chemicals in it. So, we really want to think about the fact that think about the fact that think about the fact that when you work from home, when you have when you work from home, when you have when you work from home, when you have access, whole foods and is really access, whole foods and is really access, whole foods and is really important as always leveraging processed important as always leveraging processed important as always leveraging processed or ultra-processed versions. Would you or ultra-processed versions. Would you or ultra-processed versions. Would you say that uh what you just described, in say that uh what you just described, in say that uh what you just described, in fact, everything we talked about, um fact, everything we talked about, um fact, everything we talked about, um also pertains to perimenopause, also pertains to perimenopause, also pertains to perimenopause, menopause? &gt;&gt; Absolutely, absolutely. It's so &gt;&gt; Absolutely, absolutely. It's so &gt;&gt; Absolutely, absolutely. It's so fascinating cuz when I sit with a lot of fascinating cuz when I sit with a lot of fascinating cuz when I sit with a lot of people who just do menopause, you know, people who just do menopause, you know, people who just do menopause, you know, we have the same recommendations for we have the same recommendations for we have the same recommendations for lifestyle and decreasing inflammation lifestyle and decreasing inflammation lifestyle and decreasing inflammation because it's going to improve, you know, because it's going to improve, you know, because it's going to improve, you know, ovarian response, it's going to improve ovarian response, it's going to improve ovarian response, it's going to improve how your body feels, decreasing how your body feels, decreasing how your body feels, decreasing inflammation. We know that when you go inflammation. We know that when you go inflammation. We know that when you go into menopause, estrogen has such into menopause, estrogen has such into menopause, estrogen has such profound anti-inflammatory benefits that profound anti-inflammatory benefits that profound anti-inflammatory benefits that one of the biggest problems is a one of the biggest problems is a one of the biggest problems is a baseline increase in your inflammation. baseline increase in your inflammation. baseline increase in your inflammation. So, don't wait till you're in So, don't wait till you're in So, don't wait till you're in perimenopause or menopause to start to perimenopause or menopause to start to perimenopause or menopause to start to learn these things. Learn them whatever learn these things. Learn them whatever learn these things. Learn them whatever play point you are now is the perfect play point you are now is the perfect play point you are now is the perfect time where we can start to make a time where we can start to make a time where we can start to make a difference both for hormonal health now, difference both for hormonal health now, difference both for hormonal health now, fertility now or later, but also your fertility now or later, but also your fertility now or later, but also your ovarian function long term. Amazing. Uh ovarian function long term. Amazing. Uh ovarian function long term. Amazing. Uh Dr. Natalie Crawford, thank you so, so Dr. Natalie Crawford, thank you so, so Dr. Natalie Crawford, thank you so, so much. I mean, I can't tell you much. I mean, I can't tell you much. I mean, I can't tell you how much I learn every time you speak on how much I learn every time you speak on how much I learn every time you speak on this podcast and elsewhere. People this podcast and elsewhere. People this podcast and elsewhere. People should definitely get your book. Again, should definitely get your book. Again, should definitely get your book. Again, I've read it. I've read it cover to I've read it. I've read it cover to I've read it. I've read it cover to cover. Um The Fertility Formula, Take cover. Um The Fertility Formula, Take cover. Um The Fertility Formula, Take Control of Your Reproductive Future, Control of Your Reproductive Future, Control of Your Reproductive Future, Natalie Crawford, MD, did all the Natalie Crawford, MD, did all the Natalie Crawford, MD, did all the training, runs the clinic, is out there training, runs the clinic, is out there training, runs the clinic, is out there doing public education amidst everything else, public education amidst everything else, public education amidst everything else, managing, co-managing a family, um managing, co-managing a family, um managing, co-managing a family, um and just really expanding the field. I and just really expanding the field. I and just really expanding the field. I mean, you're taking it in new mean, you're taking it in new mean, you're taking it in new directions, which is really the directions, which is really the directions, which is really the to me the most important thing, right? to me the most important thing, right? to me the most important thing, right? That you're out there teaching people, That you're out there teaching people, That you're out there teaching people, but you're also going back to the clinic but you're also going back to the clinic but you're also going back to the clinic and you're paying attention to the and you're paying attention to the and you're paying attention to the science and evolving the science because science and evolving the science because science and evolving the science because this field is just going to improve over this field is just going to improve over this field is just going to improve over time, but you've given people so many time, but you've given people so many time, but you've given people so many actionable things to contemplate, to actionable things to contemplate, to actionable things to contemplate, to definitely do, if I may insert my own uh definitely do, if I may insert my own uh definitely do, if I may insert my own uh beliefs there, and just a lot to think beliefs there, and just a lot to think beliefs there, and just a lot to think about in terms of the general landscape about in terms of the general landscape about in terms of the general landscape of how we think about reproductive of how we think about reproductive of how we think about reproductive health both our own and societally. health both our own and societally. health both our own and societally. So, thank you so much for coming back. We thank you so much for coming back. We thank you so much for coming back. We will do it again if you're willing, and will do it again if you're willing, and will do it again if you're willing, and um just grateful to you. Always. Thank you just grateful to you. Always. Thank you just grateful to you. Always. Thank you so much for having me and holding space so much for having me and holding space so much for having me and holding space for this discussion. I appreciate it. for this discussion. I appreciate it. for this discussion. I appreciate it. Absolutely. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Natalie Crawford. To discussion with Dr. Natalie Crawford. To discussion with Dr. Natalie Crawford. To find links to her podcast and her new find links to her podcast and her new find links to her podcast and her new book, The Fertility Formula, please see book, The Fertility Formula, please see book, The Fertility Formula, please see the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying you're learning from and/or enjoying you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In zero-cost way to support us. In zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, An Operating It's entitled Protocols, An Operating It's entitled Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of protocols in the form of protocols in the form of one-to-three-page PDFs that cover one-to-three-page PDFs that cover one-to-three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your everything from how to optimize your everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, sleep, how to optimize dopamine, sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a deliberate cold exposure. We have a deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that foundational fitness protocol that foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and covers cardiovascular training and covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Natalie today's discussion with Dr. Natalie today's discussion with Dr. Natalie Crawford. And last, but certainly not Crawford. And last, but certainly not Crawford. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your [music] least, thank you for your [music] least, thank you for your [music] interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]