Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live event at the Chicago Theatre in Chicago, event at the Chicago Theatre in Chicago, event at the Chicago Theatre in Chicago, Illinois. The event consisted of a Illinois. The event consisted of a Illinois. The event consisted of a lecture entitled The Brain-Body lecture entitled The Brain-Body lecture entitled The Brain-Body Contract, followed by a question and Contract, followed by a question and Contract, followed by a question and answer session. We wanted to make sure answer session. We wanted to make sure answer session. We wanted to make sure that the question and answer session was that the question and answer session was that the question and answer session was available to everybody, regardless of available to everybody, regardless of available to everybody, regardless of who could attend in person. I also want who could attend in person. I also want who could attend in person. I also want to make sure to thank the sponsors of to make sure to thank the sponsors of to make sure to thank the sponsors of that event, which were AG1 and Eight that event, which were AG1 and Eight that event, which were AG1 and Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the key things tracking capacity. One of the key things tracking capacity. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to getting a great night's sleep is to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct, and sleeping environment is correct, and sleeping environment is correct, and that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. With Eight Sleep, you can about 1 to 3°. With Eight Sleep, you can about 1 to 3°. With Eight Sleep, you can program the temperature of your sleeping program the temperature of your sleeping program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning, middle, environment in the beginning, middle, environment in the beginning, middle, and end of your night. It has a number and end of your night. It has a number and end of your night. It has a number of other features, like tracking the of other features, like tracking the of other features, like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow amount of rapid eye movement and slow amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get, things that are wave sleep that you get, things that are wave sleep that you get, things that are essential to really dialing in the essential to really dialing in the essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you. I've been perfect night's sleep for you. I've been perfect night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over 2 years now, and it cover for well over 2 years now, and it cover for well over 2 years now, and it has greatly improved my sleep. I fall has greatly improved my sleep. I fall has greatly improved my sleep. I fall asleep far more quickly, I wake up far asleep far more quickly, I wake up far asleep far more quickly, I wake up far less often in the middle of the night, less often in the middle of the night, less often in the middle of the night, and I wake up feeling far more refreshed and I wake up feeling far more refreshed and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an Eight than I ever did prior to using an Eight than I ever did prior to using an Eight Sleep mattress cover. Sleep mattress cover. Sleep mattress cover. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman can go to eightsleep.com/huberman can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's and Australia. Again, that's and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 since 2012, so I'm delighted that they since 2012, so I'm delighted that they since 2012, so I'm delighted that they sponsored the live event. sponsored the live event. sponsored the live event. The reason I started taking AG1, and the The reason I started taking AG1, and the The reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a day, is that it provides all of my day, is that it provides all of my day, is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, foundational nutritional needs. That is, foundational nutritional needs. That is, it provides insurance that I get the it provides insurance that I get the it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins, proper amounts of those vitamins, proper amounts of those vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and fiber to minerals, probiotics, and fiber to minerals, probiotics, and fiber to ensure optimal mental health, physical ensure optimal mental health, physical ensure optimal mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to try AG1, you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving to claim a special offer. They're giving to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year away five free travel packs plus a year away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. And now, to claim that special offer. And now, to claim that special offer. And now, without further ado, the question and without further ado, the question and without further ado, the question and answer session from our live event at answer session from our live event at answer session from our live event at the Chicago Theatre in Chicago, the Chicago Theatre in Chicago, the Chicago Theatre in Chicago, Illinois. I turn 70 soon. What's your best advice I turn 70 soon. What's your best advice I turn 70 soon. What's your best advice to keep my brain healthy in old age? Uh to keep my brain healthy in old age? Uh to keep my brain healthy in old age? Uh terrific question. terrific question. terrific question. The advice I would give to you as The advice I would give to you as The advice I would give to you as somebody about to reach 70 is the same somebody about to reach 70 is the same somebody about to reach 70 is the same advice I give to anybody, advice I give to anybody, advice I give to anybody, which is that essentially all of the which is that essentially all of the which is that essentially all of the things that improve cardiovascular things that improve cardiovascular things that improve cardiovascular health and perfusion of your bodily tissues are and perfusion of your bodily tissues are and perfusion of your bodily tissues are going to improve functionality of going to improve functionality of going to improve functionality of the brain. Um because, of course, the brain. Um because, of course, the brain. Um because, of course, the brain is a brain is a brain is a uh a rich consumer of a rich consumer of a rich consumer of fuel, requires fuel, requires fuel, requires very good portals to deliver those very good portals to deliver those very good portals to deliver those fuels, and that capillaries, fuels, and that capillaries, fuels, and that capillaries, microcapillaries, and arteries and so microcapillaries, and arteries and so microcapillaries, and arteries and so forth need to be clean and clear. That's forth need to be clean and clear. That's forth need to be clean and clear. That's the big one. This is why the big one. This is why the big one. This is why I think the prescription now is let's I think the prescription now is let's I think the prescription now is let's generally accepted, and here I'm generally accepted, and here I'm generally accepted, and here I'm borrowing from my friend Peter Attia, borrowing from my friend Peter Attia, borrowing from my friend Peter Attia, but about 150 or maybe as much as 200 but about 150 or maybe as much as 200 but about 150 or maybe as much as 200 minutes of so-called zone two cardio per minutes of so-called zone two cardio per minutes of so-called zone two cardio per week. Movement that you can just barely week. Movement that you can just barely week. Movement that you can just barely carry out a conversation carry out a conversation carry out a conversation um is going to be very useful. One thing um is going to be very useful. One thing um is going to be very useful. One thing that's often not discussed is that that's often not discussed is that that's often not discussed is that load-bearing exercise of some sort is load-bearing exercise of some sort is load-bearing exercise of some sort is going to be better provided your body going to be better provided your body going to be better provided your body can tolerate it, but you should do can tolerate it, but you should do can tolerate it, but you should do something that um you can do something that um you can do something that um you can do consistently over those long durations consistently over those long durations consistently over those long durations um without injuring yourself. But, there's without injuring yourself. But, there's without injuring yourself. But, there's a very interesting literature about how a very interesting literature about how a very interesting literature about how load-bearing movements load-bearing movements load-bearing movements actually generate the release of actually generate the release of actually generate the release of hormones. Yes, hormones from bone that hormones. Yes, hormones from bone that hormones. Yes, hormones from bone that actually cross the blood-brain barrier actually cross the blood-brain barrier actually cross the blood-brain barrier and may influence health of neurons in and may influence health of neurons in and may influence health of neurons in brain areas such as the hippocampus. And brain areas such as the hippocampus. And brain areas such as the hippocampus. And there I'm sort of extending from there I'm sort of extending from there I'm sort of extending from preclinical data in animals to humans, preclinical data in animals to humans, preclinical data in animals to humans, but there's some human data starting to but there's some human data starting to but there's some human data starting to emerge that that's true. It's also true, emerge that that's true. It's also true, emerge that that's true. It's also true, and there's a wonderful paper out just and there's a wonderful paper out just and there's a wonderful paper out just today or yesterday from Dr. Andy today or yesterday from Dr. Andy today or yesterday from Dr. Andy Galpin's lab and collaborators talking Galpin's lab and collaborators talking Galpin's lab and collaborators talking about how about how about how if you look at cognitive health, it's if you look at cognitive health, it's if you look at cognitive health, it's highly correlated with things that highly correlated with things that highly correlated with things that relate to strength. And that is not to relate to strength. And that is not to relate to strength. And that is not to say that you should just do strength say that you should just do strength say that you should just do strength training exercise, but we know that all training exercise, but we know that all training exercise, but we know that all people truly all people should be doing people truly all people should be doing people truly all people should be doing some sort of resistance training two or some sort of resistance training two or some sort of resistance training two or three times per week. You know, and we three times per week. You know, and we three times per week. You know, and we know that grip strength and increasing know that grip strength and increasing know that grip strength and increasing asymmetry in grip strength between the asymmetry in grip strength between the asymmetry in grip strength between the two hands is one of the indicators the two hands is one of the indicators the two hands is one of the indicators of deficits in control from the brain of deficits in control from the brain of deficits in control from the brain out to the periphery and is correlated out to the periphery and is correlated out to the periphery and is correlated with cognitive decline. There's also with cognitive decline. There's also with cognitive decline. There's also some interesting data some interesting data some interesting data about how when our the feet become about how when our the feet become about how when our the feet become floppy and kind of flaccid or the lack floppy and kind of flaccid or the lack floppy and kind of flaccid or the lack of ability to extend one's toes. I'm of ability to extend one's toes. I'm of ability to extend one's toes. I'm still work I'm been wearing this toe still work I'm been wearing this toe still work I'm been wearing this toe spreader thing. Has anyone tried those? spreader thing. Has anyone tried those? spreader thing. Has anyone tried those? Those hurt. Those hurt. I broke this Those hurt. Those hurt. I broke this Those hurt. Those hurt. I broke this foot a bunch of times, but I'll tell you foot a bunch of times, but I'll tell you foot a bunch of times, but I'll tell you when you get better at spreading your when you get better at spreading your when you get better at spreading your toes, it's really exciting. And it's toes, it's really exciting. And it's toes, it's really exciting. And it's really exciting for several reasons. really exciting for several reasons. really exciting for several reasons. It's really exciting cuz there's more It's really exciting cuz there's more It's really exciting cuz there's more stability in your feet. You can run and stability in your feet. You can run and stability in your feet. You can run and move and do things better without pain. move and do things better without pain. move and do things better without pain. But in addition to that, But in addition to that, But in addition to that, believe it or not, just as one of the believe it or not, just as one of the believe it or not, just as one of the first things that they're going to do first things that they're going to do first things that they're going to do when you come into this world is scrape when you come into this world is scrape when you come into this world is scrape the bottom of your foot and look for the bottom of your foot and look for the bottom of your foot and look for the Babinski reflex, which is a neural Babinski reflex, which is a neural Babinski reflex, which is a neural transmission uh reflex as all reflexes transmission uh reflex as all reflexes transmission uh reflex as all reflexes are. Um but it's testing that essentially the but it's testing that essentially the but it's testing that essentially the health of the nervous system that over health of the nervous system that over health of the nervous system that over time, you know, again, there many time, you know, again, there many time, you know, again, there many correlates of dementia, many, many correlates of dementia, many, many correlates of dementia, many, many correlates of dementia, but a an correlates of dementia, but a an correlates of dementia, but a an inability to finally control the inability to finally control the inability to finally control the extremities is certainly one of them. extremities is certainly one of them. extremities is certainly one of them. So, um strength training, cardiovascular So, um strength training, cardiovascular So, um strength training, cardiovascular training, and these are kind of um training, and these are kind of um training, and these are kind of um stereotyped answers for stereotyped answers for stereotyped answers for your question and yet those are really your question and yet those are really your question and yet those are really the prime movers the prime movers the prime movers against cardiovascular and against cardiovascular and against cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease. And then of cerebrovascular disease. And then of cerebrovascular disease. And then of course there's you know I'd be remiss if course there's you know I'd be remiss if course there's you know I'd be remiss if I didn't throw in something that was a I didn't throw in something that was a I didn't throw in something that was a little bit more edgy cuz that's what I little bit more edgy cuz that's what I little bit more edgy cuz that's what I do. Um You know there are interesting data You know there are interesting data You know there are interesting data about the use of drugs to increase about the use of drugs to increase about the use of drugs to increase acetylcholine transmission, right? I acetylcholine transmission, right? I acetylcholine transmission, right? I mean I was visiting mean I was visiting mean I was visiting a Nobel Prize winner at a Nobel Prize winner at a Nobel Prize winner at Columbia to learn about his incredible Columbia to learn about his incredible Columbia to learn about his incredible work some years ago and saw that he chewed no some years ago and saw that he chewed no some years ago and saw that he chewed no fewer than five pieces of Nicorette gum, fewer than five pieces of Nicorette gum, fewer than five pieces of Nicorette gum, something I don't recommend, during this something I don't recommend, during this something I don't recommend, during this short meeting. And I said, "What is this short meeting. And I said, "What is this short meeting. And I said, "What is this all about?" He said, "Well, you know, I all about?" He said, "Well, you know, I all about?" He said, "Well, you know, I don't smoke anymore because I don't want don't smoke anymore because I don't want don't smoke anymore because I don't want lung cancer, but um you know, he said lung cancer, but um you know, he said lung cancer, but um you know, he said nicotine is you know, a protective nicotine is you know, a protective nicotine is you know, a protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." I against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." I against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." I was like, "Well, how can that be?" And was like, "Well, how can that be?" And was like, "Well, how can that be?" And he said, "Well, you know, you decreases he said, "Well, you know, you decreases he said, "Well, you know, you decreases in neuro modulation and in neuro modulation and in neuro modulation and dopamine acetylcholine correlated with dopamine acetylcholine correlated with dopamine acetylcholine correlated with cognitive decline, keeping your brain cognitive decline, keeping your brain cognitive decline, keeping your brain sharp, and so on and so forth." So, I'm sharp, and so on and so forth." So, I'm sharp, and so on and so forth." So, I'm not encouraging people to take nicotine. not encouraging people to take nicotine. not encouraging people to take nicotine. It increases blood pressure, It increases blood pressure, It increases blood pressure, vasoconstriction, um but it's an interesting um but it's an interesting um but it's an interesting consideration, you know, some of the consideration, you know, some of the consideration, you know, some of the emerging cholinergic and dopaminergic emerging cholinergic and dopaminergic emerging cholinergic and dopaminergic drugs or ways to increase acetylcholine and or ways to increase acetylcholine and or ways to increase acetylcholine and dopamine are certainly intriguing. And I dopamine are certainly intriguing. And I dopamine are certainly intriguing. And I won't tell you who that person is, but won't tell you who that person is, but won't tell you who that person is, but his name is Richard Axel. Next question. his name is Richard Axel. Next question. his name is Richard Axel. Next question. Yeah. How can I optimize sleep while working How can I optimize sleep while working How can I optimize sleep while working 24-hour shifts as a firefighter? 24 24-hour shifts as a firefighter? 24 24-hour shifts as a firefighter? 24 hours on, 48 hours off. Okay, and this hours on, 48 hours off. Okay, and this hours on, 48 hours off. Okay, and this probably also pertains to new parents probably also pertains to new parents probably also pertains to new parents and it probably also pertains to anyone and it probably also pertains to anyone and it probably also pertains to anyone that's going through a particular that's going through a particular that's going through a particular particularly stressful time where you're particularly stressful time where you're particularly stressful time where you're micro-waking throughout the night, so micro-waking throughout the night, so micro-waking throughout the night, so not just firefighters. So, what do we not just firefighters. So, what do we not just firefighters. So, what do we know? We know based on really good data know? We know based on really good data know? We know based on really good data that shift work is bad for us. It's just that shift work is bad for us. It's just that shift work is bad for us. It's just bad. We're a diurnal species. bad. We're a diurnal species. bad. We're a diurnal species. We're not nocturnal, but thank you thank We're not nocturnal, but thank you thank We're not nocturnal, but thank you thank you thank you shift workers because you thank you shift workers because you thank you shift workers because you essentially keep us all safe and make essentially keep us all safe and make essentially keep us all safe and make the world go round and um and so we need the world go round and um and so we need the world go round and um and so we need you and we want you healthy. So one of you and we want you healthy. So one of you and we want you healthy. So one of the main things is that you can the main things is that you can the main things is that you can make sure that you stay on the same make sure that you stay on the same make sure that you stay on the same sleep wake schedule excuse me sleep wake schedule excuse me sleep wake schedule excuse me for at least 2 weeks. It's the swing for at least 2 weeks. It's the swing for at least 2 weeks. It's the swing shift that's really shift that's really shift that's really the worst. the worst. the worst. You can tell your boss I said that You can tell your boss I said that You can tell your boss I said that and if they won't agree and you're doing and if they won't agree and you're doing and if they won't agree and you're doing this 24-hour on 24-hour off there a this 24-hour on 24-hour off there a this 24-hour on 24-hour off there a couple of things that are really couple of things that are really couple of things that are really important. First of all the main way to important. First of all the main way to important. First of all the main way to wake up your nervous system even though wake up your nervous system even though wake up your nervous system even though it might not feel like a triple espresso it might not feel like a triple espresso it might not feel like a triple espresso is going to be is going to be is going to be that light exposure to the eyes and if that light exposure to the eyes and if that light exposure to the eyes and if you can't get it from sunlight is going you can't get it from sunlight is going you can't get it from sunlight is going to be to be to be from any bright artificial light. I'm from any bright artificial light. I'm from any bright artificial light. I'm not a huge proponent of the daylight not a huge proponent of the daylight not a huge proponent of the daylight simulators are very expensive. You can simulators are very expensive. You can simulators are very expensive. You can simply buy a 900 Lux LED far more simply buy a 900 Lux LED far more simply buy a 900 Lux LED far more inexpensively. I don't have any inexpensively. I don't have any inexpensively. I don't have any relationship to any company that relationship to any company that relationship to any company that sells these but you can find them on sells these but you can find them on sells these but you can find them on Amazon or wherever you happen to Amazon or wherever you happen to Amazon or wherever you happen to prefer to purchase things prefer to purchase things prefer to purchase things um or you can just get really close to a or you can just get really close to a or you can just get really close to a bright light. bright light. bright light. Anytime you're trying to wake up even if Anytime you're trying to wake up even if Anytime you're trying to wake up even if you don't feel that it helps you wake up you don't feel that it helps you wake up you don't feel that it helps you wake up very much mostly for the melatonin very much mostly for the melatonin very much mostly for the melatonin suppression cuz bright light will very suppression cuz bright light will very suppression cuz bright light will very acutely suppress melatonin and then the acutely suppress melatonin and then the acutely suppress melatonin and then the real question from shift workers always real question from shift workers always real question from shift workers always seems to be should I catch up on sleep seems to be should I catch up on sleep seems to be should I catch up on sleep or is that going to be problematic? or is that going to be problematic? or is that going to be problematic? Should I just stay up into the next Should I just stay up into the next Should I just stay up into the next cycle? And the answer there is a little cycle? And the answer there is a little cycle? And the answer there is a little bit nuanced but the best answer I can bit nuanced but the best answer I can bit nuanced but the best answer I can give across the board is give across the board is give across the board is if this is a pattern that you're going if this is a pattern that you're going if this is a pattern that you're going to be in regularly over say months or to be in regularly over say months or to be in regularly over say months or years then get whatever sleep you can. years then get whatever sleep you can. years then get whatever sleep you can. Get whatever sleep you can. If it's Get whatever sleep you can. If it's Get whatever sleep you can. If it's something that you're doing somewhat something that you're doing somewhat something that you're doing somewhat acutely like you're traveling to Europe acutely like you're traveling to Europe acutely like you're traveling to Europe and you're just going to force and you're just going to force and you're just going to force yourselves to stay up a day and a half yourselves to stay up a day and a half yourselves to stay up a day and a half then in that case I would say no need to in that case I would say no need to in that case I would say no need to get the maximum amount of sleep just to get the maximum amount of sleep just to get the maximum amount of sleep just try and stay with the local schedule. We try and stay with the local schedule. We try and stay with the local schedule. We have an entire episode about shift work have an entire episode about shift work have an entire episode about shift work that somehow that somehow that somehow um maybe didn't get as much recognition um maybe didn't get as much recognition um maybe didn't get as much recognition as it should have as it should have as it should have for shift workers and we'll try and get for shift workers and we'll try and get for shift workers and we'll try and get it out in better form. We don't always it out in better form. We don't always it out in better form. We don't always succeed in you know top carding things succeed in you know top carding things succeed in you know top carding things in a way that gets them out to the most in a way that gets them out to the most in a way that gets them out to the most people. One thing I will say is an opportunity One thing I will say is an opportunity One thing I will say is an opportunity to announce that our website to announce that our website to announce that our website hubermanlab.com is completely revamped hubermanlab.com is completely revamped hubermanlab.com is completely revamped so it's highly searchable. We'll take so it's highly searchable. We'll take so it's highly searchable. We'll take you to exact timestamps and is and now you to exact timestamps and is and now you to exact timestamps and is and now you can segregate out timestamps from you can segregate out timestamps from you can segregate out timestamps from newsletters from all this stuff so newsletters from all this stuff so newsletters from all this stuff so thanks to a lot of effort by my amazing thanks to a lot of effort by my amazing thanks to a lot of effort by my amazing team you can now navigate that site with team you can now navigate that site with team you can now navigate that site with a with to real precision. So if you want a with to real precision. So if you want a with to real precision. So if you want to say ADHD Adderall kids yes no for to say ADHD Adderall kids yes no for to say ADHD Adderall kids yes no for instance it will take you to precise instance it will take you to precise instance it will take you to precise timestamps that will address those timestamps that will address those timestamps that will address those issues. Next question please. Next question please. Next question please. How does hypnosis therapy work? Well How does hypnosis therapy work? Well How does hypnosis therapy work? Well this is a um this is a um this is a um a very interesting topic to me because a very interesting topic to me because a very interesting topic to me because my colleague associate chair of my colleague associate chair of my colleague associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford David Spiegel psychiatry at Stanford David Spiegel psychiatry at Stanford David Spiegel is a world expert in hypnosis and its a world expert in hypnosis and its a world expert in hypnosis and its neural underpinnings and its use for neural underpinnings and its use for neural underpinnings and its use for clinical applications. Um his father was clinical applications. Um his father was clinical applications. Um his father was a hip hypnotist also a psychiatrist a hip hypnotist also a psychiatrist a hip hypnotist also a psychiatrist um and when people hear hypnotism they and when people hear hypnotism they and when people hear hypnotism they think of stage hypnotism and being you think of stage hypnotism and being you think of stage hypnotism and being you know up on stage and doing things you know up on stage and doing things you know up on stage and doing things you don't want to in front of other people don't want to in front of other people don't want to in front of other people but really it's but really it's but really it's when we're talking about clinical when we're talking about clinical when we're talking about clinical applications or applications or applications or wellness applications of hypnosis we're wellness applications of hypnosis we're wellness applications of hypnosis we're talking about self-directed hypnosis. I talking about self-directed hypnosis. I talking about self-directed hypnosis. I really wish there was a better name really wish there was a better name really wish there was a better name because it I don't think hypnosis is because it I don't think hypnosis is because it I don't think hypnosis is going to advance very far as a field going to advance very far as a field going to advance very far as a field frankly because everyone thinks hypnosis frankly because everyone thinks hypnosis frankly because everyone thinks hypnosis um and it's it would be like a um and it's it would be like a um and it's it would be like a psychedelics were just called drugs. psychedelics were just called drugs. psychedelics were just called drugs. Right? We were taught in the 80s that Right? We were taught in the 80s that Right? We were taught in the 80s that drugs are bad and that your brain on drugs are bad and that your brain on drugs are bad and that your brain on drugs looks like an omelet and that's drugs looks like an omelet and that's drugs looks like an omelet and that's bad. And if you like omelets that bad. And if you like omelets that bad. And if you like omelets that they're still bad and drugs of they're still bad and drugs of they're still bad and drugs of abuse are bad and actually I hope we abuse are bad and actually I hope we abuse are bad and actually I hope we can talk briefly about psychedelics at can talk briefly about psychedelics at can talk briefly about psychedelics at some point because I do think there's a some point because I do think there's a some point because I do think there's a little bit of a runaway train around the little bit of a runaway train around the little bit of a runaway train around the topic of psychedelics now. I think we topic of psychedelics now. I think we topic of psychedelics now. I think we need to be very careful how uh approach need to be very careful how uh approach need to be very careful how uh approach that entire landscape. But, hypnosis that entire landscape. But, hypnosis that entire landscape. But, hypnosis essentially works by essentially works by essentially works by allowing someone to place their own allowing someone to place their own allowing someone to place their own brain into this very unique state. brain into this very unique state. brain into this very unique state. Earlier, we were talking about Earlier, we were talking about Earlier, we were talking about neuroplasticity, and we talked about the neuroplasticity, and we talked about the neuroplasticity, and we talked about the fact that neuroplasticity fact that neuroplasticity fact that neuroplasticity involves intense focus followed by deep rest in intense focus followed by deep rest in intense focus followed by deep rest in the form of deep sleep or non-sleep deep the form of deep sleep or non-sleep deep the form of deep sleep or non-sleep deep rest, maybe even Rick Rubining it and rest, maybe even Rick Rubining it and rest, maybe even Rick Rubining it and just kind of like laying there. just kind of like laying there. just kind of like laying there. Hypnosis is different Hypnosis is different Hypnosis is different because hypnosis is in a state in which because hypnosis is in a state in which because hypnosis is in a state in which your focus is very narrow, the context is focus is very narrow, the context is focus is very narrow, the context is very narrow, but you're very, very narrow, but you're very, very narrow, but you're very, very relaxed. So, maybe the Rubin example of relaxed. So, maybe the Rubin example of relaxed. So, maybe the Rubin example of being brain active and body very still being brain active and body very still being brain active and body very still is a bit more like hypnosis, is a bit more like hypnosis, is a bit more like hypnosis, to be fair. to be fair. to be fair. Why would it be the case that David Why would it be the case that David Why would it be the case that David Spiegel and his dad have literally a Spiegel and his dad have literally a Spiegel and his dad have literally a tool that is approved by the tool that is approved by the tool that is approved by the psychiatric associa- the major American psychiatric associa- the major American psychiatric associa- the major American Psychiatric Association, where they can Psychiatric Association, where they can Psychiatric Association, where they can figure out how hypnotizable you are by figure out how hypnotizable you are by figure out how hypnotizable you are by having you look up and try and close having you look up and try and close having you look up and try and close your eyelids while continuing to look your eyelids while continuing to look your eyelids while continuing to look up, the so-called Spiegel eye roll test. up, the so-called Spiegel eye roll test. up, the so-called Spiegel eye roll test. Sounds pretty wacky, right? This is like Sounds pretty wacky, right? This is like Sounds pretty wacky, right? This is like Tik Tok level wacky. Tik Tok level wacky. Tik Tok level wacky. Well, the reason is you have cranial Well, the reason is you have cranial Well, the reason is you have cranial nerves, so they sit more or less near nerves, so they sit more or less near nerves, so they sit more or less near your neck, that allow you to direct your neck, that allow you to direct your neck, that allow you to direct your focus, your eyes upward, and then you focus, your eyes upward, and then you focus, your eyes upward, and then you have cranial nerves that have your eyes have cranial nerves that have your eyes have cranial nerves that have your eyes go down, and the ones that the cranial go down, and the ones that the cranial go down, and the ones that the cranial nerves that drive your eyes up are nerves that drive your eyes up are nerves that drive your eyes up are associated with alertness and eyes open, associated with alertness and eyes open, associated with alertness and eyes open, no surprise, and the cranial nerves that no surprise, and the cranial nerves that no surprise, and the cranial nerves that are associated with are associated with are associated with pointing your eyes down and closing your pointing your eyes down and closing your pointing your eyes down and closing your eyelids are associated with what? With eyelids are associated with what? With eyelids are associated with what? With drowsiness, sleep, and lack of drowsiness, sleep, and lack of drowsiness, sleep, and lack of alertness. They're sort of a push-pull alertness. They're sort of a push-pull alertness. They're sort of a push-pull in the autonomic nervous system. in the autonomic nervous system. in the autonomic nervous system. And Spiegel, And Spiegel, And Spiegel, Spiegel's daddy and him figured out, cuz Spiegel's daddy and him figured out, cuz Spiegel's daddy and him figured out, cuz they're geniuses, they're geniuses, they're geniuses, that if somebody can maintain upward that if somebody can maintain upward that if somebody can maintain upward gaze while closing their eyelids, two gaze while closing their eyelids, two gaze while closing their eyelids, two things happen. One, you'll see the things happen. One, you'll see the things happen. One, you'll see the whites of their eyes, and it's pretty whites of their eyes, and it's pretty whites of their eyes, and it's pretty creepy. Two, that means they're highly Two, that means they're highly Two, that means they're highly hypnotizable because that is a hypnotizable because that is a hypnotizable because that is a reflection of the probability that they reflection of the probability that they reflection of the probability that they can enter a brain state in which they can enter a brain state in which they can enter a brain state in which they are both very awake and very relaxed. are both very awake and very relaxed. are both very awake and very relaxed. Pretty cool. Now, if that sounds kind of Pretty cool. Now, if that sounds kind of Pretty cool. Now, if that sounds kind of wacky cuz you're just looking at the wacky cuz you're just looking at the wacky cuz you're just looking at the periphery, keep in mind that one of the periphery, keep in mind that one of the periphery, keep in mind that one of the primary entry points for diagnosing primary entry points for diagnosing primary entry points for diagnosing concussion is to shine a light in one concussion is to shine a light in one concussion is to shine a light in one eye and have that pupil constrict and then and have that pupil constrict and then and have that pupil constrict and then see whether or not the other pupil see whether or not the other pupil see whether or not the other pupil constricts. The so-called consensual constricts. The so-called consensual constricts. The so-called consensual pupillary reflex. Although, technically pupillary reflex. Although, technically pupillary reflex. Although, technically I've been bothered by this from day one. I've been bothered by this from day one. I've been bothered by this from day one. It should be called the non-consensual It should be called the non-consensual It should be called the non-consensual pupil reflex cuz the other eye doesn't pupil reflex cuz the other eye doesn't pupil reflex cuz the other eye doesn't have a choice if everything's working. In any case, In any case, In any case, if you have a hard hit to the head, if you have a hard hit to the head, if you have a hard hit to the head, you'll see that you shine light in one you'll see that you shine light in one you'll see that you shine light in one eye, pupil constricts, and the other one eye, pupil constricts, and the other one eye, pupil constricts, and the other one stays really dilated and then you go, stays really dilated and then you go, stays really dilated and then you go, "Okay, get this person to the emergency "Okay, get this person to the emergency "Okay, get this person to the emergency room." Because there's been a severing of the Because there's been a severing of the Because there's been a severing of the connections between the two sides of the connections between the two sides of the connections between the two sides of the brain. So, looking in the eyes and brain. So, looking in the eyes and brain. So, looking in the eyes and trying to deduce what might be happening trying to deduce what might be happening trying to deduce what might be happening more centrally within the caverns of the more centrally within the caverns of the more centrally within the caverns of the skull and the brain is not a new thing. skull and the brain is not a new thing. skull and the brain is not a new thing. It is a primary diagnostic tool in It is a primary diagnostic tool in It is a primary diagnostic tool in neurology. It's also how your parents neurology. It's also how your parents neurology. It's also how your parents knew that you were taking drugs when you knew that you were taking drugs when you knew that you were taking drugs when you came in the door cuz your pupils were came in the door cuz your pupils were came in the door cuz your pupils were like that big. like that big. like that big. And that reflects a difference in And that reflects a difference in And that reflects a difference in autonomic arousal. autonomic arousal. autonomic arousal. And basically stimulants And basically stimulants And basically stimulants makes people dilate their pupils. This makes people dilate their pupils. This makes people dilate their pupils. This is also why the story about belladonna, is also why the story about belladonna, is also why the story about belladonna, people intentionally dilating their people intentionally dilating their people intentionally dilating their pupils to trick people into thinking pupils to trick people into thinking pupils to trick people into thinking that they were attracted to them. that they were attracted to them. that they were attracted to them. Thought about this one a lot, too. Thought about this one a lot, too. Thought about this one a lot, too. It's like not a precursor to a good It's like not a precursor to a good It's like not a precursor to a good relationship. It's like someone's using relationship. It's like someone's using relationship. It's like someone's using their physiology to pretend that they're their physiology to pretend that they're their physiology to pretend that they're attracted so the other person thinks attracted so the other person thinks attracted so the other person thinks that they're attracted so that they that they're attracted so that they that they're attracted so that they might become attracted. Anyway, it's a might become attracted. Anyway, it's a might become attracted. Anyway, it's a recipe for failure, almost as bad as recipe for failure, almost as bad as recipe for failure, almost as bad as most of the dating apps. Well, I most of the dating apps. Well, I most of the dating apps. Well, I wouldn't know, I'm not on them, but from wouldn't know, I'm not on them, but from wouldn't know, I'm not on them, but from what I hear. what I hear. what I hear. Okay. So, where were we? Hypnosis. So, where were we? Hypnosis. So, where were we? Hypnosis. Um when you are in a state of elevated Um when you are in a state of elevated Um when you are in a state of elevated attention, but very relaxed, guess what? attention, but very relaxed, guess what? attention, but very relaxed, guess what? Neuroplasticity occurs much faster Neuroplasticity occurs much faster Neuroplasticity occurs much faster because you're essentially marrying the because you're essentially marrying the because you're essentially marrying the two states that are normally divorced, two states that are normally divorced, two states that are normally divorced, which are which are which are heightened levels of attention first, heightened levels of attention first, heightened levels of attention first, and then deep rest. You're essentially and then deep rest. You're essentially and then deep rest. You're essentially putting the nervous system into a more, putting the nervous system into a more, putting the nervous system into a more, I wouldn't call it hyperplastic state, I wouldn't call it hyperplastic state, I wouldn't call it hyperplastic state, but a more plastic state. And for people but a more plastic state. And for people but a more plastic state. And for people that are highly hypnotizable, that are highly hypnotizable, that are highly hypnotizable, the success rates the success rates the success rates at, for instance, smoking cessation, at, for instance, smoking cessation, at, for instance, smoking cessation, pain relief, are pretty impressive. Uh pain relief, are pretty impressive. Uh pain relief, are pretty impressive. Uh it's Spiegel Lab has published a number it's Spiegel Lab has published a number it's Spiegel Lab has published a number of these. So, I think self-hypnosis is of these. So, I think self-hypnosis is of these. So, I think self-hypnosis is a very interesting tool. I just hope is a very interesting tool. I just hope is a very interesting tool. I just hope that they rename it so that it um stands that they rename it so that it um stands that they rename it so that it um stands a chance of getting off the ground. I a chance of getting off the ground. I a chance of getting off the ground. I mean, one of the things that you learn mean, one of the things that you learn mean, one of the things that you learn as a public-facing educator is that what as a public-facing educator is that what as a public-facing educator is that what things are called has a great impact on things are called has a great impact on things are called has a great impact on whether or not they achieve any kind of whether or not they achieve any kind of whether or not they achieve any kind of um use in the world. Hence, why I decided use in the world. Hence, why I decided use in the world. Hence, why I decided to um swallow the difficult pill of to um swallow the difficult pill of to um swallow the difficult pill of um partially renaming Yoga Nidra as um partially renaming Yoga Nidra as um partially renaming Yoga Nidra as non-sleep deep rest. I don't like to do non-sleep deep rest. I don't like to do non-sleep deep rest. I don't like to do that. Yoga Nidra has more than a that. Yoga Nidra has more than a that. Yoga Nidra has more than a thousand-year history, but it's When thousand-year history, but it's When thousand-year history, but it's When people hear Yoga Nidra, unless they are people hear Yoga Nidra, unless they are people hear Yoga Nidra, unless they are very open-minded, they hear magic very open-minded, they hear magic very open-minded, they hear magic carpet. They hear levitation. And it's They hear levitation. And it's They hear levitation. And it's unfortunate, and that's not how I feel, unfortunate, and that's not how I feel, unfortunate, and that's not how I feel, but for years I talked about Yoga Nidra. but for years I talked about Yoga Nidra. but for years I talked about Yoga Nidra. It's so cool. It's like a sleep state, It's so cool. It's like a sleep state, It's so cool. It's like a sleep state, but it's not. I'm like, "Yeah, like Yoga but it's not. I'm like, "Yeah, like Yoga but it's not. I'm like, "Yeah, like Yoga Nidra, okay." And but if you come from a Nidra, okay." And but if you come from a Nidra, okay." And but if you come from a culture where that's discussed, they're culture where that's discussed, they're culture where that's discussed, they're all about it. And so, non-sleep deep all about it. And so, non-sleep deep all about it. And so, non-sleep deep rest, you know, I felt like, "All right, rest, you know, I felt like, "All right, rest, you know, I felt like, "All right, leave my name out of it. You know, I'll leave my name out of it. You know, I'll leave my name out of it. You know, I'll be dead eventually. I mean, I'm in this be dead eventually. I mean, I'm in this be dead eventually. I mean, I'm in this line of advisors, right? I'm like line of advisors, right? I'm like line of advisors, right? I'm like approaching 50. I'm like I'm like I'm approaching 50. I'm like I'm like I'm approaching 50. I'm like I'm like I'm winning in my lineage, winning in my lineage, winning in my lineage, but should I be fortunate enough to, you but should I be fortunate enough to, you but should I be fortunate enough to, you know, live past, you know, bullet, know, live past, you know, bullet, know, live past, you know, bullet, cancer, or car crash cancer, or car crash cancer, or car crash far enough, far enough, far enough, then, you know, NSDR hopefully will then, you know, NSDR hopefully will then, you know, NSDR hopefully will persist, and I don't need a piece of it. persist, and I don't need a piece of it. persist, and I don't need a piece of it. It's just the hope is that people will It's just the hope is that people will It's just the hope is that people will learn to put themselves into brain learn to put themselves into brain learn to put themselves into brain states that can be adaptive for them. states that can be adaptive for them. states that can be adaptive for them. So, be nice if something someone could So, be nice if something someone could So, be nice if something someone could come up with something other than come up with something other than come up with something other than hypnosis. I think Spiegel would agree. hypnosis. I think Spiegel would agree. hypnosis. I think Spiegel would agree. Super interested in psychedelics as Super interested in psychedelics as Super interested in psychedelics as medicine, to be done with somebody with medicine, to be done with somebody with medicine, to be done with somebody with experience. Worried about unlocking experience. Worried about unlocking experience. Worried about unlocking mental health conditions. Yeah, you mental health conditions. Yeah, you mental health conditions. Yeah, you should be. Uh what does the research say should be. Uh what does the research say should be. Uh what does the research say and what are your thoughts? and what are your thoughts? and what are your thoughts? Okay. Um barbed wire question, we like that. Um barbed wire question, we like that. Um barbed wire question, we like that. Um psychedelics. Well, psychedelics. Well, psychedelics. Well, let's just back up a little bit and let's just back up a little bit and let's just back up a little bit and acknowledge one thing that's more acknowledge one thing that's more acknowledge one thing that's more important than psychedelics or any thing important than psychedelics or any thing important than psychedelics or any thing else when it comes to rewiring the else when it comes to rewiring the else when it comes to rewiring the brain, which is that ultimately brain, which is that ultimately brain, which is that ultimately rewiring of the brain is about shifts in rewiring of the brain is about shifts in rewiring of the brain is about shifts in neuromodulators. Dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, Dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, Dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, norepinephrine, acetylcholine. norepinephrine, acetylcholine. norepinephrine, acetylcholine. And it's no coincidence that you know, And it's no coincidence that you know, And it's no coincidence that you know, SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have been one of the major inhibitors, have been one of the major inhibitors, have been one of the major entry points for attempts to treat entry points for attempts to treat entry points for attempts to treat things like depression over the last things like depression over the last things like depression over the last 20-30 years or more. 20-30 years or more. 20-30 years or more. Uh when I was in college, there was Uh when I was in college, there was Uh when I was in college, there was That's when the book Listening to Prozac That's when the book Listening to Prozac That's when the book Listening to Prozac came out, but prior to that, there's a came out, but prior to that, there's a came out, but prior to that, there's a long history of drugs long history of drugs long history of drugs prescription drugs in that case to prescription drugs in that case to prescription drugs in that case to change levels of neuromodulators like change levels of neuromodulators like change levels of neuromodulators like serotonin or acetylcholine or dopamine serotonin or acetylcholine or dopamine serotonin or acetylcholine or dopamine in an attempt to cure or treat a in an attempt to cure or treat a in an attempt to cure or treat a disease. But keep in mind, despite the disease. But keep in mind, despite the disease. But keep in mind, despite the varied success of SSRIs, a topic unto varied success of SSRIs, a topic unto varied success of SSRIs, a topic unto itself, that there's a strong belief and itself, that there's a strong belief and itself, that there's a strong belief and there has been for a long time that if there has been for a long time that if there has been for a long time that if SSRIs worked, it wasn't because SSRIs worked, it wasn't because SSRIs worked, it wasn't because the depressed brain is deficient in the depressed brain is deficient in the depressed brain is deficient in serotonin, but rather because increasing serotonin, but rather because increasing serotonin, but rather because increasing serotonin offered the opportunity to serotonin offered the opportunity to serotonin offered the opportunity to increase neuroplasticity. increase neuroplasticity. increase neuroplasticity. Right, so it's a different way of Right, so it's a different way of Right, so it's a different way of thinking about it. thinking about it. thinking about it. And that's a segue for saying that when And that's a segue for saying that when And that's a segue for saying that when you say psychedelics, that's a broad you say psychedelics, that's a broad you say psychedelics, that's a broad category of drugs. Nowadays, people even category of drugs. Nowadays, people even category of drugs. Nowadays, people even lump ketamine into the that, although lump ketamine into the that, although lump ketamine into the that, although technically it's not a psychedelic, but technically it's not a psychedelic, but technically it's not a psychedelic, but that the sort of classic, if you will, that the sort of classic, if you will, that the sort of classic, if you will, psychedelics are LSD, lysergic acid psychedelics are LSD, lysergic acid psychedelics are LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide, and psilocybin, and psilocybin, and psilocybin, aka mushrooms, although it comes in aka mushrooms, although it comes in aka mushrooms, although it comes in other sources as well. Um the major other sources as well. Um the major other sources as well. Um the major effect of psilocybin is to stimulate a effect of psilocybin is to stimulate a effect of psilocybin is to stimulate a particular serotonin receptor which has particular serotonin receptor which has particular serotonin receptor which has elevated density in particular brain elevated density in particular brain elevated density in particular brain areas and indeed there are many recent areas and indeed there are many recent areas and indeed there are many recent clinical trials, many, let's just say, clinical trials, many, let's just say, clinical trials, many, let's just say, um, let's say 12 to 20 let's say 12 to 20 let's say 12 to 20 good sized good sized good sized clinical trials done in clinical trials done in clinical trials done in diverse locations on the planet, many in diverse locations on the planet, many in diverse locations on the planet, many at Johns Hopkins and UCSF, some in at Johns Hopkins and UCSF, some in at Johns Hopkins and UCSF, some in Switzerland, showing that enhancing and here you showing that enhancing and here you showing that enhancing and here you notice I'm using the notice I'm using the notice I'm using the mechanistic language, enhancing the mechanistic language, enhancing the mechanistic language, enhancing the transmission of the release of serotonin transmission of the release of serotonin transmission of the release of serotonin and activating particular serotonin and activating particular serotonin and activating particular serotonin receptors leads to an opportunity for receptors leads to an opportunity for receptors leads to an opportunity for more what? Neuroplasticity. more what? Neuroplasticity. more what? Neuroplasticity. Now, I say it that way I say it that way I say it that way not to add a bunch of words to but not to add a bunch of words to but not to add a bunch of words to but because the real question is whether or because the real question is whether or because the real question is whether or not the experience that one has while not the experience that one has while not the experience that one has while under the influence of psychedelics under the influence of psychedelics under the influence of psychedelics is critical is critical is critical to the clinical outcome. the clinical outcome. the clinical outcome. Or a growing idea just as a hypothesis I a growing idea just as a hypothesis I a growing idea just as a hypothesis I think is equally interesting is that think is equally interesting is that think is equally interesting is that it's the serotonin itself it's the serotonin itself it's the serotonin itself and that the things you see, the things and that the things you see, the things and that the things you see, the things you hear, the things you experience are you hear, the things you experience are you hear, the things you experience are not relevant. Now, not relevant. Now, not relevant. Now, uh, I have uh, I have uh, I have some experience with psychedelics. I had some experience with psychedelics. I had some experience with psychedelics. I had a bad time on psychedelics as a bad time on psychedelics as a bad time on psychedelics as a teenager. I was also pretty wayward teenager. I was also pretty wayward teenager. I was also pretty wayward youth but I I've had a bad trip on youth but I I've had a bad trip on youth but I I've had a bad trip on LSD. I for years I was scared that LSD. I for years I was scared that LSD. I for years I was scared that people were going to dose me with LSD people were going to dose me with LSD people were going to dose me with LSD after that. It was so bad. Um, I think after that. It was so bad. Um, I think after that. It was so bad. Um, I think across the board we can say kids doing across the board we can say kids doing across the board we can say kids doing psychedelics just seems like a bad idea. psychedelics just seems like a bad idea. psychedelics just seems like a bad idea. Their brains are already hyperplastic. Their brains are already hyperplastic. Their brains are already hyperplastic. If you have a predisposition to If you have a predisposition to If you have a predisposition to bipolar type issues or schizophrenia, it can type issues or schizophrenia, it can type issues or schizophrenia, it can exacerbate those issues and certainly exacerbate those issues and certainly exacerbate those issues and certainly if you don't have certainly if you don't have certainly if you don't have adequate support adequate support adequate support in the form of somebody that can guide in the form of somebody that can guide in the form of somebody that can guide you through the sessions as well as the you through the sessions as well as the you through the sessions as well as the pre-sessions, which are not pre-sessions, which are not pre-sessions, which are not done with psychedelics, as well as the done with psychedelics, as well as the done with psychedelics, as well as the so-called integration afterwards, it can so-called integration afterwards, it can so-called integration afterwards, it can be a really slippery slope. I know be a really slippery slope. I know be a really slippery slope. I know examples of people really suffering in examples of people really suffering in examples of people really suffering in the aftermath of psychedelic journeys. the aftermath of psychedelic journeys. the aftermath of psychedelic journeys. Now, there are a few interesting points Now, there are a few interesting points Now, there are a few interesting points as well, and it wouldn't be fair if I as well, and it wouldn't be fair if I as well, and it wouldn't be fair if I didn't say that didn't say that didn't say that several, if not many individuals, who several, if not many individuals, who several, if not many individuals, who have had so-called treatment-resistant had so-called treatment-resistant had so-called treatment-resistant depression, at least in these clinical depression, at least in these clinical depression, at least in these clinical trials, have reported feeling far better trials, have reported feeling far better trials, have reported feeling far better after psilo- after psilo- after psilo- therapy, but that psilocybin therapy was therapy, but that psilocybin therapy was therapy, but that psilocybin therapy was done with several pre-sessions, done with several pre-sessions, done with several pre-sessions, then the psychedelic sessions, then the psychedelic sessions, then the psychedelic sessions, then several after sessions, and it's not several after sessions, and it's not several after sessions, and it's not always the case that things turn out always the case that things turn out always the case that things turn out well. So, I think it's early days. well. So, I think it's early days. well. So, I think it's early days. Um what is interesting, and I think Um what is interesting, and I think Um what is interesting, and I think important, is to recognize that important, is to recognize that important, is to recognize that psilocybin this and the structure of psilocybin this and the structure of psilocybin this and the structure of psilocybin is very similar to serotonin psilocybin is very similar to serotonin psilocybin is very similar to serotonin itself. Very similar. Very similar. Very similar. But it activates particular receptors. A But it activates particular receptors. A But it activates particular receptors. A lot of people don't realize how similar lot of people don't realize how similar lot of people don't realize how similar to serotonin it is. And that microdosing to serotonin it is. And that microdosing to serotonin it is. And that microdosing psilocybin, I should say the data on psilocybin, I should say the data on psilocybin, I should say the data on microdosing psilocybin, something that's microdosing psilocybin, something that's microdosing psilocybin, something that's increasingly popular, is not increasingly popular, is not increasingly popular, is not particularly uh compelling. uh compelling. uh compelling. It's not clear what it does. It's not It's not clear what it does. It's not It's not clear what it does. It's not clear if it's of at any of any use. And I if it's of at any of any use. And I if it's of at any of any use. And I think the danger here is that we end up think the danger here is that we end up think the danger here is that we end up in a situation, as we did with, frankly, in a situation, as we did with, frankly, in a situation, as we did with, frankly, with cannabis. And by the way, I'm not with cannabis. And by the way, I'm not with cannabis. And by the way, I'm not somebody who demonizes cannabis. I think somebody who demonizes cannabis. I think somebody who demonizes cannabis. I think it has its uses for certain people, but it has its uses for certain people, but it has its uses for certain people, but very high THC concentration cannabis can very high THC concentration cannabis can very high THC concentration cannabis can be a problem, especially with people be a problem, especially with people be a problem, especially with people that have a predisposition to psychosis. that have a predisposition to psychosis. that have a predisposition to psychosis. And anyone that tells you that cannabis And anyone that tells you that cannabis And anyone that tells you that cannabis isn't addictive, just say, "Great. Like, isn't addictive, just say, "Great. Like, isn't addictive, just say, "Great. Like, don't smoke weed for a week. Let's see don't smoke weed for a week. Let's see don't smoke weed for a week. Let's see how you do." how you do." how you do." Yeah. And let's go on a plane trip Yeah. And let's go on a plane trip Yeah. And let's go on a plane trip together, right? And how are you together, right? And how are you together, right? And how are you sleeping? And you know, so I think um sleeping? And you know, so I think um sleeping? And you know, so I think um the chronic cannabis users are starting the chronic cannabis users are starting the chronic cannabis users are starting to take note of some of the issues it to take note of some of the issues it to take note of some of the issues it causes. But again, there are some causes. But again, there are some causes. But again, there are some clinical applications. Now, when it clinical applications. Now, when it clinical applications. Now, when it comes to the sort of the um comes to the sort of the um comes to the sort of the um high-speed train psychedelics, like DMT high-speed train psychedelics, like DMT high-speed train psychedelics, like DMT and so that's far fewer far less data and so that's far fewer far less data and so that's far fewer far less data available there. And then MDMA assisted available there. And then MDMA assisted available there. And then MDMA assisted psychotherapy for the treatment of PTSD, psychotherapy for the treatment of PTSD, psychotherapy for the treatment of PTSD, there the data I think are more robust. there the data I think are more robust. there the data I think are more robust. I think we're likely to see legalization I think we're likely to see legalization I think we're likely to see legalization or at least or at least or at least decriminalization in the next few years, decriminalization in the next few years, decriminalization in the next few years, but keep in mind that MDMA is but keep in mind that MDMA is but keep in mind that MDMA is methylenedioxy methamphetamine. methylenedioxy methamphetamine. methylenedioxy methamphetamine. So for people that like dopaminergic So for people that like dopaminergic So for people that like dopaminergic states, it's a particularly compelling states, it's a particularly compelling states, it's a particularly compelling state to be in so much so that they state to be in so much so that they state to be in so much so that they could overindulge in MDMA and then could overindulge in MDMA and then could overindulge in MDMA and then there's the issues of purity and I could there's the issues of purity and I could there's the issues of purity and I could do a 5-hour podcast on this right now. do a 5-hour podcast on this right now. do a 5-hour podcast on this right now. So I think the important point is So I think the important point is So I think the important point is approach with caution. Kids, absolutely approach with caution. Kids, absolutely approach with caution. Kids, absolutely not. Um, not. Um, not. Um, and I think it's a an exciting and I think it's a an exciting and I think it's a an exciting landscape, very exciting. And whereas a landscape, very exciting. And whereas a landscape, very exciting. And whereas a discussion like the one we just had discussion like the one we just had discussion like the one we just had um, would have gotten me fired a few would have gotten me fired a few would have gotten me fired a few years ago. I mean Stanford has big years ago. I mean Stanford has big years ago. I mean Stanford has big programs now, a lot of philanthropy, programs now, a lot of philanthropy, programs now, a lot of philanthropy, federal grants, and many laboratories federal grants, and many laboratories federal grants, and many laboratories focused on the study of psychedelics. focused on the study of psychedelics. focused on the study of psychedelics. Um, so you know, I would say stay tuned, Um, so you know, I would say stay tuned, Um, so you know, I would say stay tuned, um, but keep in mind that neuro- um, but keep in mind that neuro- um, but keep in mind that neuro- increasing neuromodulator levels very increasing neuromodulator levels very increasing neuromodulator levels very acutely, whether or not it's with a acutely, whether or not it's with a acutely, whether or not it's with a prescription drug or whether or not it's prescription drug or whether or not it's prescription drug or whether or not it's with psychedelics is really what lies at with psychedelics is really what lies at with psychedelics is really what lies at the heart of the recovery, the potential the heart of the recovery, the potential the heart of the recovery, the potential recovery I should say, or the negative recovery I should say, or the negative recovery I should say, or the negative effects that happen to occur in uh, effects that happen to occur in uh, effects that happen to occur in uh, anyone that embarks on the anyone that embarks on the anyone that embarks on the psychedelic journey. Do people who psychedelic journey. Do people who psychedelic journey. Do people who meditate need less sleep than people who meditate need less sleep than people who meditate need less sleep than people who don't? Ooh. That's interesting. Well, That's interesting. Well, That's interesting. Well, we know that from a study by Wendy we know that from a study by Wendy we know that from a study by Wendy Suzuki who I believe Suzuki who I believe Suzuki who I believe if NYU made the right choice, and I if NYU made the right choice, and I if NYU made the right choice, and I think they did, is now the Dean of Arts think they did, is now the Dean of Arts think they did, is now the Dean of Arts and Sciences at NYU. She ran a memory and Sciences at NYU. She ran a memory and Sciences at NYU. She ran a memory lab for a long time. She's She has data lab for a long time. She's She has data lab for a long time. She's She has data showing um, that even 10, I think it's showing um, that even 10, I think it's showing um, that even 10, I think it's 13, but as little as 10 minutes of 13, but as little as 10 minutes of 13, but as little as 10 minutes of meditation versus we sitting still, meditation versus we sitting still, meditation versus we sitting still, breathing, focusing on your breathing, focusing on your breathing, focusing on your breathing, directing one's attention to third eye directing one's attention to third eye directing one's attention to third eye center, etc. We don't have a third eye. center, etc. We don't have a third eye. center, etc. We don't have a third eye. The pineal is thought to be the third The pineal is thought to be the third The pineal is thought to be the third eye, but um, I don't know why people say eye, but um, I don't know why people say eye, but um, I don't know why people say it's a light-sensitive tissue deep in it's a light-sensitive tissue deep in it's a light-sensitive tissue deep in the brain, but maybe that's why they the brain, but maybe that's why they the brain, but maybe that's why they call it the third eye. But in any case, call it the third eye. But in any case, call it the third eye. But in any case, that type of practice has been shown to that type of practice has been shown to that type of practice has been shown to increase memory, focus, aka learning. increase memory, focus, aka learning. increase memory, focus, aka learning. But there's some interesting footnotes But there's some interesting footnotes But there's some interesting footnotes in those papers in those papers in those papers which point to the fact that when people which point to the fact that when people which point to the fact that when people meditate too close to bedtime, meditate too close to bedtime, meditate too close to bedtime, oftentimes they have trouble sleeping oftentimes they have trouble sleeping oftentimes they have trouble sleeping because basically meditation is a because basically meditation is a because basically meditation is a focusing exercise. focusing exercise. focusing exercise. It's a it's a perceptual exercise. I It's a it's a perceptual exercise. I It's a it's a perceptual exercise. I don't think meditation is anything don't think meditation is anything don't think meditation is anything mystical. It's a it's a self-directed mystical. It's a it's a self-directed mystical. It's a it's a self-directed shift in your perception. To what? To shift in your perception. To what? To shift in your perception. To what? To your interoception, to your internal your interoception, to your internal your interoception, to your internal state as opposed to anything beyond the state as opposed to anything beyond the state as opposed to anything beyond the confines of your skin. There's nothing confines of your skin. There's nothing confines of your skin. There's nothing mystical about that. And then in that mystical about that. And then in that mystical about that. And then in that state, your brain starts to state, your brain starts to state, your brain starts to generate patterns of activity that are generate patterns of activity that are generate patterns of activity that are distinct from when you're sharing your distinct from when you're sharing your distinct from when you're sharing your attention between what's going on attention between what's going on attention between what's going on internally and what's going out what's internally and what's going out what's internally and what's going out what's happening out in the world, right? I happening out in the world, right? I happening out in the world, right? I think we need to demystify what people think we need to demystify what people think we need to demystify what people have cloaked as mystical. And when I say have cloaked as mystical. And when I say have cloaked as mystical. And when I say cloaked, I don't think that the people cloaked, I don't think that the people cloaked, I don't think that the people that meditate for thousands of years that meditate for thousands of years that meditate for thousands of years thought that there was anything thought that there was anything thought that there was anything uh mystical about it, but sometimes what we mystical about it, but sometimes what we mystical about it, but sometimes what we experience there can feel mystical. experience there can feel mystical. experience there can feel mystical. So if you have trouble sleeping, I So if you have trouble sleeping, I So if you have trouble sleeping, I recommend doing some sort of deep some recommend doing some sort of deep some recommend doing some sort of deep some sort of non-sleep deep rest practice, sort of non-sleep deep rest practice, sort of non-sleep deep rest practice, like NSDR, aka yoga nidra. Although like NSDR, aka yoga nidra. Although like NSDR, aka yoga nidra. Although those are different. NSDR generally those are different. NSDR generally those are different. NSDR generally lacks the uh the intention piece. lacks the uh the intention piece. lacks the uh the intention piece. Um and Um and Um and the ones that I put into the world, the ones that I put into the world, the ones that I put into the world, we've stripped away the intentions and we've stripped away the intentions and we've stripped away the intentions and we've stripped away any kind of language we've stripped away any kind of language we've stripped away any kind of language that would make you think that would make you think that would make you think that there was uh some sort of there was uh some sort of there was uh some sort of um let's just say like cultural aspect to let's just say like cultural aspect to let's just say like cultural aspect to it, which again is un is admittedly a it, which again is un is admittedly a it, which again is un is admittedly a bit unfair to the origin practice of bit unfair to the origin practice of bit unfair to the origin practice of yoga nidra, but the problem again is yoga nidra, but the problem again is yoga nidra, but the problem again is that in yoga nidra, you're going to be that in yoga nidra, you're going to be that in yoga nidra, you're going to be doing intentions and hearing language doing intentions and hearing language doing intentions and hearing language that for some people, not all, might that for some people, not all, might that for some people, not all, might divorce you from the wish to divorce you from the wish to divorce you from the wish to do it. In any case, do it. In any case, do it. In any case, um non-sleep deep rest done at any time um non-sleep deep rest done at any time um non-sleep deep rest done at any time of day, but especially if you fall of day, but especially if you fall of day, but especially if you fall asleep in the middle of the night, is asleep in the middle of the night, is asleep in the middle of the night, is going to be useful for helping you fall going to be useful for helping you fall going to be useful for helping you fall back asleep. Whereas meditation, again, back asleep. Whereas meditation, again, back asleep. Whereas meditation, again, is going to enhance your level of focus. is going to enhance your level of focus. is going to enhance your level of focus. So, I don't think it's So, I don't think it's So, I don't think it's a good practice if you're if you have a good practice if you're if you have a good practice if you're if you have trouble sleeping. Now, to finally answer trouble sleeping. Now, to finally answer trouble sleeping. Now, to finally answer your question, if you meditate, can you your question, if you meditate, can you your question, if you meditate, can you afford to sleep less? afford to sleep less? afford to sleep less? My friend Matt Walker would say no. My friend Matt Walker would say no. My friend Matt Walker would say no. However, many of us can't sleep as much However, many of us can't sleep as much However, many of us can't sleep as much as we want to, and many of us are not as we want to, and many of us are not as we want to, and many of us are not like Matt where we can wake up without like Matt where we can wake up without like Matt where we can wake up without an alarm clock. Like, I'll just keep an alarm clock. Like, I'll just keep an alarm clock. Like, I'll just keep sleeping and sleeping. sleeping and sleeping. sleeping and sleeping. Unless I went to bed at like 8:00. This Unless I went to bed at like 8:00. This Unless I went to bed at like 8:00. This is actually interesting and there's an is actually interesting and there's an is actually interesting and there's an asymmetry to your sleep needs. If you go asymmetry to your sleep needs. If you go asymmetry to your sleep needs. If you go to bed, remember that old adage, you to bed, remember that old adage, you to bed, remember that old adage, you know, every hour before midnight is know, every hour before midnight is know, every hour before midnight is worth two after? Well, it turns out that worth two after? Well, it turns out that worth two after? Well, it turns out that for people that are meant to be early for people that are meant to be early for people that are meant to be early risers, going to bed at 8:00, you'll risers, going to bed at 8:00, you'll risers, going to bed at 8:00, you'll wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 feeling great. wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 feeling great. wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 feeling great. You go to bed at 11:00, you feel groggy You go to bed at 11:00, you feel groggy You go to bed at 11:00, you feel groggy and there were good reasons to explain and there were good reasons to explain and there were good reasons to explain that. But, Matt that. But, Matt that. But, Matt would say that you need your sleep, would say that you need your sleep, would say that you need your sleep, period. I'm more of the camp, based on period. I'm more of the camp, based on period. I'm more of the camp, based on my read of the data, and yes, we are my read of the data, and yes, we are my read of the data, and yes, we are allowed to disagree and still be allowed to disagree and still be allowed to disagree and still be friends. It's allowed. It's allowed. It's allowed. That In fact, Matt's going to do a That In fact, Matt's going to do a That In fact, Matt's going to do a series on sleep with our podcast, even series on sleep with our podcast, even series on sleep with our podcast, even though he has a terrific podcast of his though he has a terrific podcast of his though he has a terrific podcast of his own, uh where we will maybe debate a little uh where we will maybe debate a little uh where we will maybe debate a little bit of this, that bit of this, that bit of this, that there are ways that you can at least there are ways that you can at least there are ways that you can at least replace the feeling of wakefulness that replace the feeling of wakefulness that replace the feeling of wakefulness that you would have lost if you don't sleep you would have lost if you don't sleep you would have lost if you don't sleep enough. And for me, really, that's why enough. And for me, really, that's why enough. And for me, really, that's why NSDR became such a an attractive tool NSDR became such a an attractive tool NSDR became such a an attractive tool to do for 10 or 30 minutes each morning to do for 10 or 30 minutes each morning to do for 10 or 30 minutes each morning if I didn't sleep enough the night if I didn't sleep enough the night if I didn't sleep enough the night before. Um I first learned about yoga before. Um I first learned about yoga before. Um I first learned about yoga nidra actually at a diction recovery nidra actually at a diction recovery nidra actually at a diction recovery center, trauma recovery center in center, trauma recovery center in center, trauma recovery center in Florida in 2017. I have a friend, a Florida in 2017. I have a friend, a Florida in 2017. I have a friend, a super talented trauma therapist who is super talented trauma therapist who is super talented trauma therapist who is also treats addiction, that um I've sent also treats addiction, that um I've sent also treats addiction, that um I've sent many, many people to, and he has this many, many people to, and he has this many, many people to, and he has this kind of seemingly, you know, like wizard kind of seemingly, you know, like wizard kind of seemingly, you know, like wizard ability to um get people who have been ability to um get people who have been ability to um get people who have been addicts to not be addicts. And um one of addicts to not be addicts. And um one of addicts to not be addicts. And um one of the tools he uses is the tools he uses is the tools he uses is uh yoga nidra every morning for 30 uh yoga nidra every morning for 30 uh yoga nidra every morning for 30 minutes and eventually an hour, which minutes and eventually an hour, which minutes and eventually an hour, which seems like a lot, but then he also has seems like a lot, but then he also has seems like a lot, but then he also has these people wake up very early, maybe these people wake up very early, maybe these people wake up very early, maybe an hour before they would normally wake an hour before they would normally wake an hour before they would normally wake up and go into that liminal state up and go into that liminal state up and go into that liminal state between sleep and wakefulness. Now, my between sleep and wakefulness. Now, my between sleep and wakefulness. Now, my experience is that 10 to 20 minutes of experience is that 10 to 20 minutes of experience is that 10 to 20 minutes of NSDR yoga nidra is sufficient to offset NSDR yoga nidra is sufficient to offset NSDR yoga nidra is sufficient to offset uh some sleep loss and allow at least me to some sleep loss and allow at least me to some sleep loss and allow at least me to function and many people report the function and many people report the function and many people report the same. We have a study going with the same. We have a study going with the same. We have a study going with the sleep laboratory at Stanford to explore sleep laboratory at Stanford to explore sleep laboratory at Stanford to explore this in more depth and what I can tell this in more depth and what I can tell this in more depth and what I can tell you cuz I'm involved in some of this you cuz I'm involved in some of this you cuz I'm involved in some of this work is that there are several military work is that there are several military work is that there are several military units because they have no opportunity units because they have no opportunity units because they have no opportunity to get sleep because they're working to get sleep because they're working to get sleep because they're working that have to rely on tools like this in that have to rely on tools like this in that have to rely on tools like this in order to be able to function order to be able to function order to be able to function at their highest level. at their highest level. at their highest level. And I'm sure they will tell you as I And I'm sure they will tell you as I And I'm sure they will tell you as I will that they'd prefer to get 8 to 10 will that they'd prefer to get 8 to 10 will that they'd prefer to get 8 to 10 hours of sleep, but guess what? They hours of sleep, but guess what? They hours of sleep, but guess what? They can't. And so I think that's an can't. And so I think that's an can't. And so I think that's an important takeaway is that we don't get important takeaway is that we don't get important takeaway is that we don't get to pick how much we sleep. Unless you're to pick how much we sleep. Unless you're to pick how much we sleep. Unless you're going to be completely neurotic about going to be completely neurotic about going to be completely neurotic about your sleep hygiene, which makes you kind your sleep hygiene, which makes you kind your sleep hygiene, which makes you kind of a less interesting person in life is of a less interesting person in life is of a less interesting person in life is what I'm told. what I'm told. what I'm told. You know, going to bed at 8:00 is great You know, going to bed at 8:00 is great You know, going to bed at 8:00 is great like some or most of the time, but you like some or most of the time, but you like some or most of the time, but you got to stay up every once in a while. I got to stay up every once in a while. I got to stay up every once in a while. I mean, after they released Chimp Empire mean, after they released Chimp Empire mean, after they released Chimp Empire on Netflix, I discovered that NSDR is a on Netflix, I discovered that NSDR is a on Netflix, I discovered that NSDR is a very valuable tool because and by the very valuable tool because and by the very valuable tool because and by the way, Chimp Empire and Succession way, Chimp Empire and Succession way, Chimp Empire and Succession have a lot of parallels. have a lot of parallels. have a lot of parallels. And if you watch one I sort of I And if you watch one I sort of I And if you watch one I sort of I interleave Chimp Empire Succession, interleave Chimp Empire Succession, interleave Chimp Empire Succession, Chimp Empire Succession you start to Chimp Empire Succession you start to Chimp Empire Succession you start to realize like woah, like we're realize like woah, like we're realize like woah, like we're pretty similar. pretty similar. pretty similar. And then you look at the world And then you look at the world And then you look at the world differently, I promise. differently, I promise. differently, I promise. Your podcast has positively changed the Your podcast has positively changed the Your podcast has positively changed the lives of so many people including me. lives of so many people including me. lives of so many people including me. How has it changed your life? How has it changed your life? How has it changed your life? Uh okay. Um Uh okay. Um Uh okay. Um wasn't expecting that one. Thank you, wasn't expecting that one. Thank you, wasn't expecting that one. Thank you, Samantha. Well, first of all, I mean Well, first of all, I mean Well, first of all, I mean as this little 11-year-old told me. I as this little 11-year-old told me. I as this little 11-year-old told me. I mean, this is this is essentially mean, this is this is essentially mean, this is this is essentially what I've done my whole life. what I've done my whole life. what I've done my whole life. Um I'm a fairly private person, believe Um I'm a fairly private person, believe Um I'm a fairly private person, believe it or not I'm pretty introverted. Uh I it or not I'm pretty introverted. Uh I it or not I'm pretty introverted. Uh I spend a lot of time alone. Um spend a lot of time alone. Um spend a lot of time alone. Um and I think that's required for me to and I think that's required for me to and I think that's required for me to you know I basically have four modes. you know I basically have four modes. you know I basically have four modes. Four modes. One, I'm either readying Four modes. One, I'm either readying Four modes. One, I'm either readying myself through sleep myself through sleep myself through sleep um and NSDR um and NSDR um and NSDR to do one of the other three modes. to do one of the other three modes. to do one of the other three modes. Maybe there's a fifth mode. Um or I'm in Maybe there's a fifth mode. Um or I'm in Maybe there's a fifth mode. Um or I'm in one of these other three modes, which one of these other three modes, which one of these other three modes, which are is I'm either foraging for are is I'm either foraging for are is I'm either foraging for information, organizing that information, organizing that information, organizing that information, or dispersing that information, or dispersing that information, or dispersing that information. Or getting ready to do it all over Or getting ready to do it all over Or getting ready to do it all over again. Um and then there's this relaxation Um and then there's this relaxation Um and then there's this relaxation vacation thing that they keep telling me vacation thing that they keep telling me vacation thing that they keep telling me about. But then I went to Italy and then about. But then I went to Italy and then about. But then I went to Italy and then like Rick and I like just like hung out like Rick and I like just like hung out like Rick and I like just like hung out there. And um there. And um there. And um and it didn't feel like work. I also and it didn't feel like work. I also and it didn't feel like work. I also discovered some really great podcasts. I discovered some really great podcasts. I discovered some really great podcasts. I don't know don't know don't know I think one of the coolest podcasts out I think one of the coolest podcasts out I think one of the coolest podcasts out there, if you like rock and roll, which there, if you like rock and roll, which there, if you like rock and roll, which I love, is uh History of 500 Songs but I love, is uh History of 500 Songs but I love, is uh History of 500 Songs but Andrew Hickey's podcast on rock and Andrew Hickey's podcast on rock and Andrew Hickey's podcast on rock and roll. I like the nerdy podcast. It's roll. I like the nerdy podcast. It's roll. I like the nerdy podcast. It's like a graduate or an education in rock like a graduate or an education in rock like a graduate or an education in rock and roll. It's so cool. Um and roll. It's so cool. Um and roll. It's so cool. Um and you'll learn a lot about music and you'll learn a lot about music and you'll learn a lot about music and history and the mobs involved and all history and the mobs involved and all history and the mobs involved and all that stuff. And from what I was told that stuff. And from what I was told that stuff. And from what I was told like Al Capone used to sit there, right? like Al Capone used to sit there, right? like Al Capone used to sit there, right? His exit was there. His exit was there. His exit was there. You know, so it's weird, right? And then You know, so it's weird, right? And then You know, so it's weird, right? And then he uh and then and he died of syphilis he uh and then and he died of syphilis he uh and then and he died of syphilis and like so I don't know how I feel and like so I don't know how I feel and like so I don't know how I feel about all that. Um but they told me about all that. Um but they told me about all that. Um but they told me that. Um so I think the podcast has been wonderful I think the podcast has been wonderful I think the podcast has been wonderful um as an opportunity to share things um as an opportunity to share things um as an opportunity to share things that I love. Um that I love. Um that I love. Um if I had my way it would be more like if I had my way it would be more like if I had my way it would be more like this, although more of a dialogue, this, although more of a dialogue, this, although more of a dialogue, frankly. Uh it's changed um my frankly. Uh it's changed um my frankly. Uh it's changed um my understanding of understanding of understanding of kind of like what the world is kind of like what the world is kind of like what the world is like. I you know I certainly get um like. I you know I certainly get um like. I you know I certainly get um critique and that's good. Um but again I critique and that's good. Um but again I critique and that's good. Um but again I was raised by iconoclasts and was raised by iconoclasts and was raised by iconoclasts and particularly my post doc advisor Ben particularly my post doc advisor Ben particularly my post doc advisor Ben Barres, who unfortunately well as I Barres, who unfortunately well as I Barres, who unfortunately well as I mentioned is dead cuz I worked for him. mentioned is dead cuz I worked for him. mentioned is dead cuz I worked for him. Um and uh and uh and uh but you know, he was he really but you know, he was he really but you know, he was he really encouraged all of us in his lab and encouraged all of us in his lab and encouraged all of us in his lab and uh and often we were very close friends. I and often we were very close friends. I and often we were very close friends. I spent the last year of his life spent the last year of his life spent the last year of his life recording interview with him. There's recording interview with him. There's recording interview with him. There's actually a documentary coming out about actually a documentary coming out about actually a documentary coming out about Ben. Um Ben. Um Ben. Um and then I'm going to release the audio and then I'm going to release the audio and then I'm going to release the audio uh interviews with Ben, which he uh interviews with Ben, which he uh interviews with Ben, which he approved, by the way, and you'll get to approved, by the way, and you'll get to approved, by the way, and you'll get to realize that the history of what you see realize that the history of what you see realize that the history of what you see is often not what the dead person really is often not what the dead person really is often not what the dead person really did or said. It's going to be fun. So, I did or said. It's going to be fun. So, I did or said. It's going to be fun. So, I can't wait till they release this can't wait till they release this can't wait till they release this documentary and then Ben gets to have documentary and then Ben gets to have documentary and then Ben gets to have his voice his voice his voice uh infuse it. And it'll be a cool uh infuse it. And it'll be a cool uh infuse it. And it'll be a cool documentary, but as uh some of you know documentary, but as uh some of you know documentary, but as uh some of you know that like what appears to be and what that like what appears to be and what that like what appears to be and what was in the historical narrative is was in the historical narrative is was in the historical narrative is not necessarily what it what really not necessarily what it what really not necessarily what it what really happened. But, that's just life. So, I happened. But, that's just life. So, I happened. But, that's just life. So, I suppose the short answer is that uh you suppose the short answer is that uh you suppose the short answer is that uh you know, I feel very honored with the know, I feel very honored with the know, I feel very honored with the opportunity, very honored. Um opportunity, very honored. Um opportunity, very honored. Um and you know, it's a challenge at times. I you know, it's a challenge at times. I you know, it's a challenge at times. I suppose that the major challenges are suppose that the major challenges are suppose that the major challenges are when things are taken out of context, when things are taken out of context, when things are taken out of context, like little clips and things of like little clips and things of like little clips and things of that sort. Being misunderstood doesn't that sort. Being misunderstood doesn't that sort. Being misunderstood doesn't feel good. But, look, at the end of the feel good. But, look, at the end of the feel good. But, look, at the end of the day I day I day I feel like uh the luckiest person in the feel like uh the luckiest person in the feel like uh the luckiest person in the world um because I get to spend my time world um because I get to spend my time world um because I get to spend my time learning. So, it's either, you know, I'm learning. So, it's either, you know, I'm learning. So, it's either, you know, I'm forging, I'm organizing, or I'm forging, I'm organizing, or I'm forging, I'm organizing, or I'm dispersing information that I also want dispersing information that I also want dispersing information that I also want and that I find in incredibly and that I find in incredibly and that I find in incredibly um useful if or if not that then um useful if or if not that then um useful if or if not that then certainly informative and at times certainly informative and at times certainly informative and at times enchanting as well. enchanting as well. enchanting as well. So, I try and focus on the positive and So, I try and focus on the positive and So, I try and focus on the positive and I have a number of practices that help I have a number of practices that help I have a number of practices that help me uh do that. me uh do that. me uh do that. Um and I am somebody who engages on Um and I am somebody who engages on Um and I am somebody who engages on social media. I'm not a post and ghost social media. I'm not a post and ghost social media. I'm not a post and ghost kind of person. I want to kind of person. I want to kind of person. I want to understand. I think that, you know, what understand. I think that, you know, what understand. I think that, you know, what cuttlefish are super interesting, but cuttlefish are super interesting, but cuttlefish are super interesting, but human beings are super interesting, too. human beings are super interesting, too. human beings are super interesting, too. And I have a strong drive for And I have a strong drive for And I have a strong drive for mastery, but also um I do have a mastery, but also um I do have a mastery, but also um I do have a strong sense of justice um and that strong sense of justice um and that strong sense of justice um and that can be problematic at times. I define can be problematic at times. I define can be problematic at times. I define justice as feeling like there's justice as feeling like there's justice as feeling like there's something for something for something for us to do about something. Like seeing us to do about something. Like seeing us to do about something. Like seeing something that sets us or that excites something that sets us or that excites something that sets us or that excites us is great, but then if you have a us is great, but then if you have a us is great, but then if you have a strong sense of justice, you feel like strong sense of justice, you feel like strong sense of justice, you feel like there's something you need to do about there's something you need to do about there's something you need to do about it. And not everybody feels that. And it. And not everybody feels that. And it. And not everybody feels that. And then of course, a desire to understand. then of course, a desire to understand. then of course, a desire to understand. And I think uh for reasons very personal And I think uh for reasons very personal And I think uh for reasons very personal to me that um relate mostly to just to me that um relate mostly to just to me that um relate mostly to just having a kind of incredible array of having a kind of incredible array of having a kind of incredible array of experiences in life, many of which were experiences in life, many of which were experiences in life, many of which were um like shocking, disturbing, exciting, um like shocking, disturbing, exciting, um like shocking, disturbing, exciting, enchanting that I want to understand. enchanting that I want to understand. enchanting that I want to understand. And so, you know, And so, you know, And so, you know, it's changed things, but you know, it's changed things, but you know, it's changed things, but you know, it's like I don't know, I got one truck, one I don't know, I got one truck, one I don't know, I got one truck, one watch. I you know, it's not to say that I don't I you know, it's not to say that I don't I you know, it's not to say that I don't care about having things. I There are a care about having things. I There are a care about having things. I There are a few things I really love, but like few things I really love, but like few things I really love, but like mostly like I'm just thinking about the mostly like I'm just thinking about the mostly like I'm just thinking about the podcast we got to record on Monday, podcast we got to record on Monday, podcast we got to record on Monday, which is about willpower and tenacity. which is about willpower and tenacity. which is about willpower and tenacity. And if I don't stop myself, I'll give it And if I don't stop myself, I'll give it And if I don't stop myself, I'll give it right now. So. right now. So. right now. So. What do you feel is the next big thing What do you feel is the next big thing What do you feel is the next big thing to come to the forefront in the health to come to the forefront in the health to come to the forefront in the health space? Thanks for this question. space? Thanks for this question. space? Thanks for this question. Um One uh is non-protein amino acids. I think I uh is non-protein amino acids. I think I uh is non-protein amino acids. I think I love these debates online because I love these debates online because I love these debates online because I know that there's something there. It's know that there's something there. It's know that there's something there. It's so cool cuz I grew up in seeing these so cool cuz I grew up in seeing these so cool cuz I grew up in seeing these debates, and you know there's something debates, and you know there's something debates, and you know there's something interesting there because people are interesting there because people are interesting there because people are debating about it. debating about it. debating about it. But the debate isn't what's interesting. But the debate isn't what's interesting. But the debate isn't what's interesting. It's almost always the thing that people It's almost always the thing that people It's almost always the thing that people aren't talking about that's aren't talking about that's aren't talking about that's sure to surface at some point. And you sure to surface at some point. And you sure to surface at some point. And you know, right now there's this obsession know, right now there's this obsession know, right now there's this obsession with like seed oils. It's like seed oil, with like seed oils. It's like seed oil, with like seed oils. It's like seed oil, seed oils. And I can't demonize seed oils. And I can't demonize seed oils. And I can't demonize seed oils. All the data say that if you oils. All the data say that if you oils. All the data say that if you separate out their caloric load, there's separate out their caloric load, there's separate out their caloric load, there's nothing inherently bad about seed oils, nothing inherently bad about seed oils, nothing inherently bad about seed oils, and etc. I don't know. It's still an and etc. I don't know. It's still an and etc. I don't know. It's still an emerging literature, but there was a um emerging literature, but there was a um emerging literature, but there was a um a scientist at Stanford, a scientist at Stanford, a scientist at Stanford, Ed Rubenstein, Ed Rubenstein, Ed Rubenstein, who uh passed away of at a ripe old age, who uh passed away of at a ripe old age, who uh passed away of at a ripe old age, a brilliant scientist who um talked a brilliant scientist who um talked a brilliant scientist who um talked about and I had a lot of discussions about and I had a lot of discussions about and I had a lot of discussions with when I was a postdoc about with when I was a postdoc about with when I was a postdoc about non-protein amino acids. non-protein amino acids. non-protein amino acids. Turns out his son is a neuroscientist at Turns out his son is a neuroscientist at Turns out his son is a neuroscientist at UCSF. His other son's a physician at UCSF. His other son's a physician at UCSF. His other son's a physician at UCSF. So, it's another one of these So, it's another one of these So, it's another one of these low-performing families. low-performing families. low-performing families. Um, and all wonderful people. and all wonderful people. and all wonderful people. Um, and Um, and Um, and you know, Ed had data that, you know, you know, Ed had data that, you know, you know, Ed had data that, you know, unlike a lot of animals like birds, unlike a lot of animals like birds, unlike a lot of animals like birds, um, there are certain amino acids which um, there are certain amino acids which um, there are certain amino acids which are non-protein amino acids that exist are non-protein amino acids that exist are non-protein amino acids that exist in fairly high density in seeds and in fairly high density in seeds and in fairly high density in seeds and nuts, which is not to say that seeds and nuts, which is not to say that seeds and nuts, which is not to say that seeds and nuts are bad, right? I had almonds this nuts are bad, right? I had almonds this nuts are bad, right? I had almonds this evening. Okay, so please. Um, but evening. Okay, so please. Um, but evening. Okay, so please. Um, but non-protein amino acids are similar non-protein amino acids are similar non-protein amino acids are similar enough to enough to enough to mammalian protein amino acids that if they are consumed in amino acids that if they are consumed in amino acids that if they are consumed in abundance and perhaps especially in liquid form, and perhaps especially in liquid form, and perhaps especially in liquid form, that they may, again, may, cuz this is that they may, again, may, cuz this is that they may, again, may, cuz this is about the future, this isn't about what about the future, this isn't about what about the future, this isn't about what we know, this is about where I think we know, this is about where I think we know, this is about where I think there's an interest, a growing interest, there's an interest, a growing interest, there's an interest, a growing interest, they may be able to incorporate into they may be able to incorporate into they may be able to incorporate into certain proteins of our tissues of our certain proteins of our tissues of our certain proteins of our tissues of our body that potentially Ed thought could body that potentially Ed thought could body that potentially Ed thought could lead to misfolding of those proteins and lead to misfolding of those proteins and lead to misfolding of those proteins and may explain certain forms of may explain certain forms of may explain certain forms of neurodegeneration and other neurodegeneration and other neurodegeneration and other neurocognitive uh challenges. So, I neurocognitive uh challenges. So, I neurocognitive uh challenges. So, I think non-protein amino acids are going think non-protein amino acids are going think non-protein amino acids are going to be an important discussion. Now, to be an important discussion. Now, to be an important discussion. Now, there are lots of non-protein amino there are lots of non-protein amino there are lots of non-protein amino acids that are not um that don't come acids that are not um that don't come acids that are not um that don't come from foods, but I think the discussion from foods, but I think the discussion from foods, but I think the discussion around non-protein amino acids from around non-protein amino acids from around non-protein amino acids from foods is going to be very interesting. foods is going to be very interesting. foods is going to be very interesting. Uh, so that's one area. Uh, so that's one area. Uh, so that's one area. The other area, and perhaps you The other area, and perhaps you The other area, and perhaps you picked up on this a little bit tonight, picked up on this a little bit tonight, picked up on this a little bit tonight, is that I like the nuts and boltsy stuff is that I like the nuts and boltsy stuff is that I like the nuts and boltsy stuff around stress, neuroplasticity, but the around stress, neuroplasticity, but the around stress, neuroplasticity, but the high-level stuff. high-level stuff. high-level stuff. You know, I think, um, You know, I think, um, You know, I think, um, you know, the relationship between uh you know, the relationship between uh you know, the relationship between uh you know, structured thought, abstract you know, structured thought, abstract you know, structured thought, abstract thought. I I'm not interested in the thought. I I'm not interested in the thought. I I'm not interested in the free will discussion. I just feel like free will discussion. I just feel like free will discussion. I just feel like that's a career ender. that's a career ender. that's a career ender. Um, I'm friends with Robert Sapolsky and Um, I'm friends with Robert Sapolsky and Um, I'm friends with Robert Sapolsky and he's got a great book coming out about he's got a great book coming out about he's got a great book coming out about this, um, called Determined, so he this, um, called Determined, so he this, um, called Determined, so he obviously doesn't believe in free will, obviously doesn't believe in free will, obviously doesn't believe in free will, but he's far smarter than I ever could but he's far smarter than I ever could but he's far smarter than I ever could be. And, um, it just feels like that be. And, um, it just feels like that be. And, um, it just feels like that don't know that there's an end point don't know that there's an end point don't know that there's an end point with that one. Um, but if anyone could with that one. Um, but if anyone could with that one. Um, but if anyone could find it, it would be it would be Robert. find it, it would be it would be Robert. find it, it would be it would be Robert. Um, he's oh so smart. Uh, but I think Um, he's oh so smart. Uh, but I think Um, he's oh so smart. Uh, but I think that the higher level stuff, the higher level stuff, the higher level stuff, um, creativity, um, creativity, um, creativity, abstract reasoning and thought, defining abstract reasoning and thought, defining abstract reasoning and thought, defining and better understanding the and better understanding the and better understanding the different states that we can go into in different states that we can go into in different states that we can go into in waking. And I and I confess, um, waking. And I and I confess, um, waking. And I and I confess, um, without a hint of sheepishness about without a hint of sheepishness about without a hint of sheepishness about it that I also think the notion of it that I also think the notion of it that I also think the notion of spirituality and the belief in and of spirituality and the belief in and of spirituality and the belief in and things that are beyond our things that are beyond our things that are beyond our current and conscious understanding is current and conscious understanding is current and conscious understanding is super interesting. Um, I think that you super interesting. Um, I think that you super interesting. Um, I think that you know, as a species we are know, as a species we are know, as a species we are uh we've been uh we've been uh we've been challenged and conflicted from go. At challenged and conflicted from go. At challenged and conflicted from go. At least that's what the historical least that's what the historical least that's what the historical scripture tells us. Um, and that it's scripture tells us. Um, and that it's scripture tells us. Um, and that it's sort of inherent to our experience that sort of inherent to our experience that sort of inherent to our experience that um life is challenging and perplexing um life is challenging and perplexing um life is challenging and perplexing and also wonderful. And so I think a and also wonderful. And so I think a and also wonderful. And so I think a better understanding of how to better understanding of how to better understanding of how to navigate all that. I mean this like the navigate all that. I mean this like the navigate all that. I mean this like the stuff in our skulls, except for the stuff in our skulls, except for the stuff in our skulls, except for the eyes, which by the way are two pieces of eyes, which by the way are two pieces of eyes, which by the way are two pieces of brain that are not in your skull, the brain that are not in your skull, the brain that are not in your skull, the retinas, have to point that out. Um, retinas, have to point that out. Um, retinas, have to point that out. Um, you know, it's tricky and we're you know, it's tricky and we're you know, it's tricky and we're trying to use that very tissue to trying to use that very tissue to trying to use that very tissue to understand it. And so I I'm intrigued by understand it. And so I I'm intrigued by understand it. And so I I'm intrigued by the possibility that the possibility that the possibility that there's certain aspects of self that um there's certain aspects of self that um there's certain aspects of self that um maybe are not maybe are not maybe are not um intended to be explored because they are intended to be explored because they are intended to be explored because they are not really of us, right? Brains not really of us, right? Brains not really of us, right? Brains interacting with one another is an interacting with one another is an interacting with one another is an interesting area certainly for interesting area certainly for interesting area certainly for scientific exploration, but I'm scientific exploration, but I'm scientific exploration, but I'm fascinated by and excited about fascinated by and excited about fascinated by and excited about the possibility that, you know, at some the possibility that, you know, at some the possibility that, you know, at some point our species will both understand point our species will both understand point our species will both understand the mechanics of our the mechanics of our the mechanics of our emotions, mechanics of our thought emotions, mechanics of our thought emotions, mechanics of our thought process, creativity, and so on, but that process, creativity, and so on, but that process, creativity, and so on, but that we It also allow room for the for the we It also allow room for the for the we It also allow room for the for the stuff that we can't explain with science stuff that we can't explain with science stuff that we can't explain with science and to allow room for that in our in our and to allow room for that in our in our and to allow room for that in our in our life experience because I also believe life experience because I also believe life experience because I also believe that can be powerful. And while that can be powerful. And while that can be powerful. And while understanding things in great detail and understanding things in great detail and understanding things in great detail and putting mechanism and utility around putting mechanism and utility around putting mechanism and utility around that and applying that is wonderful. that and applying that is wonderful. that and applying that is wonderful. It's the It's the It's the it's the stuff of my life it's the stuff of my life it's the stuff of my life um which is obvious. which is obvious. which is obvious. I also think that there's great value in I also think that there's great value in I also think that there's great value in not trying to control and understand not trying to control and understand not trying to control and understand everything and enjoying the everything and enjoying the everything and enjoying the mystery of things that are that are mystery of things that are that are mystery of things that are that are clearly greater than us. How do you balance having fun with How do you balance having fun with How do you balance having fun with having such a rich knowledge and passion having such a rich knowledge and passion having such a rich knowledge and passion in neuroscience and optimization? Fun. in neuroscience and optimization? Fun. in neuroscience and optimization? Fun. Um People ask me like what do you do for People ask me like what do you do for People ask me like what do you do for fun? I think people think I do all the fun? I think people think I do all the fun? I think people think I do all the protocols. It's like protocols. It's like protocols. It's like Sure, I get my sunlight, I drink my Sure, I get my sunlight, I drink my Sure, I get my sunlight, I drink my water, I do that I do them but um uh fun uh fun uh fun um I like learning. Uh I like learning. Uh I like learning. Uh I like learning. I like I do enjoy I like learning. I like I do enjoy I like learning. I like I do enjoy physical movement. I like learning. You physical movement. I like learning. You physical movement. I like learning. You know, for me that know, for me that know, for me that Okay, so like for me it's the little Okay, so like for me it's the little Okay, so like for me it's the little things. I don't know. Maybe I'm weird. things. I don't know. Maybe I'm weird. things. I don't know. Maybe I'm weird. Um certainly been told that. Um like the Um certainly been told that. Um like the Um certainly been told that. Um like the other day there's a frog in my swimming other day there's a frog in my swimming other day there's a frog in my swimming pool and he's just like sitting there pool and he's just like sitting there pool and he's just like sitting there like and I was just like spend some time and I was just like spend some time and I was just like spend some time looking at him back and forth and looking at him back and forth and looking at him back and forth and then I had all sorts of ideas about like then I had all sorts of ideas about like then I had all sorts of ideas about like what's he doing and what's he like what's he doing and what's he like what's he doing and what's he thinking and then I thinking and then I thinking and then I was thinking how Oliver Sacks used to was thinking how Oliver Sacks used to was thinking how Oliver Sacks used to spend time imagining experience spend time imagining experience spend time imagining experience experiencing life as a bat through only experiencing life as a bat through only experiencing life as a bat through only echolocation. He talked about this. echolocation. He talked about this. echolocation. He talked about this. And I thought and why would he do that, And I thought and why would he do that, And I thought and why would he do that, right? Is that And that's kind of cute. right? Is that And that's kind of cute. right? Is that And that's kind of cute. He's like delightful old man, right? He He's like delightful old man, right? He He's like delightful old man, right? He had a 600-lb free weight squat won the had a 600-lb free weight squat won the had a 600-lb free weight squat won the state California free squatting state California free squatting state California free squatting championship and like also like championship and like also like championship and like also like pretending he was a bat. He's a weird pretending he was a bat. He's a weird pretending he was a bat. He's a weird dude. Did methamphetamines, raced dude. Did methamphetamines, raced dude. Did methamphetamines, raced motorcycles, you know, like hung out with movie you know, like hung out with movie you know, like hung out with movie stars, but then also was like a recluse stars, but then also was like a recluse stars, but then also was like a recluse and liked rocks. Okay, that's a weird and liked rocks. Okay, that's a weird and liked rocks. Okay, that's a weird scientist. I've been around a lot of scientist. I've been around a lot of scientist. I've been around a lot of those. But, you know, in discussions with people you know, in discussions with people you know, in discussions with people that knew him, I mean that exercise that knew him, I mean that exercise that knew him, I mean that exercise of kind of like seeing something he of kind of like seeing something he of kind of like seeing something he thought was cool like a bat, you know, thought was cool like a bat, you know, thought was cool like a bat, you know, and he and he and he allowed him to also use theory of mind allowed him to also use theory of mind allowed him to also use theory of mind to kind of think well, what would it be to kind of think well, what would it be to kind of think well, what would it be like to have locked-in syndrome and only like to have locked-in syndrome and only like to have locked-in syndrome and only be able to like blink your eyes to be able to like blink your eyes to be able to like blink your eyes to communicate? And and gave him an communicate? And and gave him an communicate? And and gave him an incredible compassion and sensitivity incredible compassion and sensitivity incredible compassion and sensitivity for other people for other people for other people that um then he transmuted into the form that um then he transmuted into the form that um then he transmuted into the form of like these wonderful books. of like these wonderful books. of like these wonderful books. So, for me, fun is really about doing So, for me, fun is really about doing So, for me, fun is really about doing the things that I do systematically each the things that I do systematically each the things that I do systematically each day, but then when something excites me, day, but then when something excites me, day, but then when something excites me, I know that feeling. I know it I know that feeling. I know it I know that feeling. I know it physically in my body and to just physically in my body and to just physically in my body and to just follow that trail like a weirdo, follow that trail like a weirdo, follow that trail like a weirdo, right? Like a weirdo. Just like Baris right? Like a weirdo. Just like Baris right? Like a weirdo. Just like Baris was a weird and was a weird and was a weird and Barbara Chapman was weird and like Barbara Chapman was weird and like Barbara Chapman was weird and like I think everybody's a little weird if I think everybody's a little weird if I think everybody's a little weird if you allow yourself to just see the you allow yourself to just see the you allow yourself to just see the things that you think are really cool. things that you think are really cool. things that you think are really cool. And there are a bunch of things that I And there are a bunch of things that I And there are a bunch of things that I think are really cool that enchant me, think are really cool that enchant me, think are really cool that enchant me, that a bunch of other people love, too. that a bunch of other people love, too. that a bunch of other people love, too. And I know that cuz it like I see we're And I know that cuz it like I see we're And I know that cuz it like I see we're all watching that video or something all watching that video or something all watching that video or something like that. Um like that. Um like that. Um but I think for me fun is in the but I think for me fun is in the but I think for me fun is in the practice of trying to stay open to the practice of trying to stay open to the practice of trying to stay open to the like the little things. Um the little like the little things. Um the little like the little things. Um the little things that kids say are always things that kids say are always things that kids say are always delightful cuz they're not filtering delightful cuz they're not filtering delightful cuz they're not filtering through all the that we filter through all the that we filter through all the that we filter ourself our life experience through, but ourself our life experience through, but ourself our life experience through, but also just um yeah, I like reading and also just um yeah, I like reading and also just um yeah, I like reading and learning, exercising. I mean, I like to learning, exercising. I mean, I like to learning, exercising. I mean, I like to think I'm not a very wooden person, but think I'm not a very wooden person, but think I'm not a very wooden person, but at the same time at the same time at the same time um I mean, I didn't see the Barbie movie. I mean, I didn't see the Barbie movie. I mean, I didn't see the Barbie movie. Um No no disrespect to Barbie. I you No no disrespect to Barbie. I you No no disrespect to Barbie. I you know, I go to movies. I do that kind know, I go to movies. I do that kind know, I go to movies. I do that kind of thing. I don't know what else is of thing. I don't know what else is of thing. I don't know what else is there to do. At some point, you know, there to do. At some point, you know, there to do. At some point, you know, um what else is there to do? what else is there to do? what else is there to do? Uh anyway, I mean, I delight in Uh anyway, I mean, I delight in Uh anyway, I mean, I delight in certain things as I you now know far certain things as I you now know far certain things as I you now know far too much about, but um fun is a relative too much about, but um fun is a relative too much about, but um fun is a relative term. That was a hard question. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for the pass. Thanks for the pass. Thanks for the pass. Do you believe time changes due to Do you believe time changes due to Do you believe time changes due to daylight savings time is worth a daylight savings time is worth a daylight savings time is worth a potential loss of productivity? Look, potential loss of productivity? Look, potential loss of productivity? Look, daylight savings time is anti-health. daylight savings time is anti-health. daylight savings time is anti-health. Okay, this is where I'll get like It's Okay, this is where I'll get like It's Okay, this is where I'll get like It's just it's just dumb. It's just dumb. just it's just dumb. It's just dumb. just it's just dumb. It's just dumb. It's just so dumb. It's It makes no It's just so dumb. It's It makes no It's just so dumb. It's It makes no sense. I mean, the director of the sense. I mean, the director of the sense. I mean, the director of the chronobiology unit at the National chronobiology unit at the National chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, my good Institutes of Mental Health, my good Institutes of Mental Health, my good friend, long-time friend, and brilliant friend, long-time friend, and brilliant friend, long-time friend, and brilliant scientist Samer Hattar, will tell you scientist Samer Hattar, will tell you scientist Samer Hattar, will tell you it's a stupid idea. It's anti-biology. it's a stupid idea. It's anti-biology. it's a stupid idea. It's anti-biology. And it increase car crashes, increase And it increase car crashes, increase And it increase car crashes, increase heart attacks, increase depression. It's heart attacks, increase depression. It's heart attacks, increase depression. It's just It's like kids don't like to wake just It's like kids don't like to wake just It's like kids don't like to wake up early anyway. Parents don't like to up early anyway. Parents don't like to up early anyway. Parents don't like to wake up early, especially with kids that wake up early, especially with kids that wake up early, especially with kids that don't like to wake up early. It makes no don't like to wake up early. It makes no don't like to wake up early. It makes no sense. And then there's all these sense. And then there's all these sense. And then there's all these arguments about, you know, is it arguments about, you know, is it arguments about, you know, is it really about trying to truncate the really about trying to truncate the really about trying to truncate the late You know, you want more light the late You know, you want more light the late You know, you want more light at in the evening, so there's less at in the evening, so there's less at in the evening, so there's less crime. Like That's totally crime. Like That's totally crime. Like That's totally unsubstantiated. Like it's completely unsubstantiated. Like it's completely unsubstantiated. Like it's completely unsubstantiated. So, the daylight unsubstantiated. So, the daylight unsubstantiated. So, the daylight savings thing is just stupid. Um savings thing is just stupid. Um savings thing is just stupid. Um basically, try and get as much light in basically, try and get as much light in basically, try and get as much light in your eyes, ideally from sunlight your eyes, ideally from sunlight your eyes, ideally from sunlight early in the day. And by the sunlight early in the day. And by the sunlight early in the day. And by the way, if you're worried about cataract, way, if you're worried about cataract, way, if you're worried about cataract, um that's a serious concern. After all, um that's a serious concern. After all, um that's a serious concern. After all, I have an appointment in ophthalmology. I have an appointment in ophthalmology. I have an appointment in ophthalmology. You know, cataract, macular You know, cataract, macular You know, cataract, macular degeneration, but guess what? The chair degeneration, but guess what? The chair degeneration, but guess what? The chair of ophthalmology at from Stanford, when of ophthalmology at from Stanford, when of ophthalmology at from Stanford, when he came on the podcast, verified this. he came on the podcast, verified this. he came on the podcast, verified this. When the sun is low in the sky, you're When the sun is low in the sky, you're When the sun is low in the sky, you're not really at risk of that. Right? So, not really at risk of that. Right? So, not really at risk of that. Right? So, when the sun is overhead, and you're when the sun is overhead, and you're when the sun is overhead, and you're like you're doing beaming your eyes, like you're doing beaming your eyes, like you're doing beaming your eyes, like trying to get Yeah, it's a problem. like trying to get Yeah, it's a problem. like trying to get Yeah, it's a problem. But we're talking about viewing low But we're talking about viewing low But we're talking about viewing low solar angle sunlight in the morning and solar angle sunlight in the morning and solar angle sunlight in the morning and in the evening. And if there's clouds, in the evening. And if there's clouds, in the evening. And if there's clouds, do it anyway. In fact, do it longer. And do it anyway. In fact, do it longer. And do it anyway. In fact, do it longer. And if you can't do that, look at some if you can't do that, look at some if you can't do that, look at some artificial light inside. Daylight artificial light inside. Daylight artificial light inside. Daylight savings is just it's just open. Is savings is just it's just open. Is savings is just it's just open. Is it? Yeah. You know, what happens here is as Yeah. You know, what happens here is as Yeah. You know, what happens here is as the night goes on, the amount of GABA in the night goes on, the amount of GABA in the night goes on, the amount of GABA in my brain starts to diminish and then I my brain starts to diminish and then I my brain starts to diminish and then I just kind of go to short form. We've just kind of go to short form. We've just kind of go to short form. We've thought about podcasting in the middle thought about podcasting in the middle thought about podcasting in the middle of the night. That's why when I went on of the night. That's why when I went on of the night. That's why when I went on Lex's podcast recently, the more recent Lex's podcast recently, the more recent Lex's podcast recently, the more recent one, he did it at 8:00 at night and he one, he did it at 8:00 at night and he one, he did it at 8:00 at night and he cried he made me cry. He didn't cry. He cried he made me cry. He didn't cry. He cried he made me cry. He didn't cry. He made me cry. I was so tired and then I made me cry. I was so tired and then I made me cry. I was so tired and then I can't think and then he asked me about can't think and then he asked me about can't think and then he asked me about my dog and I'm talking about the dog. my dog and I'm talking about the dog. my dog and I'm talking about the dog. So, you know, his goal was to get me to So, you know, his goal was to get me to So, you know, his goal was to get me to cry. We have this friendship, you know. cry. We have this friendship, you know. cry. We have this friendship, you know. No, he he's delightful. No, he he's delightful. No, he he's delightful. What should I as a 19-year-old college What should I as a 19-year-old college What should I as a 19-year-old college student be doing to maximize the years student be doing to maximize the years student be doing to maximize the years of neuroplasticity I have left? I get of neuroplasticity I have left? I get of neuroplasticity I have left? I get this question I'm like, "Oh man, it's this question I'm like, "Oh man, it's this question I'm like, "Oh man, it's such a great question, Reese." Well, I such a great question, Reese." Well, I such a great question, Reese." Well, I don't I'm assuming yeah. don't I'm assuming yeah. don't I'm assuming yeah. I don't know who you are, Reese, or what I don't know who you are, Reese, or what I don't know who you are, Reese, or what you're doing. But, you're 19. So, the you're doing. But, you're 19. So, the you're doing. But, you're 19. So, the cool thing is your brain is cool thing is your brain is cool thing is your brain is hyperplastic. Life is a psychedelic hyperplastic. Life is a psychedelic hyperplastic. Life is a psychedelic experience without psychedelics. experience without psychedelics. experience without psychedelics. Um gosh, people always then say like if you gosh, people always then say like if you gosh, people always then say like if you could go back to your 19-year-old self, could go back to your 19-year-old self, could go back to your 19-year-old self, what would you do? And and that's a what would you do? And and that's a what would you do? And and that's a tricky one. There are movies about that, tricky one. There are movies about that, tricky one. There are movies about that, right? Um right? Um right? Um I you know, I would definitely worry I you know, I would definitely worry I you know, I would definitely worry less. Um yeah, I would worry less. I would have yeah, I would worry less. I would have yeah, I would worry less. I would have more fun. more fun. more fun. Um I would I would certainly um I would I would certainly um I would I would certainly um listen, I listen, I listen, I started latching on to practices and I started latching on to practices and I started latching on to practices and the understanding of science as a way the understanding of science as a way the understanding of science as a way for me it was kind of like my world felt for me it was kind of like my world felt for me it was kind of like my world felt very unstable. very unstable. very unstable. Um and for me it brought stability. Um and for me it brought stability. Um and for me it brought stability. Um but, you want to avoid rigidity. So, but, you want to avoid rigidity. So, but, you want to avoid rigidity. So, you know, do you want to be the one you know, do you want to be the one you know, do you want to be the one 19-year-old who's like, "Oh, I got to 19-year-old who's like, "Oh, I got to 19-year-old who's like, "Oh, I got to get to sleep." get to sleep." get to sleep." You know, I got to go back to You know, I got to go back to You know, I got to go back to bed at 8:30 at night. No, yeah, you bed at 8:30 at night. No, yeah, you bed at 8:30 at night. No, yeah, you enjoy life, but I would say um enjoy life, but I would say um enjoy life, but I would say um when you're 19, when you're 19, when you're 19, learn how you learn, learn how you learn, learn how you learn, learn how to focus, learn how to rest. learn how to focus, learn how to rest. learn how to focus, learn how to rest. Basically, you can stress and focus as Basically, you can stress and focus as Basically, you can stress and focus as much as you want as long as you can much as you want as long as you can much as you want as long as you can still fall asleep at night and sleep still fall asleep at night and sleep still fall asleep at night and sleep well. And fall back asleep if you wake up. You And fall back asleep if you wake up. You And fall back asleep if you wake up. You know, that we hear stress is bad, stress know, that we hear stress is bad, stress know, that we hear stress is bad, stress is good, stress is bad, stress is good. is good, stress is bad, stress is good. is good, stress is bad, stress is good. Stress is bad Stress is bad Stress is bad unless you're getting enough sleep, in unless you're getting enough sleep, in unless you're getting enough sleep, in which case stress is called learning in which case stress is called learning in which case stress is called learning in life. Now, obviously don't do anything life. Now, obviously don't do anything life. Now, obviously don't do anything dangerous, avoid dangerous, avoid dangerous, avoid psychological and physical danger. But, psychological and physical danger. But, psychological and physical danger. But, I think as a 19-year-old, I mean I think as a 19-year-old, I mean I think as a 19-year-old, I mean my direct advice would be have some direct advice would be have some direct advice would be have some cardiovascular activity you like, have cardiovascular activity you like, have cardiovascular activity you like, have some resistance training activity you some resistance training activity you some resistance training activity you like, develop some sort of self-awareness develop some sort of self-awareness develop some sort of self-awareness practice, like journaling, could be practice, like journaling, could be practice, like journaling, could be meditation, um surround yourself with people that you surround yourself with people that you surround yourself with people that you like, avoid people you don't like. Um I mean, avoid people you don't like. Um I mean, avoid people you don't like. Um I mean, it sounds so straightforward, but it sounds so straightforward, but it sounds so straightforward, but then we can all look into our personal then we can all look into our personal then we can all look into our personal histories and be like, "Well, I spent histories and be like, "Well, I spent histories and be like, "Well, I spent all this time trying to resolve this all this time trying to resolve this all this time trying to resolve this thing that like clearly you didn't like thing that like clearly you didn't like thing that like clearly you didn't like them. It's simple. Like you didn't like them. It's simple. Like you didn't like them. It's simple. Like you didn't like them. They weren't into cuttlefish or them. They weren't into cuttlefish or them. They weren't into cuttlefish or ferrets. You didn't like them. Wasn't ferrets. You didn't like them. Wasn't ferrets. You didn't like them. Wasn't your kind of person, right? And that's your kind of person, right? And that's your kind of person, right? And that's not a box you can check on the dating not a box you can check on the dating not a box you can check on the dating apps, they tell me, right?" The ferret apps, they tell me, right?" The ferret apps, they tell me, right?" The ferret thing, I think it'd be very thing, I think it'd be very thing, I think it'd be very small subset of people. Um I think very small subset of people. Um I think very small subset of people. Um I think you know, the know thyself thing is you know, the know thyself thing is you know, the know thyself thing is huge. Learn huge. Learn huge. Learn to tap into that early feeling of Learn to tap into that early feeling of Learn to tap into that early feeling of like this feels right, this doesn't feel like this feels right, this doesn't feel like this feels right, this doesn't feel right. Learn to be a bit of a of a right. Learn to be a bit of a of a right. Learn to be a bit of a of a rudder for yourself. And um and journal. rudder for yourself. And um and journal. rudder for yourself. And um and journal. I still have stacks of things that I still have stacks of things that I still have stacks of things that I wrote across the years. Most of it is wrote across the years. Most of it is wrote across the years. Most of it is terrible, but you will find if you go terrible, but you will find if you go terrible, but you will find if you go back that you kind of knew better all back that you kind of knew better all back that you kind of knew better all along, even if you didn't do better all along, even if you didn't do better all along, even if you didn't do better all along. Um that voice in your head, Um that voice in your head, Um that voice in your head, don't do that, do that. This person's don't do that, do that. This person's don't do that, do that. This person's like, "Everyone else is crazy about this like, "Everyone else is crazy about this like, "Everyone else is crazy about this person, but not me." person, but not me." person, but not me." But this is like, you know, like I But this is like, you know, like I But this is like, you know, like I don't want to sound sentimental, but you don't want to sound sentimental, but you don't want to sound sentimental, but you have to you have to have to you have to have to you have to you have to find your heart, right? Or you have to find your heart, right? Or you have to find your heart, right? Or at least not lose it. You have to make at least not lose it. You have to make at least not lose it. You have to make sure that you're in touch with that sure that you're in touch with that sure that you're in touch with that piece of yourself that wasn't judging piece of yourself that wasn't judging piece of yourself that wasn't judging and just felt good. And as long as it's and just felt good. And as long as it's and just felt good. And as long as it's not something that's self-destructive, I not something that's self-destructive, I not something that's self-destructive, I think that's the most important thing. think that's the most important thing. think that's the most important thing. And then yeah, have tools and practices And then yeah, have tools and practices And then yeah, have tools and practices in place because they work. And when in place because they work. And when in place because they work. And when you're 19 and your neuro- you're 19 and your neuro- you're 19 and your neuro- is through the roof, you can you can do is through the roof, you can you can do is through the roof, you can you can do a lot less and get a lot more. a lot less and get a lot more. a lot less and get a lot more. But don't worry about hitting 25 and it But don't worry about hitting 25 and it But don't worry about hitting 25 and it all being over. Um certainly that's not all being over. Um certainly that's not all being over. Um certainly that's not the case, but you can cram in a lot the case, but you can cram in a lot the case, but you can cram in a lot early on. This you know, I still regret early on. This you know, I still regret early on. This you know, I still regret not learning an instrument. The data on not learning an instrument. The data on not learning an instrument. The data on people that learn an instrument even people that learn an instrument even people that learn an instrument even later in life, but certainly at 19 is later in life, but certainly at 19 is later in life, but certainly at 19 is that it greatly increases your ability that it greatly increases your ability that it greatly increases your ability to learn all sorts of things. So, learn to learn all sorts of things. So, learn to learn all sorts of things. So, learn an instrument. How can we transform the an instrument. How can we transform the an instrument. How can we transform the American education system to be more American education system to be more American education system to be more effective? Oh. effective? Oh. effective? Oh. So, in 10 seconds So, when I'm in charge now, I'm just So, when I'm in charge now, I'm just So, when I'm in charge now, I'm just kidding. The a little while back, I did kidding. The a little while back, I did kidding. The a little while back, I did an interview with a with a major media an interview with a with a major media an interview with a with a major media outlet and they were very gracious and outlet and they were very gracious and outlet and they were very gracious and then they said like, "What's next?" and then they said like, "What's next?" and then they said like, "What's next?" And I was like, "I'm going to run for And I was like, "I'm going to run for And I was like, "I'm going to run for office." I was just like office." I was just like office." I was just like Now, you know, I was sort of a I Look, Now, you know, I was sort of a I Look, Now, you know, I was sort of a I Look, it's not out of the question, but it's not out of the question, but it's not out of the question, but frankly, I think that um I'm so poorly frankly, I think that um I'm so poorly frankly, I think that um I'm so poorly suited for that. It's obvious. Um I'm so suited for that. It's obvious. Um I'm so suited for that. It's obvious. Um I'm so poorly suited for that. So, it wasn't a poorly suited for that. So, it wasn't a poorly suited for that. So, it wasn't a joke, but it was you know, I think as a joke, but it was you know, I think as a joke, but it was you know, I think as a I spent some time afterwards like, "Oh, I spent some time afterwards like, "Oh, I spent some time afterwards like, "Oh, this should really go talk to people who this should really go talk to people who this should really go talk to people who do that for a living." And um do that for a living." And um do that for a living." And um and um and um and um but I am very interested in but I am very interested in but I am very interested in uh potentially informing policy. If I were potentially informing policy. If I were potentially informing policy. If I were to ever be asked, I'd certainly to ever be asked, I'd certainly to ever be asked, I'd certainly um respond. And and my stance on this um respond. And and my stance on this um respond. And and my stance on this is, you know, um much in the same vein is, you know, um much in the same vein is, you know, um much in the same vein as the podcast because keep in mind the as the podcast because keep in mind the as the podcast because keep in mind the podcast yes, Lex suggested I start one, podcast yes, Lex suggested I start one, podcast yes, Lex suggested I start one, but it was really during the um but it was really during the um but it was really during the um those days of the deep 2020-2021 those days of the deep 2020-2021 those days of the deep 2020-2021 pandemic where um by the way, I wasn't pandemic where um by the way, I wasn't pandemic where um by the way, I wasn't allowed to talk about vaccines, so I allowed to talk about vaccines, so I allowed to talk about vaccines, so I didn't. And also, I don't have any didn't. And also, I don't have any didn't. And also, I don't have any expertise in it, so I was not uh well expertise in it, so I was not uh well expertise in it, so I was not uh well suited to do it. But I also decided it's suited to do it. But I also decided it's suited to do it. But I also decided it's a topic that enough people are talking a topic that enough people are talking a topic that enough people are talking about. So, my response in life and in about. So, my response in life and in about. So, my response in life and in general when people say, "What about general when people say, "What about general when people say, "What about something?" is I like, "Well, I've got a something?" is I like, "Well, I've got a something?" is I like, "Well, I've got a lot of opinions about that, but this lot of opinions about that, but this lot of opinions about that, but this isn't the venue." All right, okay. But isn't the venue." All right, okay. But isn't the venue." All right, okay. But during the pandemic during the pandemic during the pandemic I realized there was a of circadian I realized there was a of circadian I realized there was a of circadian disruption, anxiety, stress, bunch of disruption, anxiety, stress, bunch of disruption, anxiety, stress, bunch of things happening with visual systems and things happening with visual systems and things happening with visual systems and biological systems that I felt there biological systems that I felt there biological systems that I felt there were tools that people could were tools that people could were tools that people could perhaps benefit from. So, I just started perhaps benefit from. So, I just started perhaps benefit from. So, I just started putting that information into the world putting that information into the world putting that information into the world and I was really surprised. Really and I was really surprised. Really and I was really surprised. Really surprised that people that I knew from surprised that people that I knew from surprised that people that I knew from the neuroscience community, for the neuroscience community, for the neuroscience community, for instance, at NIMH or um you know, in instance, at NIMH or um you know, in instance, at NIMH or um you know, in government positions weren't talking government positions weren't talking government positions weren't talking about this stuff. about this stuff. about this stuff. So, I just kept doing it. Um So, I just kept doing it. Um So, I just kept doing it. Um and I think that it made clear to me I think that it made clear to me I think that it made clear to me that the education system that the education system that the education system is not one thing. It's tough, is not one thing. It's tough, is not one thing. It's tough, especially when talking about kids, like especially when talking about kids, like especially when talking about kids, like what to do. what to do. what to do. Um is a tricky thing, but that the is a tricky thing, but that the is a tricky thing, but that the education system education system education system in my mind should at least involve some in my mind should at least involve some in my mind should at least involve some sort of discussion early on about this sort of discussion early on about this sort of discussion early on about this thing called the brain, this thing called the brain, this thing called the brain, this thing called the body, how they work, how you called the body, how they work, how you called the body, how they work, how you can do certain things to can do certain things to can do certain things to um modulate your stress level, your um modulate your stress level, your um modulate your stress level, your sleep, the importance of not just the sleep, the importance of not just the sleep, the importance of not just the importance of sleep and nutrition and importance of sleep and nutrition and importance of sleep and nutrition and avoiding social isolation and you know, avoiding social isolation and you know, avoiding social isolation and you know, all these important things, but giving all these important things, but giving all these important things, but giving people some levers and knobs to people some levers and knobs to people some levers and knobs to maneuver within themselves and you know, maneuver within themselves and you know, maneuver within themselves and you know, zero-cost tools as a way to do that zero-cost tools as a way to do that zero-cost tools as a way to do that um transcend, you know, socioeconomic um transcend, you know, socioeconomic um transcend, you know, socioeconomic boundaries. Ideally, transcend language boundaries. Ideally, transcend language boundaries. Ideally, transcend language as well because, you know, we're not as well because, you know, we're not as well because, you know, we're not just talking about the United States and just talking about the United States and just talking about the United States and of course, within the United States, of course, within the United States, of course, within the United States, there are many different uh cultures there are many different uh cultures there are many different uh cultures speaking different languages, but um and speaking different languages, but um and speaking different languages, but um and maybe AI will soon allow us to put out maybe AI will soon allow us to put out maybe AI will soon allow us to put out the podcast into a bunch of different the podcast into a bunch of different the podcast into a bunch of different languages. I think it will. Um so, languages. I think it will. Um so, languages. I think it will. Um so, I think that the education system should I think that the education system should I think that the education system should start, in my opinion, with a with start, in my opinion, with a with start, in my opinion, with a with teaching kids how to understand teaching kids how to understand teaching kids how to understand themselves, what to do in difficult themselves, what to do in difficult themselves, what to do in difficult scenarios, that's really anchored in scenarios, that's really anchored in scenarios, that's really anchored in the real pillars of biology and the real pillars of biology and the real pillars of biology and psychology and trying to take some of psychology and trying to take some of psychology and trying to take some of the mystery out of trying to navigate the mystery out of trying to navigate the mystery out of trying to navigate the tough business of growing up. Um the tough business of growing up. Um the tough business of growing up. Um I mean, if you think it's tough being an I mean, if you think it's tough being an I mean, if you think it's tough being an adult, which it can be certainly, it's adult, which it can be certainly, it's adult, which it can be certainly, it's really tough growing up really tough growing up really tough growing up as we all know. And I think that more as we all know. And I think that more as we all know. And I think that more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools. But that's obviously a biased a biased But that's obviously a biased a biased But that's obviously a biased a biased opinion. And no one's ever asked me opinion. And no one's ever asked me opinion. And no one's ever asked me like, hey, like, hey, like, hey, what should we be teaching kids? But if what should we be teaching kids? But if what should we be teaching kids? But if they ask, as you can tell like I'm not they ask, as you can tell like I'm not they ask, as you can tell like I'm not going to shut up. So. going to shut up. So. going to shut up. So. I think that was our last question. I think that was our last question. I think that was our last question. Thank you all for coming tonight. I want Thank you all for coming tonight. I want Thank you all for coming tonight. I want to forgive me for going long. forgive me for going long. forgive me for going long. I do want to say I do want to say I do want to say thank you, sincere thank you for make thank you, sincere thank you for make thank you, sincere thank you for make your way out here especially on a your way out here especially on a your way out here especially on a weekday night. Thanks for your weekday night. Thanks for your weekday night. Thanks for your hospitality. My incredible team, I want to thank My incredible team, I want to thank My incredible team, I want to thank them. And them. And them. And certainly last but not least, thank you certainly last but not least, thank you certainly last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. Thank you. for your interest in science. Thank you. for your interest in science. Thank you. Thank you so much.