Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin. for my discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin. for my discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin. Welcome, Dr. Professor Andy Galpin. Welcome, Dr. Professor Andy Galpin. Welcome, Dr. Professor Andy Galpin. There are only a handful, meaning about There are only a handful, meaning about There are only a handful, meaning about three or four people who I trust enough three or four people who I trust enough three or four people who I trust enough in the exercise physiology space that in the exercise physiology space that in the exercise physiology space that when they speak, I not only listen, but when they speak, I not only listen, but when they speak, I not only listen, but I modify my protocols, and you are among I modify my protocols, and you are among I modify my protocols, and you are among those three or four people. I would love those three or four people. I would love those three or four people. I would love to have you share with us what you think to have you share with us what you think to have you share with us what you think most everybody or even everybody should most everybody or even everybody should most everybody or even everybody should know about principles of strength know about principles of strength know about principles of strength training and principles of training and principles of training and principles of let's call it hypertrophy, power, and let's call it hypertrophy, power, and let's call it hypertrophy, power, and the other sort of categories of the other sort of categories of the other sort of categories of training. &gt;&gt; There's about nine different adaptations &gt;&gt; There's about nine different adaptations &gt;&gt; There's about nine different adaptations you can get from exercise. First one to you can get from exercise. First one to you can get from exercise. First one to think about is well, we'll just call it think about is well, we'll just call it think about is well, we'll just call it skill. So, this is improving anything skill. So, this is improving anything skill. So, this is improving anything from say a golf swing to a squatting from say a golf swing to a squatting from say a golf swing to a squatting technique to running. This is just technique to running. This is just technique to running. This is just simply moving mechanically how you want simply moving mechanically how you want simply moving mechanically how you want your body to move. From there, we're your body to move. From there, we're your body to move. From there, we're going to get into speed. So, this is going to get into speed. So, this is going to get into speed. So, this is moving as fast as possible. moving as fast as possible. moving as fast as possible. The next one is power. And power is a The next one is power. And power is a The next one is power. And power is a function of speed, but it's also a function of speed, but it's also a function of speed, but it's also a function of the next one, which is function of the next one, which is function of the next one, which is strength. So, if you actually multiply strength. So, if you actually multiply strength. So, if you actually multiply strength by speed, you get power. So, strength by speed, you get power. So, strength by speed, you get power. So, there's carryover. So, like a lot of there's carryover. So, like a lot of there's carryover. So, like a lot of things that you would do for the things that you would do for the things that you would do for the development of strength and power development of strength and power development of strength and power um they are somewhat similar, but then um they are somewhat similar, but then um they are somewhat similar, but then there's differences. Once you get past there's differences. Once you get past there's differences. Once you get past strength, then the next one kind of down strength, then the next one kind of down strength, then the next one kind of down the list is hypertrophy. This is muscle the list is hypertrophy. This is muscle the list is hypertrophy. This is muscle size, right? Growing muscle mass is one size, right? Growing muscle mass is one size, right? Growing muscle mass is one way to think about it. way to think about it. way to think about it. After hypertrophy, you get into these After hypertrophy, you get into these After hypertrophy, you get into these categories of The next one is um these categories of The next one is um these categories of The next one is um these are all globally endurance-based issues, are all globally endurance-based issues, are all globally endurance-based issues, and the very first one is called and the very first one is called and the very first one is called muscular endurance. muscular endurance. muscular endurance. So, this is your ability to do How many So, this is your ability to do How many So, this is your ability to do How many push-ups can you do in 1 minute? You push-ups can you do in 1 minute? You push-ups can you do in 1 minute? You know, things like that. Past muscular know, things like that. Past muscular know, things like that. Past muscular endurance, you're now into more of an endurance, you're now into more of an endurance, you're now into more of an energetic or even cardiovascular energetic or even cardiovascular energetic or even cardiovascular fatigue. So, you've left the local fatigue. So, you've left the local fatigue. So, you've left the local muscle and you're now into the entire muscle and you're now into the entire muscle and you're now into the entire physiological system and its ability to physiological system and its ability to physiological system and its ability to produce and sustain work. Think about produce and sustain work. Think about produce and sustain work. Think about this as this as this as um I call this anaerobic power, right? um I call this anaerobic power, right? um I call this anaerobic power, right? So, this is your ability to produce a So, this is your ability to produce a So, this is your ability to produce a lot of work for say 30 seconds to maybe lot of work for say 30 seconds to maybe lot of work for say 30 seconds to maybe 1 minute, kind of 2 minutes like that. 1 minute, kind of 2 minutes like that. 1 minute, kind of 2 minutes like that. The next one down then is more closely The next one down then is more closely The next one down then is more closely aligned to what we call your VO2 max. aligned to what we call your VO2 max. aligned to what we call your VO2 max. So, this is your ability to kind of do So, this is your ability to kind of do So, this is your ability to kind of do the same thing but more of a time domain the same thing but more of a time domain the same thing but more of a time domain of say 3 to 12 minutes. So, this is of say 3 to 12 minutes. So, this is of say 3 to 12 minutes. So, this is going to be a maximum heart rate but going to be a maximum heart rate but going to be a maximum heart rate but it's going to be well past just max it's going to be well past just max it's going to be well past just max heart rate. heart rate. heart rate. Then after that, we have what I call Then after that, we have what I call Then after that, we have what I call long duration endurance. So, this is long duration endurance. So, this is long duration endurance. So, this is your ability to sustain work. The time your ability to sustain work. The time your ability to sustain work. The time domain doesn't matter in terms of how domain doesn't matter in terms of how domain doesn't matter in terms of how fast going you're going. It's how long fast going you're going. It's how long fast going you're going. It's how long can you sustain work? This is 30 plus can you sustain work? This is 30 plus can you sustain work? This is 30 plus minutes of no break like that. So, as minutes of no break like that. So, as minutes of no break like that. So, as just an high-level overview, those are just an high-level overview, those are just an high-level overview, those are the different things you can target. the different things you can target. the different things you can target. And again, some of those cross over and And again, some of those cross over and And again, some of those cross over and some are actually a little bit contrary some are actually a little bit contrary some are actually a little bit contrary to the other ones. So, pushing towards to the other ones. So, pushing towards to the other ones. So, pushing towards one is maybe going to sacrifice one is maybe going to sacrifice one is maybe going to sacrifice something else. There is a handful of something else. There is a handful of something else. There is a handful of things you have got to do to make all of things you have got to do to make all of things you have got to do to make all of those things work. One of them is those things work. One of them is those things work. One of them is functionally called progressive functionally called progressive functionally called progressive overload. If you want to continue to overload. If you want to continue to overload. If you want to continue to improve, you have to have some method of improve, you have to have some method of improve, you have to have some method of overload. Adaptation physiologically overload. Adaptation physiologically overload. Adaptation physiologically happens as a byproduct of stress. So, happens as a byproduct of stress. So, happens as a byproduct of stress. So, you have to push your system. So, if you have to push your system. So, if you have to push your system. So, if you continue to do say the exact same continue to do say the exact same continue to do say the exact same workout over time, workout over time, workout over time, you better not expect much improvement. you better not expect much improvement. you better not expect much improvement. You can keep maintenance but you're not You can keep maintenance but you're not You can keep maintenance but you're not going to be adding additional stress. In going to be adding additional stress. In going to be adding additional stress. In general, you have to have some sort of general, you have to have some sort of general, you have to have some sort of progressive overload. This could come progressive overload. This could come progressive overload. This could come from adding more weights. This could from adding more weights. This could from adding more weights. This could come from adding more repetitions. It come from adding more repetitions. It come from adding more repetitions. It could come from doing it more often in could come from doing it more often in could come from doing it more often in the week. It could come from adding the week. It could come from adding the week. It could come from adding complexity to the movement. So, there's complexity to the movement. So, there's complexity to the movement. So, there's a lot of different ways to progress but a lot of different ways to progress but a lot of different ways to progress but you have to have some sort of movement you have to have some sort of movement you have to have some sort of movement forward. So, if you have this kind of forward. So, if you have this kind of forward. So, if you have this kind of routine you've built Monday, Wednesday, routine you've built Monday, Wednesday, routine you've built Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday or something and you just and Saturday or something and you just and Saturday or something and you just do that infinitely, do that infinitely, do that infinitely, um you're not going to get very far. So, um you're not going to get very far. So, um you're not going to get very far. So, what are the progressive overload what are the progressive overload what are the progressive overload principles um, that are most effective principles um, that are most effective principles um, that are most effective over time for strength and hypertrophy? over time for strength and hypertrophy? over time for strength and hypertrophy? &gt;&gt; You have what we call your modifiable &gt;&gt; You have what we call your modifiable &gt;&gt; You have what we call your modifiable variables. So, this is a very short list variables. So, this is a very short list variables. So, this is a very short list of all the things you can modify, the of all the things you can modify, the of all the things you can modify, the different variables within your workout different variables within your workout different variables within your workout that can be modified that will change that can be modified that will change that can be modified that will change the outcome. Fancy way of saying, if you the outcome. Fancy way of saying, if you the outcome. Fancy way of saying, if you do this differently, then you're going do this differently, then you're going do this differently, then you're going to get a different result. to get a different result. to get a different result. Um, so modifiable variables, um, the Um, so modifiable variables, um, the Um, so modifiable variables, um, the very first one of those is called very first one of those is called very first one of those is called choice. So, this is the exercise choice choice. So, this is the exercise choice choice. So, this is the exercise choice that you select. So, if you choose, I that you select. So, if you choose, I that you select. So, if you choose, I want to get stronger, I'm going to do a want to get stronger, I'm going to do a want to get stronger, I'm going to do a bench press. Well, if you do the wrong bench press. Well, if you do the wrong bench press. Well, if you do the wrong set range, the wrong repetition range, set range, the wrong repetition range, set range, the wrong repetition range, the wrong speed, you won't get strength, the wrong speed, you won't get strength, the wrong speed, you won't get strength, you may be get muscular endurance and you may be get muscular endurance and you may be get muscular endurance and very little strength adaptation. So, the very little strength adaptation. So, the very little strength adaptation. So, the exercise selection itself is important, exercise selection itself is important, exercise selection itself is important, but it does not determine the outcome but it does not determine the outcome but it does not determine the outcome adaptation, right? It is the application adaptation, right? It is the application adaptation, right? It is the application of the exercise. What are the sets, what of the exercise. What are the sets, what of the exercise. What are the sets, what are the reps, what are the uh, rest are the reps, what are the uh, rest are the reps, what are the uh, rest ranges are you using? That's going to be ranges are you using? That's going to be ranges are you using? That's going to be your primary determinant. The second one your primary determinant. The second one your primary determinant. The second one is the intensity, and that refers to in is the intensity, and that refers to in is the intensity, and that refers to in this context this context this context not perceived effort, like, "Wow, that not perceived effort, like, "Wow, that not perceived effort, like, "Wow, that was a really intense workout." It is was a really intense workout." It is was a really intense workout." It is quite literally either a percentage of quite literally either a percentage of quite literally either a percentage of your one rep at max your one rep at max your one rep at max or a percentage of your maximum heart or a percentage of your maximum heart or a percentage of your maximum heart rate or VO2 max. So, for the rate or VO2 max. So, for the rate or VO2 max. So, for the strength-based things, you want to think strength-based things, you want to think strength-based things, you want to think about what's percentage of the maximum about what's percentage of the maximum about what's percentage of the maximum weight I could lift one time, and that's weight I could lift one time, and that's weight I could lift one time, and that's what we're going to call one rep that's what we're going to call one rep that's what we're going to call one rep max. Or it's a percentage of my heart max. Or it's a percentage of my heart max. Or it's a percentage of my heart rate, right? So, if I tell you to get on rate, right? So, if I tell you to get on rate, right? So, if I tell you to get on a bike and I want you to do intervals a bike and I want you to do intervals a bike and I want you to do intervals and I want you to get 75%, I'm typically and I want you to get 75%, I'm typically and I want you to get 75%, I'm typically referring to 75% of your max heart rate referring to 75% of your max heart rate referring to 75% of your max heart rate or VO2 max or, you know, something like or VO2 max or, you know, something like or VO2 max or, you know, something like that. If I tell you to do squats at 75%, that. If I tell you to do squats at 75%, that. If I tell you to do squats at 75%, that means 75% of the maximum amount of that means 75% of the maximum amount of that means 75% of the maximum amount of weight you could lift one time or close. weight you could lift one time or close. weight you could lift one time or close. The third one is what we call volume. The third one is what we call volume. The third one is what we call volume. And so, this is just how many reps and And so, this is just how many reps and And so, this is just how many reps and how many sets are you doing, right? So, how many sets are you doing, right? So, how many sets are you doing, right? So, if you're going to do three sets of 10, if you're going to do three sets of 10, if you're going to do three sets of 10, that volume would be 30. that volume would be 30. that volume would be 30. Right? Five sets of five, that volume is Right? Five sets of five, that volume is Right? Five sets of five, that volume is 25. It's just a simple equation, how 25. It's just a simple equation, how 25. It's just a simple equation, how much work are you totally doing? Uh, the much work are you totally doing? Uh, the much work are you totally doing? Uh, the next one past that is called rest next one past that is called rest next one past that is called rest intervals. So, this is the amount of intervals. So, this is the amount of intervals. So, this is the amount of time you're taking in between typically time you're taking in between typically time you're taking in between typically a set. a set. a set. Um, then from there you have Um, then from there you have Um, then from there you have progression, which is what we started to progression, which is what we started to progression, which is what we started to talk about this progressive overload. talk about this progressive overload. talk about this progressive overload. Are you increasing by weight or reps or Are you increasing by weight or reps or Are you increasing by weight or reps or rest intervals or complexity? All of rest intervals or complexity? All of rest intervals or complexity? All of those things can be changed as a method those things can be changed as a method those things can be changed as a method of progression. And so, maybe you want of progression. And so, maybe you want of progression. And so, maybe you want to go um progressing from a single joint to go um progressing from a single joint to go um progressing from a single joint exercise like a leg extension on a exercise like a leg extension on a exercise like a leg extension on a machine. And you want to progress by moving to a And you want to progress by moving to a And you want to progress by moving to a whole body movement like a squat. That whole body movement like a squat. That whole body movement like a squat. That in of itself, you don't have to change in of itself, you don't have to change in of itself, you don't have to change the load or the reps or the rest. That the load or the reps or the rest. That the load or the reps or the rest. That is a representation of progressive is a representation of progressive is a representation of progressive overload. And it's probably a pretty overload. And it's probably a pretty overload. And it's probably a pretty good place to start because number one, good place to start because number one, good place to start because number one, especially for beginners, especially for beginners, especially for beginners, you want to make sure that the movement you want to make sure that the movement you want to make sure that the movement pattern is correct. Don't worry about pattern is correct. Don't worry about pattern is correct. Don't worry about intensity. Don't worry about rep ranges intensity. Don't worry about rep ranges intensity. Don't worry about rep ranges or any of these things. You need to or any of these things. You need to or any of these things. You need to learn to move correctly and you need to learn to move correctly and you need to learn to move correctly and you need to give your body some time to develop some give your body some time to develop some give your body some time to develop some tissue tolerance. So, that you're not tissue tolerance. So, that you're not tissue tolerance. So, that you're not getting overtly sore. In general, getting overtly sore. In general, getting overtly sore. In general, soreness is a terrible proxy for soreness is a terrible proxy for soreness is a terrible proxy for exercise quality. It's a really bad way exercise quality. It's a really bad way exercise quality. It's a really bad way to estimate whether it was a good or a to estimate whether it was a good or a to estimate whether it was a good or a bad workout, especially for people in bad workout, especially for people in bad workout, especially for people in that beginner to middle that beginner to middle that beginner to middle to moderate. In fact, even the that for to moderate. In fact, even the that for to moderate. In fact, even the that for our professional athletes, um we do not our professional athletes, um we do not our professional athletes, um we do not use soreness as a metric of a good use soreness as a metric of a good use soreness as a metric of a good workout. On the same token, because workout. On the same token, because workout. On the same token, because stress is required for adaptation, you stress is required for adaptation, you stress is required for adaptation, you don't want to leave at the gym and feel don't want to leave at the gym and feel don't want to leave at the gym and feel like, I didn't really do much. Like I If like, I didn't really do much. Like I If like, I didn't really do much. Like I If you're sore of like you're moving around you're sore of like you're moving around you're sore of like you're moving around a little bit and you're like, man, this a little bit and you're like, man, this a little bit and you're like, man, this is a little bit sore, you can train. If is a little bit sore, you can train. If is a little bit sore, you can train. If you're like, I can't sit on the couch you're like, I can't sit on the couch you're like, I can't sit on the couch without crying because my glutes are so without crying because my glutes are so without crying because my glutes are so sore, in that particular case, I'd say sore, in that particular case, I'd say sore, in that particular case, I'd say you've actually gone to a place of you've actually gone to a place of you've actually gone to a place of detriment because now you're going to detriment because now you're going to detriment because now you're going to have to skip a training session. And now have to skip a training session. And now have to skip a training session. And now you're behind, so your actual total you're behind, so your actual total you're behind, so your actual total volume, say across the month, is volume, say across the month, is volume, say across the month, is actually going to be lower because you actually going to be lower because you actually going to be lower because you went way too hard in those workouts, had went way too hard in those workouts, had went way too hard in those workouts, had to take too many days off in between. to take too many days off in between. to take too many days off in between. You're going to see that you're going to You're going to see that you're going to You're going to see that you're going to cover less distance over the course of a cover less distance over the course of a cover less distance over the course of a month or 6 month or even a year. So, you month or 6 month or even a year. So, you month or 6 month or even a year. So, you want to walk a pretty fine line and for want to walk a pretty fine line and for want to walk a pretty fine line and for most people, I would say hedge a little most people, I would say hedge a little most people, I would say hedge a little bit on the side of less sore than more bit on the side of less sore than more bit on the side of less sore than more sore. Because frequency is very, very Because frequency is very, very Because frequency is very, very important for almost all these important for almost all these important for almost all these adaptations. It's training frequency, adaptations. It's training frequency, adaptations. It's training frequency, which is the last modifiable variable, which is the last modifiable variable, which is the last modifiable variable, right? Frequency. Which is how many right? Frequency. Which is how many right? Frequency. Which is how many times per week are you times per week are you times per week are you are you doing that thing? So, those are you doing that thing? So, those are you doing that thing? So, those are of our global things that we can play of our global things that we can play of our global things that we can play with. So, when I'm trying to manipulate with. So, when I'm trying to manipulate with. So, when I'm trying to manipulate and get strength versus hypertrophy and get strength versus hypertrophy and get strength versus hypertrophy or, you know what? I want like a little or, you know what? I want like a little or, you know what? I want like a little bit of both. bit of both. bit of both. All those variables are the things that All those variables are the things that All those variables are the things that are going through my mind. Which one do are going through my mind. Which one do are going through my mind. Which one do I need to move in which direction so I need to move in which direction so I need to move in which direction so that I can get this outcome and not this that I can get this outcome and not this that I can get this outcome and not this outcome over here? outcome over here? outcome over here? For example, some folks might want to For example, some folks might want to For example, some folks might want to get stronger, but not put muscle mass get stronger, but not put muscle mass get stronger, but not put muscle mass on. Some folks are just kind of want on. Some folks are just kind of want on. Some folks are just kind of want both. And that's a lot of the general both. And that's a lot of the general both. And that's a lot of the general public. I want to get a little stronger public. I want to get a little stronger public. I want to get a little stronger and a little bit more muscle. Great. and a little bit more muscle. Great. and a little bit more muscle. Great. But, there are instances where people But, there are instances where people But, there are instances where people for performance reasons or for purely for performance reasons or for purely for performance reasons or for purely personal preference, like I don't want personal preference, like I don't want personal preference, like I don't want to get any more muscle. Great, but I to get any more muscle. Great, but I to get any more muscle. Great, but I want to get stronger. want to get stronger. want to get stronger. Awesome. If you manipulate those Awesome. If you manipulate those Awesome. If you manipulate those variables correctly, you can get exactly variables correctly, you can get exactly variables correctly, you can get exactly that. Very little development of muscle that. Very little development of muscle that. Very little development of muscle size and a lot of development in size and a lot of development in size and a lot of development in strength. And this is why we continue to strength. And this is why we continue to strength. And this is why we continue to break world records in sports like break world records in sports like break world records in sports like powerlifting and weightlifting that have powerlifting and weightlifting that have powerlifting and weightlifting that have weight classes. So, there's a top number weight classes. So, there's a top number weight classes. So, there's a top number that we can hit in terms of body size, that we can hit in terms of body size, that we can hit in terms of body size, but yet we continue to get stronger and but yet we continue to get stronger and but yet we continue to get stronger and faster. So, this is very possible if you faster. So, this is very possible if you faster. So, this is very possible if you understand how to manipulate all those understand how to manipulate all those understand how to manipulate all those variables. &gt;&gt; How should we uh modify the variables? &gt;&gt; How should we uh modify the variables? &gt;&gt; How should we uh modify the variables? &gt;&gt; Love it. All right, great. So, one of my &gt;&gt; Love it. All right, great. So, one of my &gt;&gt; Love it. All right, great. So, one of my other laws of strength and conditioning other laws of strength and conditioning other laws of strength and conditioning is, in general, the default is all is, in general, the default is all is, in general, the default is all joints through all range of motion. So, joints through all range of motion. So, joints through all range of motion. So, this is important because it's going to this is important because it's going to this is important because it's going to answer your very first question on this answer your very first question on this answer your very first question on this strength category. In general, the ankle strength category. In general, the ankle strength category. In general, the ankle should go through the full range of should go through the full range of should go through the full range of motion in the ankle. The knee should go motion in the ankle. The knee should go motion in the ankle. The knee should go through the full range of motion in the through the full range of motion in the through the full range of motion in the knee, the hip, the elbow, etc., knee, the hip, the elbow, etc., knee, the hip, the elbow, etc., right? So, across I would even say it right? So, across I would even say it right? So, across I would even say it doesn't even have to be the day, doesn't even have to be the day, doesn't even have to be the day, but maybe throughout the week. but maybe throughout the week. but maybe throughout the week. Try to get every joint through full Try to get every joint through full Try to get every joint through full range of motion. When I say full range of motion. When I say full range of motion. When I say full range of motion, that's the default. That of motion, that's the default. That of motion, that's the default. That doesn't mean every single person can do doesn't mean every single person can do doesn't mean every single person can do that for every single exercise. It means that for every single exercise. It means that for every single exercise. It means that's where we should be striving to that's where we should be striving to that's where we should be striving to and that's our starting point. You're and that's our starting point. You're and that's our starting point. You're going to see a lot less injury and a lot going to see a lot less injury and a lot going to see a lot less injury and a lot more productivity out of your training more productivity out of your training more productivity out of your training sessions. In fact, the science is fairly sessions. In fact, the science is fairly sessions. In fact, the science is fairly clear on this one. clear on this one. clear on this one. Well, strength development as well as Well, strength development as well as Well, strength development as well as hypertrophy is generally enhanced with a hypertrophy is generally enhanced with a hypertrophy is generally enhanced with a larger range of motion of training. So, larger range of motion of training. So, larger range of motion of training. So, if you need if you're doing a say a if you need if you're doing a say a if you need if you're doing a say a deadlift, and in order to take your knee deadlift, and in order to take your knee deadlift, and in order to take your knee through a full range of motion a through a full range of motion a through a full range of motion a deadlift, you have to compromise your deadlift, you have to compromise your deadlift, you have to compromise your back position, that's no bueno. back position, that's no bueno. back position, that's no bueno. So, caveats there aside, don't kill me. So, caveats there aside, don't kill me. So, caveats there aside, don't kill me. Like, in good positions always. Like, in good positions always. Like, in good positions always. &gt;&gt; kill yourselves, more importantly. &gt;&gt; kill yourselves, more importantly. &gt;&gt; kill yourselves, more importantly. &gt;&gt; So, why that matters is if we walk &gt;&gt; So, why that matters is if we walk &gt;&gt; So, why that matters is if we walk through strength, the very first thing through strength, the very first thing through strength, the very first thing I'm going to go through is the I'm going to go through is the I'm going to go through is the exercise selection. So, let's choose an exercise selection. So, let's choose an exercise selection. So, let's choose an exercise which ideally has a full range exercise which ideally has a full range exercise which ideally has a full range of motion or close to it, that doesn't of motion or close to it, that doesn't of motion or close to it, that doesn't induce injury for you, that you can induce injury for you, that you can induce injury for you, that you can still maintain good neck and low back still maintain good neck and low back still maintain good neck and low back and in position and everything else. Um and in position and everything else. Um and in position and everything else. Um you feel comfortable you feel comfortable you feel comfortable with, so you can feel strong, but you with, so you can feel strong, but you with, so you can feel strong, but you don't feel like oh my gosh. If you've don't feel like oh my gosh. If you've don't feel like oh my gosh. If you've never snatched before, never snatched before, never snatched before, having you do a snatch for a maximum, having you do a snatch for a maximum, having you do a snatch for a maximum, even, you know, 75% like it's a terrible even, you know, 75% like it's a terrible even, you know, 75% like it's a terrible idea. You're not going to feel idea. You're not going to feel idea. You're not going to feel confident, it's going to be a train confident, it's going to be a train confident, it's going to be a train wreck. I would rather put you on a wreck. I would rather put you on a wreck. I would rather put you on a machine bench press, so you can go I machine bench press, so you can go I machine bench press, so you can go I feel stable, I feel safe here, and I can feel stable, I feel safe here, and I can feel stable, I feel safe here, and I can just express my strength. So, exercise just express my strength. So, exercise just express my strength. So, exercise choice in general, full range of motion, choice in general, full range of motion, choice in general, full range of motion, and you want to kind of balance between and you want to kind of balance between and you want to kind of balance between the movement areas. So, this is an upper the movement areas. So, this is an upper the movement areas. So, this is an upper body press, so this is pushing away from body press, so this is pushing away from body press, so this is pushing away from you, bench press, things like that. you, bench press, things like that. you, bench press, things like that. Upper body pull, pulling an implement Upper body pull, pulling an implement Upper body pull, pulling an implement towards you, towards you, towards you, uh bent row, pull up. Um the pressing uh bent row, pull up. Um the pressing uh bent row, pull up. Um the pressing should be horizontal, so perpendicular should be horizontal, so perpendicular should be horizontal, so perpendicular to your body, as well as vertical. So, to your body, as well as vertical. So, to your body, as well as vertical. So, this is lifting a weight over top of this is lifting a weight over top of this is lifting a weight over top of your head, your head, your head, lifting a weight away from you. lifting a weight away from you. lifting a weight away from you. The pull version is pulling horizontally The pull version is pulling horizontally The pull version is pulling horizontally to you and pulling vertically down, pull to you and pulling vertically down, pull to you and pulling vertically down, pull up, things like that. So, if you were up, things like that. So, if you were up, things like that. So, if you were going to do a single workout, you could going to do a single workout, you could going to do a single workout, you could choose four exercises. choose four exercises. choose four exercises. And you could choose one of each, one And you could choose one of each, one And you could choose one of each, one press, upper body press, one upper body press, upper body press, one upper body press, upper body press, one upper body pull, one lower body hinge, one lower pull, one lower body hinge, one lower pull, one lower body hinge, one lower body press. And then that would be like body press. And then that would be like body press. And then that would be like a decently well-rounded exercise. Um a decently well-rounded exercise. Um a decently well-rounded exercise. Um that's your exercise selection. And if that's your exercise selection. And if that's your exercise selection. And if you're taking those through a full range you're taking those through a full range you're taking those through a full range of motion, you're in a pretty good spot, of motion, you're in a pretty good spot, of motion, you're in a pretty good spot, as close as you can. The next one is as close as you can. The next one is as close as you can. The next one is intensity. So, if you want to develop intensity. So, if you want to develop intensity. So, if you want to develop strength, there is a certain recruitment strength, there is a certain recruitment strength, there is a certain recruitment threshold needed for neurons to fire, threshold needed for neurons to fire, threshold needed for neurons to fire, and we have muscle fibers in what we and we have muscle fibers in what we and we have muscle fibers in what we call fast-twitch muscle fibers and call fast-twitch muscle fibers and call fast-twitch muscle fibers and slow-twitch muscle fibers. And in slow-twitch muscle fibers. And in slow-twitch muscle fibers. And in general, you're going to activate the general, you're going to activate the general, you're going to activate the slow-twitch ones first because they tend slow-twitch ones first because they tend slow-twitch ones first because they tend to be associated with low-threshold to be associated with low-threshold to be associated with low-threshold motor neurons. It's not exactly that motor neurons. It's not exactly that motor neurons. It's not exactly that way, but it's close enough, right? way, but it's close enough, right? way, but it's close enough, right? Well, the only way that you activate Well, the only way that you activate Well, the only way that you activate some of these higher threshold neurons some of these higher threshold neurons some of these higher threshold neurons is to demand the muscle to produce more is to demand the muscle to produce more is to demand the muscle to produce more force. So, in general, the only way to force. So, in general, the only way to force. So, in general, the only way to use these big chunks of your muscle, use these big chunks of your muscle, use these big chunks of your muscle, which are incredibly important for which are incredibly important for which are incredibly important for aging, by the way. One of the major aging, by the way. One of the major aging, by the way. One of the major problems we have with aging developing problems we have with aging developing problems we have with aging developing or development of aging related issues or development of aging related issues or development of aging related issues with muscle is the fact that we lose muscle is the fact that we lose muscle is the fact that we lose fast-twitch fibers preferentially. And fast-twitch fibers preferentially. And fast-twitch fibers preferentially. And then we have major problems as we go then we have major problems as we go then we have major problems as we go down the line because we've lost a big down the line because we've lost a big down the line because we've lost a big chunk of our strength and size. So, you chunk of our strength and size. So, you chunk of our strength and size. So, you want to make sure these fibers stay want to make sure these fibers stay want to make sure these fibers stay alive and intact. So, with that being alive and intact. So, with that being alive and intact. So, with that being said, the only way to develop strength said, the only way to develop strength said, the only way to develop strength is then to challenge the muscle to is then to challenge the muscle to is then to challenge the muscle to produce more total force. So, if you produce more total force. So, if you produce more total force. So, if you want to get stronger, you need to impose want to get stronger, you need to impose want to get stronger, you need to impose a demand of strength, a demand of strength, a demand of strength, not repetitions. So, this has to be the not repetitions. So, this has to be the not repetitions. So, this has to be the load has to be very high. Um in general, load has to be very high. Um in general, load has to be very high. Um in general, you're probably looking at above 85% of you're probably looking at above 85% of you're probably looking at above 85% of your one-rep max. If you're moderately your one-rep max. If you're moderately your one-rep max. If you're moderately trained, maybe 75%. So, because the trained, maybe 75%. So, because the trained, maybe 75%. So, because the intensity demand is so high, intensity demand is so high, intensity demand is so high, that is going to enforce you to do a low that is going to enforce you to do a low that is going to enforce you to do a low repetition range. You can't do 12 reps repetition range. You can't do 12 reps repetition range. You can't do 12 reps at 95%. at 95%. at 95%. That then it wouldn't be 95% of your That then it wouldn't be 95% of your That then it wouldn't be 95% of your one-rep max. So, by definition, one-rep max. So, by definition, one-rep max. So, by definition, true strength training is really going true strength training is really going true strength training is really going to be in like five repetitions per set to be in like five repetitions per set to be in like five repetitions per set or less range. So, we've covered choice, or less range. So, we've covered choice, or less range. So, we've covered choice, intensity, and um repetitions, right? The total and um repetitions, right? The total and um repetitions, right? The total amount of sets that you do amount of sets that you do amount of sets that you do is really kind of up to your personal is really kind of up to your personal is really kind of up to your personal fitness level, fitness level, fitness level, right? Um if you did as little as like right? Um if you did as little as like right? Um if you did as little as like three sets per exercise, that's probably three sets per exercise, that's probably three sets per exercise, that's probably enough. &gt;&gt; Work sets. &gt;&gt; Work sets. &gt;&gt; Work sets. &gt;&gt; Totally. Yeah, totally work sets, right. &gt;&gt; Totally. Yeah, totally work sets, right. &gt;&gt; Totally. Yeah, totally work sets, right. So, you'll be fully warmed up and build So, you'll be fully warmed up and build So, you'll be fully warmed up and build up to that 85%. Don't just walk into the up to that 85%. Don't just walk into the up to that 85%. Don't just walk into the gym and throw 85% on and go. Thank you. gym and throw 85% on and go. Thank you. gym and throw 85% on and go. Thank you. That's a That's an important That's a That's an important That's a That's an important distinction. A very classic warm-up distinction. A very classic warm-up distinction. A very classic warm-up thing would be like a set of 10 at 50%, thing would be like a set of 10 at 50%, thing would be like a set of 10 at 50%, a set of eight at 60%, a set of maybe a set of eight at 60%, a set of maybe a set of eight at 60%, a set of maybe eight again at 70%, and then maybe like eight again at 70%, and then maybe like eight again at 70%, and then maybe like a set of five at 75%. So, two or three a set of five at 75%. So, two or three a set of five at 75%. So, two or three or four sets kind of building intensity or four sets kind of building intensity or four sets kind of building intensity and lowering the rep range, and then you and lowering the rep range, and then you and lowering the rep range, and then you would go after your two or three working would go after your two or three working would go after your two or three working sets. Also, sets. Also, sets. Also, in terms of rest intervals, the primary in terms of rest intervals, the primary in terms of rest intervals, the primary driver of strength is intensity. driver of strength is intensity. driver of strength is intensity. It's not the volume, right? It's not the volume, right? It's not the volume, right? It's the intensity. So, in order to maintain the intensity. So, in order to maintain the intensity. So, in order to maintain that, we have to do a low repetition that, we have to do a low repetition that, we have to do a low repetition range, but in addition, we also have to range, but in addition, we also have to range, but in addition, we also have to have a high rest interval. Because if we have a high rest interval. Because if we have a high rest interval. Because if we have any amount of fatigue can occur, have any amount of fatigue can occur, have any amount of fatigue can occur, and we have to then either reduce the and we have to then either reduce the and we have to then either reduce the reps or reduce the intensity, we've lost reps or reduce the intensity, we've lost reps or reduce the intensity, we've lost the primary driver. We've lost that main the primary driver. We've lost that main the primary driver. We've lost that main signal. So, the number we're going to signal. So, the number we're going to signal. So, the number we're going to throw out typically is like two to four throw out typically is like two to four throw out typically is like two to four minutes. Um so, imagine you did Um so, imagine you did Um so, imagine you did you know, your set of bench press, and you know, your set of bench press, and you know, your set of bench press, and you did five repetitions at 85%. You you did five repetitions at 85%. You you did five repetitions at 85%. You probably want to rest two to four probably want to rest two to four probably want to rest two to four minutes before coming back to the bench. minutes before coming back to the bench. minutes before coming back to the bench. That doesn't mean you have to sit there That doesn't mean you have to sit there That doesn't mean you have to sit there on your phone. Like In fact, please on your phone. Like In fact, please on your phone. Like In fact, please don't. Like don't. Like don't. Like Everyone will thank you for not doing Everyone will thank you for not doing Everyone will thank you for not doing that, I promise. You can engage other that, I promise. You can engage other that, I promise. You can engage other muscle groups. This is what we call muscle groups. This is what we call muscle groups. This is what we call supersetting. So, you're doing your supersetting. So, you're doing your supersetting. So, you're doing your bench press, and while that two-minute bench press, and while that two-minute bench press, and while that two-minute clock is running for your chest clock is running for your chest clock is running for your chest to rest, you can go over and do your to rest, you can go over and do your to rest, you can go over and do your deadlifts. You can kind of move back and deadlifts. You can kind of move back and deadlifts. You can kind of move back and forth, and this is how you can make forth, and this is how you can make forth, and this is how you can make strength training not a 7-hour workout. strength training not a 7-hour workout. strength training not a 7-hour workout. If you're a professional athlete, you're If you're a professional athlete, you're If you're a professional athlete, you're going to take that time going to take that time going to take that time because you want to maximize the because you want to maximize the because you want to maximize the outcome. Um sup- We've done this actually in our Um sup- We've done this actually in our Um sup- We've done this actually in our lab, too. Supersets will reduce lab, too. Supersets will reduce lab, too. Supersets will reduce the strength gains, the strength gains, the strength gains, but by a tiny amount. And most of us but by a tiny amount. And most of us but by a tiny amount. And most of us don't care enough don't care enough don't care enough relative to it's going to triple the relative to it's going to triple the relative to it's going to triple the length of your training session. length of your training session. length of your training session. It's not worth it. So, for the average It's not worth it. So, for the average It's not worth it. So, for the average person, I will tell them, "Yeah, person, I will tell them, "Yeah, person, I will tell them, "Yeah, superset." For someone who's trying to superset." For someone who's trying to superset." For someone who's trying to break a world record in weightlifting or break a world record in weightlifting or break a world record in weightlifting or powerlifting, I don't superset. powerlifting, I don't superset. powerlifting, I don't superset. &gt;&gt; How often can and should one train a &gt;&gt; How often can and should one train a &gt;&gt; How often can and should one train a muscle? And how do you know if a muscle is And how do you know if a muscle is And how do you know if a muscle is recovered locally? And how do you know recovered locally? And how do you know recovered locally? And how do you know if your nervous system is recovered if your nervous system is recovered if your nervous system is recovered systemically? &gt;&gt; One of the question is, what are you &gt;&gt; One of the question is, what are you &gt;&gt; One of the question is, what are you training for? If you're training for training for? If you're training for training for? If you're training for hypertrophy, right? Muscle size, muscle growth. We right? Muscle size, muscle growth. We right? Muscle size, muscle growth. We need to hedge towards recovery. Because need to hedge towards recovery. Because need to hedge towards recovery. Because what you're trying to do is cause a what you're trying to do is cause a what you're trying to do is cause a massive insult there, massive insult there, massive insult there, allow then protein synthesis to occur, allow then protein synthesis to occur, allow then protein synthesis to occur, building of new tissue, which takes building of new tissue, which takes building of new tissue, which takes time, 48 to 72 hours like kind of at a time, 48 to 72 hours like kind of at a time, 48 to 72 hours like kind of at a minimum. That process needs to occur. If you're That process needs to occur. If you're That process needs to occur. If you're doing actually more strength, strength doing actually more strength, strength doing actually more strength, strength is not going to cause a lot of soreness. is not going to cause a lot of soreness. is not going to cause a lot of soreness. Therefore, intensity is the driver, Therefore, intensity is the driver, Therefore, intensity is the driver, therefore frequency can be as high as therefore frequency can be as high as therefore frequency can be as high as you want. So, you can train every single you want. So, you can train every single you want. So, you can train every single day the same exact muscle if speed or day the same exact muscle if speed or day the same exact muscle if speed or power or strength are the primary power or strength are the primary power or strength are the primary training tools. But, if you want to training tools. But, if you want to training tools. But, if you want to allow for that process of connect and allow for that process of connect and allow for that process of connect and contract our proteins to add and contract our proteins to add and contract our proteins to add and grow, then you're going to have to allow grow, then you're going to have to allow grow, then you're going to have to allow some recovery because if you go back some recovery because if you go back some recovery because if you go back into that muscle too soon, you're going into that muscle too soon, you're going into that muscle too soon, you're going to blunt the response. You're going to blunt the response. You're going to blunt the response. You're going to stop it. You're going to cut it off. You stop it. You're going to cut it off. You stop it. You're going to cut it off. You have all kinds of problems going on have all kinds of problems going on have all kinds of problems going on in the cell that are going to in the cell that are going to in the cell that are going to um just attenuate that growth um just attenuate that growth um just attenuate that growth response. So, the answer for hypertrophy response. So, the answer for hypertrophy response. So, the answer for hypertrophy is probably less than three out of 10 probably less than three out of 10 probably less than three out of 10 on level of soreness, you can go again. on level of soreness, you can go again. on level of soreness, you can go again. In general, you're probably looking at In general, you're probably looking at In general, you're probably looking at 72 hours is the optimal window. So, if 72 hours is the optimal window. So, if 72 hours is the optimal window. So, if you trained your shoulders on you trained your shoulders on you trained your shoulders on Monday, you probably wouldn't want to train them you probably wouldn't want to train them you probably wouldn't want to train them again on Tuesday if hypertrophy is the again on Tuesday if hypertrophy is the again on Tuesday if hypertrophy is the goal. Maybe Wednesday, maybe Thursday's best. Maybe Wednesday, maybe Thursday's best. Maybe Wednesday, maybe Thursday's best. So, something like an every two to So, something like an every two to So, something like an every two to three-day window is probably three-day window is probably three-day window is probably um and we know a little bit more now um and we know a little bit more now um and we know a little bit more now about why that is. Um the gene cascade, about why that is. Um the gene cascade, about why that is. Um the gene cascade, the signaling response happens well, the signaling response happens well, the signaling response happens well, the signaling happens instantaneously, signaling happens instantaneously, signaling happens instantaneously, right? Within seconds. The gene cascade right? Within seconds. The gene cascade right? Within seconds. The gene cascade is probably in the is probably in the is probably in the peak in the four-hour window, like the peak in the four-hour window, like the peak in the four-hour window, like the depending on which depending on which depending on which gene you want to look at, but it's just gene you want to look at, but it's just gene you want to look at, but it's just kind of a snapshot. But, the protein kind of a snapshot. But, the protein kind of a snapshot. But, the protein synthesis process is 24 to 48-hour synthesis process is 24 to 48-hour synthesis process is 24 to 48-hour thing. And so, it tends to kind of look thing. And so, it tends to kind of look thing. And so, it tends to kind of look like let that thing finish and let that like let that thing finish and let that like let that thing finish and let that signal go back to the baseline signal go back to the baseline signal go back to the baseline and then hit it again. and then hit it again. and then hit it again. And then hit it again. And now, as long And then hit it again. And now, as long And then hit it again. And now, as long as you're providing the nutrients, the as you're providing the nutrients, the as you're providing the nutrients, the recovery should happen recovery should happen recovery should happen and you should be able to sustain the and you should be able to sustain the and you should be able to sustain the same work output in the training same work output in the training same work output in the training session. So, the stimulus stays high session. So, the stimulus stays high session. So, the stimulus stays high and the recovery's there and you can now and the recovery's there and you can now and the recovery's there and you can now continue to grow muscle. continue to grow muscle. continue to grow muscle. &gt;&gt; What if the training split, uh &gt;&gt; What if the training split, uh &gt;&gt; What if the training split, uh lifestyle factors, etc. Somebody, say lifestyle factors, etc. Somebody, say lifestyle factors, etc. Somebody, say let's use your example, trains uh let's use your example, trains uh let's use your example, trains uh shoulders on Monday. Um shoulders on Monday. Um shoulders on Monday. Um Ideally, they would train them again on Ideally, they would train them again on Ideally, they would train them again on Thursday. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; In their particular instance, somewhere &gt;&gt; In their particular instance, somewhere &gt;&gt; In their particular instance, somewhere Wednesday or Thursday. But, they don't. Wednesday or Thursday. But, they don't. Wednesday or Thursday. But, they don't. They wait until Saturday or Sunday for They wait until Saturday or Sunday for They wait until Saturday or Sunday for whatever reason. Maybe it's more whatever reason. Maybe it's more whatever reason. Maybe it's more compatible with their work and compatible with their work and compatible with their work and other exercise schedule. Are they other exercise schedule. Are they other exercise schedule. Are they actually losing hypertrophy that they actually losing hypertrophy that they actually losing hypertrophy that they gained or they've missed out a window to gained or they've missed out a window to gained or they've missed out a window to induce further hypertrophy? induce further hypertrophy? induce further hypertrophy? &gt;&gt; It's probably better to think about it &gt;&gt; It's probably better to think about it &gt;&gt; It's probably better to think about it the latter. the latter. the latter. It's not that you're you've lost, it's It's not that you're you've lost, it's It's not that you're you've lost, it's just you've just kind of lost an just you've just kind of lost an just you've just kind of lost an opportunity to make more progress. If opportunity to make more progress. If opportunity to make more progress. If you want to take 5 days or 6 days in you want to take 5 days or 6 days in you want to take 5 days or 6 days in between each muscle group, you can do between each muscle group, you can do between each muscle group, you can do that. In fact, if you look at the that. In fact, if you look at the that. In fact, if you look at the research, it's going to show that research, it's going to show that research, it's going to show that frequency it can handle changes frequency it can handle changes frequency it can handle changes as long as you get to the same total as long as you get to the same total as long as you get to the same total volume. So, you can do that. You just have to do So, you can do that. You just have to do So, you can do that. You just have to do a lot more work in that one workout. The a lot more work in that one workout. The a lot more work in that one workout. The challenge with splitting up your challenge with splitting up your challenge with splitting up your training sessions for hypertrophy into training sessions for hypertrophy into training sessions for hypertrophy into smaller numbers, like once or twice a smaller numbers, like once or twice a smaller numbers, like once or twice a week, it's just difficult to get that number. it's just difficult to get that number. it's just difficult to get that number. It's difficult to get that volume done. It's difficult to get that volume done. It's difficult to get that volume done. Volume-wise, the more recent Volume-wise, the more recent Volume-wise, the more recent meta-analyses are going to say that meta-analyses are going to say that meta-analyses are going to say that you're probably looking at about 10 you're probably looking at about 10 you're probably looking at about 10 working sets working sets working sets per muscle group per week. per muscle group per week. per muscle group per week. Seems to be kind of the minimum Seems to be kind of the minimum Seems to be kind of the minimum threshold that you're going to want to threshold that you're going to want to threshold that you're going to want to hit. So, if you did three sets of 10 at hit. So, if you did three sets of 10 at hit. So, if you did three sets of 10 at your shoulders on Monday, your shoulders on Monday, your shoulders on Monday, three sets of 10 shoulders three sets of 10 shoulders three sets of 10 shoulders Wednesday and three on Friday, that's Wednesday and three on Friday, that's Wednesday and three on Friday, that's nine working sets. nine working sets. nine working sets. The problem is The problem is The problem is 10 is kind of the minimum. 10 is kind of the minimum. 10 is kind of the minimum. You probably want to look for more like You probably want to look for more like You probably want to look for more like 15 to 20. And in fact, well-trained 15 to 20. And in fact, well-trained 15 to 20. And in fact, well-trained folks, 20 25. folks, 20 25. folks, 20 25. That becomes very challenging That becomes very challenging That becomes very challenging in one workout. In fact, de facto, in one workout. In fact, de facto, in one workout. In fact, de facto, you're not going to be able to do it, you're not going to be able to do it, you're not going to be able to do it, right? And so, that is where it's not right? And so, that is where it's not right? And so, that is where it's not the frequency that looks like it kills the frequency that looks like it kills the frequency that looks like it kills you, it's just the fact you have got to you, it's just the fact you have got to you, it's just the fact you have got to get because the total driver of strength get because the total driver of strength get because the total driver of strength is intensity, but the total driver of is intensity, but the total driver of is intensity, but the total driver of hypertrophy is volume. Assume you're hypertrophy is volume. Assume you're hypertrophy is volume. Assume you're taking it to fatigue, right? Or muscular taking it to fatigue, right? Or muscular taking it to fatigue, right? Or muscular failure. So, it's just tough to get failure. So, it's just tough to get failure. So, it's just tough to get enough done enough done enough done &gt;&gt; for hypertrophy. &gt;&gt; for hypertrophy. &gt;&gt; for hypertrophy. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; What are the repetition ranges that are &gt;&gt; What are the repetition ranges that are &gt;&gt; What are the repetition ranges that are effective? And what are the ones that effective? And what are the ones that effective? And what are the ones that are most effective if one is trying to are most effective if one is trying to are most effective if one is trying to maximize some of the other variables? maximize some of the other variables? maximize some of the other variables? Like, people don't want more than Like, people don't want more than Like, people don't want more than an hour to 75 minutes in the gym. an hour to 75 minutes in the gym. an hour to 75 minutes in the gym. &gt;&gt; The quick answer there is anywhere &gt;&gt; The quick answer there is anywhere &gt;&gt; The quick answer there is anywhere between like 5 to 30 reps per set. between like 5 to 30 reps per set. between like 5 to 30 reps per set. That's going to show across the That's going to show across the That's going to show across the literature pretty much equal pretty much equal pretty much equal hypertrophy gains. Um but I'm just hypertrophy gains. Um but I'm just hypertrophy gains. Um but I'm just remembering one thing from a second ago. remembering one thing from a second ago. remembering one thing from a second ago. I want to give a better answer for the I want to give a better answer for the I want to give a better answer for the frequency. You can do every single day frequency. You can do every single day frequency. You can do every single day for strength. If you want though, like for strength. If you want though, like for strength. If you want though, like what's probably minimally viable, two what's probably minimally viable, two what's probably minimally viable, two twice per week per muscle. So hamstrings twice per week per muscle. So hamstrings twice per week per muscle. So hamstrings strength twice per week. That That's a strength twice per week. That That's a strength twice per week. That That's a good number to get most people really good number to get most people really good number to get most people really strong. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; You can do every single day. &gt;&gt; You can do every single day. &gt;&gt; You can do every single day. You don't need to though. So I want to You don't need to though. So I want to You don't need to though. So I want to make sure that like I wasn't saying you make sure that like I wasn't saying you make sure that like I wasn't saying you have to train a muscle have to train a muscle have to train a muscle 85% every single day to get it strong. 85% every single day to get it strong. 85% every single day to get it strong. Two is a good number. Three is great, Two is a good number. Three is great, Two is a good number. Three is great, but probably even two is really but probably even two is really but probably even two is really effective. When it comes to hypertrophy effective. When it comes to hypertrophy effective. When it comes to hypertrophy training, the way I like to explain it training, the way I like to explain it training, the way I like to explain it is it's kind of idiot-proof. is it's kind of idiot-proof. is it's kind of idiot-proof. The programming is idiot-proof. The work The programming is idiot-proof. The work The programming is idiot-proof. The work is hard though. is hard though. is hard though. So you here's your range. Anywhere So you here's your range. Anywhere So you here's your range. Anywhere between you know, five reps and 30. you know, five reps and 30. you know, five reps and 30. Like can you hit somewhere in there? Like can you hit somewhere in there? Like can you hit somewhere in there? Perfect. It's all equally effective. You Perfect. It's all equally effective. You Perfect. It's all equally effective. You can't screw that up. The only caveat for can't screw that up. The only caveat for can't screw that up. The only caveat for hypertrophy is you have to take it to hypertrophy is you have to take it to hypertrophy is you have to take it to muscular failure. muscular failure. muscular failure. &gt;&gt; And you need enough rest for the &gt;&gt; And you need enough rest for the &gt;&gt; And you need enough rest for the adaptation and protein synthesis to adaptation and protein synthesis to adaptation and protein synthesis to occur. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And if you recover faster, you can maybe &gt;&gt; And if you recover faster, you can maybe &gt;&gt; And if you recover faster, you can maybe do it more frequently. And if you don't, do it more frequently. And if you don't, do it more frequently. And if you don't, maybe less frequently. maybe less frequently. maybe less frequently. &gt;&gt; Should people perhaps experiment and &gt;&gt; Should people perhaps experiment and &gt;&gt; Should people perhaps experiment and figure out what repetition range allows figure out what repetition range allows figure out what repetition range allows them to recover them to recover them to recover um in concert with the training um in concert with the training um in concert with the training frequency that they can do consistently? frequency that they can do consistently? frequency that they can do consistently? &gt;&gt; My recommendation is I think you should &gt;&gt; My recommendation is I think you should &gt;&gt; My recommendation is I think you should actually use the repetition range as a actually use the repetition range as a actually use the repetition range as a way to have some variation. way to have some variation. way to have some variation. Because most people don't want to go in Because most people don't want to go in Because most people don't want to go in the gym and do three sets of 10. They're the gym and do three sets of 10. They're the gym and do three sets of 10. They're going to get very bored very quickly. going to get very bored very quickly. going to get very bored very quickly. And so I think you should actually And so I think you should actually And so I think you should actually intentionally change the rep schemes for intentionally change the rep schemes for intentionally change the rep schemes for simple sake of having more fun. simple sake of having more fun. simple sake of having more fun. It is a very different challenge. The It is a very different challenge. The It is a very different challenge. The mechanisms that are inducing hypertrophy mechanisms that are inducing hypertrophy mechanisms that are inducing hypertrophy are different. are different. are different. But there's only a maximum amount of But there's only a maximum amount of But there's only a maximum amount of growth that one can get, right? But the growth that one can get, right? But the growth that one can get, right? But the three most likely drivers are one, three most likely drivers are one, three most likely drivers are one, metabolic stress, metabolic stress, metabolic stress, two, mechanical tension, and then three, two, mechanical tension, and then three, two, mechanical tension, and then three, muscular damage. muscular damage. muscular damage. You don't have to have all three. One is You don't have to have all three. One is You don't have to have all three. One is sufficient. You can have a little bit of sufficient. You can have a little bit of sufficient. You can have a little bit of one or two, and you can kind of So you one or two, and you can kind of So you one or two, and you can kind of So you get to play here. get to play here. get to play here. We've already talked about the muscular We've already talked about the muscular We've already talked about the muscular damage. Again, it's very clear more damage. Again, it's very clear more damage. Again, it's very clear more damage is not better. damage is not better. damage is not better. But it is somewhat But it is somewhat But it is somewhat a decent proxy, right? Like I get a decent proxy, right? Like I get a decent proxy, right? Like I get a little bit of soreness is good. Just little bit of soreness is good. Just little bit of soreness is good. Just don't get so sore it's compromising your don't get so sore it's compromising your don't get so sore it's compromising your total volume. total volume. total volume. All right? Um mechanical tension is kind All right? Um mechanical tension is kind All right? Um mechanical tension is kind of like strength and this is why if you of like strength and this is why if you of like strength and this is why if you do even sets of five or eight and you're do even sets of five or eight and you're do even sets of five or eight and you're kind of close to that strength range, kind of close to that strength range, kind of close to that strength range, you will gain a little bit of muscle. you will gain a little bit of muscle. you will gain a little bit of muscle. It's not optimal muscle gain, but you're It's not optimal muscle gain, but you're It's not optimal muscle gain, but you're going to gain some because everything in going to gain some because everything in going to gain some because everything in these like physiology doesn't cut off at these like physiology doesn't cut off at these like physiology doesn't cut off at four reps and then five reps is a four reps and then five reps is a four reps and then five reps is a different thing, right? It's always different thing, right? It's always different thing, right? It's always a blend so think of it as like a blend so think of it as like a blend so think of it as like a fading curve. As you get closer to the fading curve. As you get closer to the fading curve. As you get closer to the end, it fades less effective. As you get end, it fades less effective. As you get end, it fades less effective. As you get closer to the middle, it's more closer to the middle, it's more closer to the middle, it's more effective. Anywhere between eight reps per set to Anywhere between eight reps per set to Anywhere between eight reps per set to 30, it's equally effective. Past 30, it's equally effective. Past 30, it's equally effective. Past 30, it's going to blend out. Past eight to it's going to blend out. Past eight to it's going to blend out. Past eight to five to four to three, it's going to five to four to three, it's going to five to four to three, it's going to blend you know, less or there. So, mechanical you know, less or there. So, mechanical you know, less or there. So, mechanical tension is the one that's heavy. tension is the one that's heavy. tension is the one that's heavy. Muscle damage is the other one. The Muscle damage is the other one. The Muscle damage is the other one. The third one is metabolic stress. third one is metabolic stress. third one is metabolic stress. And this is um And this is um And this is um a get a bit of an area of scientific a get a bit of an area of scientific a get a bit of an area of scientific contention, but something's there. but something's there. but something's there. I know something's there. We just We're I know something's there. We just We're I know something's there. We just We're just kind of fumbling to figure out what just kind of fumbling to figure out what just kind of fumbling to figure out what exactly it is. And this is Metabolic exactly it is. And this is Metabolic exactly it is. And this is Metabolic stress is the burn, right? It It's stress is the burn, right? It It's stress is the burn, right? It It's there. So, you want to train to failure, there. So, you want to train to failure, there. So, you want to train to failure, but you don't need to go to extreme but you don't need to go to extreme but you don't need to go to extreme failure. So, you don't need to failure. So, you don't need to failure. So, you don't need to necessarily go to that like necessarily go to that like necessarily go to that like a partner has to lift the barbell off my a partner has to lift the barbell off my a partner has to lift the barbell off my chest. But you have to get close. If chest. But you have to get close. If chest. But you have to get close. If you'd be willing to throw out a few sort you'd be willing to throw out a few sort you'd be willing to throw out a few sort of sets and rep parameters that could of sets and rep parameters that could of sets and rep parameters that could act as broad guidelines for people who act as broad guidelines for people who act as broad guidelines for people who want to want to want to explore further. A really fast answer is explore further. A really fast answer is explore further. A really fast answer is what I just call the three to five what I just call the three to five what I just call the three to five concept, all right? So, pick three to concept, all right? So, pick three to concept, all right? So, pick three to five exercises. If you're feeling better five exercises. If you're feeling better five exercises. If you're feeling better that day, choose on the higher end. If that day, choose on the higher end. If that day, choose on the higher end. If you're feeling less that day or you have you're feeling less that day or you have you're feeling less that day or you have a shorter time frame to train, go less. a shorter time frame to train, go less. a shorter time frame to train, go less. So, three to five exercises, So, three to five exercises, So, three to five exercises, do three to five reps, do three to five reps, do three to five reps, three to five sets, three to five sets, three to five sets, take three to five minutes rest in take three to five minutes rest in take three to five minutes rest in between, and do it three to five times a between, and do it three to five times a between, and do it three to five times a week. So, that can be as little as three week. So, that can be as little as three week. So, that can be as little as three sets of three sets of three sets of three for three exercises, three times a week. for three exercises, three times a week. for three exercises, three times a week. That's that's a 20-minute workout three That's that's a 20-minute workout three That's that's a 20-minute workout three times a week. It can be as high as five times a week. It can be as high as five times a week. It can be as high as five sets of five for five exercises five sets of five for five exercises five sets of five for five exercises five days a week. So, it's very broad and days a week. So, it's very broad and days a week. So, it's very broad and allows people to still stay within the allows people to still stay within the allows people to still stay within the domains of strength and power domains of strength and power domains of strength and power while still being able to move and while still being able to move and while still being able to move and contour toward their lifestyle and contour toward their lifestyle and contour toward their lifestyle and soreness and time and all those things. soreness and time and all those things. soreness and time and all those things. The only differentiator to pay attention The only differentiator to pay attention The only differentiator to pay attention to between power to between power to between power and strength is intensity. and strength is intensity. and strength is intensity. So, if you want strength, this is now So, if you want strength, this is now So, if you want strength, this is now 85% plus of your max, right? 85% plus of your max, right? 85% plus of your max, right? If you want power, it needs to be a lot If you want power, it needs to be a lot If you want power, it needs to be a lot lighter cuz you need to move more lighter cuz you need to move more lighter cuz you need to move more towards the velocity end of the spectrum towards the velocity end of the spectrum towards the velocity end of the spectrum because power is strength multiplied by because power is strength multiplied by because power is strength multiplied by speed. So, while getting stronger by definition So, while getting stronger by definition So, while getting stronger by definition can help power, you probably want to can help power, you probably want to can help power, you probably want to spend more of your time in the 40% to spend more of your time in the 40% to spend more of your time in the 40% to 70% range. Like plus or minus. So, 70% range. Like plus or minus. So, 70% range. Like plus or minus. So, that's it. Both of them conceptually that's it. Both of them conceptually that's it. Both of them conceptually though work everything else. The though work everything else. The though work everything else. The exercise, the reps, the frequency, exercise, the reps, the frequency, exercise, the reps, the frequency, all that can be still in the three to all that can be still in the three to all that can be still in the three to five range. Just change the intensity five range. Just change the intensity five range. Just change the intensity depending on which outcome you want. depending on which outcome you want. depending on which outcome you want. &gt;&gt; The nervous system obviously plays an &gt;&gt; The nervous system obviously plays an &gt;&gt; The nervous system obviously plays an important role at the level of nerves important role at the level of nerves important role at the level of nerves controlling the contraction of muscle controlling the contraction of muscle controlling the contraction of muscle fibers. But, of course, we have these fibers. But, of course, we have these fibers. But, of course, we have these upper motor neurons, which are the ones upper motor neurons, which are the ones upper motor neurons, which are the ones that reside in our brain that control that reside in our brain that control that reside in our brain that control the lower motor neurons that control the lower motor neurons that control the lower motor neurons that control muscle. This takes us into the realm of where This takes us into the realm of where This takes us into the realm of where the mind is at during a particular the mind is at during a particular the mind is at during a particular movement. I can imagine doing workouts movement. I can imagine doing workouts movement. I can imagine doing workouts that are mainly focused on strength that are mainly focused on strength that are mainly focused on strength or mainly focused on hypertrophy. or mainly focused on hypertrophy. or mainly focused on hypertrophy. And in the case of strength, am I trying And in the case of strength, am I trying And in the case of strength, am I trying to move weights? And when I'm trying to move weights? And when I'm trying to move weights? And when I'm trying to generate hypertrophy, am I trying to generate hypertrophy, am I trying to generate hypertrophy, am I trying to {quote} challenge muscles? That subtle {quote} challenge muscles? That subtle {quote} challenge muscles? That subtle mental shift changes the patterns of mental shift changes the patterns of mental shift changes the patterns of nerve fiber recruitment. So, can we say nerve fiber recruitment. So, can we say nerve fiber recruitment. So, can we say to get stronger, focus on moving weights to get stronger, focus on moving weights to get stronger, focus on moving weights still with proper form and safely? And still with proper form and safely? And still with proper form and safely? And to get hypertrophy, focus on challenging to get hypertrophy, focus on challenging to get hypertrophy, focus on challenging muscles still with proper form and muscles still with proper form and muscles still with proper form and safely. &gt;&gt; Intentionality matters for both. In &gt;&gt; Intentionality matters for both. In &gt;&gt; Intentionality matters for both. In other words, if you look at some other words, if you look at some other words, if you look at some interesting science that's been done on interesting science that's been done on interesting science that's been done on power development and speed development, power development and speed development, power development and speed development, the intent to move is actually more the intent to move is actually more the intent to move is actually more important than the actual movement important than the actual movement important than the actual movement velocity. So, if you're doing say something for So, if you're doing say something for So, if you're doing say something for power or strength and you're doing just power or strength and you're doing just power or strength and you're doing just enough to get the bar up, enough to get the bar up, enough to get the bar up, that will result in less improvements in that will result in less improvements in that will result in less improvements in strength than even if you're moving at strength than even if you're moving at strength than even if you're moving at the exact same speed, but you're the exact same speed, but you're the exact same speed, but you're intending to move faster. intending to move faster. intending to move faster. And this is one of the reasons why good And this is one of the reasons why good And this is one of the reasons why good coaching matters. So, if you're coaching matters. So, if you're coaching matters. So, if you're coaching an athlete through a power workout an athlete through a power workout an athlete through a power workout especially, and they're doing enough to especially, and they're doing enough to especially, and they're doing enough to just lift 50% of their one-rep max, it's just lift 50% of their one-rep max, it's just lift 50% of their one-rep max, it's not going to generate as much speed not going to generate as much speed not going to generate as much speed development as them trying to move that development as them trying to move that development as them trying to move that bar as fast as they can, even if the net bar as fast as they can, even if the net bar as fast as they can, even if the net result is the same barbell velocity. Turns out is the same barbell velocity. Turns out is the same barbell velocity. Turns out nerves matter. nerves matter. nerves matter. &gt;&gt; Even if the bar is moving at the same &gt;&gt; Even if the bar is moving at the same &gt;&gt; Even if the bar is moving at the same speed, same weight, speed, same weight, speed, same weight, &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; if my internal representation, my &gt;&gt; if my internal representation, my &gt;&gt; if my internal representation, my thoughts are I'm trying to move this as thoughts are I'm trying to move this as thoughts are I'm trying to move this as fast as possible, versus I'm just trying fast as possible, versus I'm just trying fast as possible, versus I'm just trying to get the bar away from me, to get the bar away from me, to get the bar away from me, and get the weight up, I'm going to and get the weight up, I'm going to and get the weight up, I'm going to get different outcomes. get different outcomes. get different outcomes. &gt;&gt; Yep, this is quality of work, right? &gt;&gt; Yep, this is quality of work, right? &gt;&gt; Yep, this is quality of work, right? This is Did you do enough to just check This is Did you do enough to just check This is Did you do enough to just check off the box or did you actually strive off the box or did you actually strive off the box or did you actually strive for adaptation, right? adaptation, right? adaptation, right? Si- Similar concept actually works for Si- Similar concept actually works for Si- Similar concept actually works for hypertrophy. In terms of there is hypertrophy. In terms of there is hypertrophy. In terms of there is a handful of very recent studies that a handful of very recent studies that a handful of very recent studies that have looked at what we'll call the have looked at what we'll call the have looked at what we'll call the mind-muscle connection. And this is mind-muscle connection. And this is mind-muscle connection. And this is doing things like imagine a bicep curl, doing things like imagine a bicep curl, doing things like imagine a bicep curl, and you're simply looking at and you're simply looking at and you're simply looking at and watching your biceps and you're thinking watching your biceps and you're thinking watching your biceps and you're thinking about contracting it harder, even though about contracting it harder, even though about contracting it harder, even though you execute the same repetitions at the you execute the same repetitions at the you execute the same repetitions at the same exact intensity, initial same exact intensity, initial same exact intensity, initial indications are the mind-body connection indications are the mind-body connection indications are the mind-body connection are going to result in more growth than are going to result in more growth than are going to result in more growth than not. I think it's very much worth your not. I think it's very much worth your not. I think it's very much worth your time to do a higher quality training time to do a higher quality training time to do a higher quality training session, be more intentional, be more intentional, be more intentional, be present, be present, be present, than just executing the same exact than just executing the same exact than just executing the same exact workout. I think that's globally very workout. I think that's globally very workout. I think that's globally very clear to be to your advantage. So, if clear to be to your advantage. So, if clear to be to your advantage. So, if you're thinking you're thinking you're thinking like I'm going to like I don't want to like I'm going to like I don't want to like I'm going to like I don't want to work out today. I got all this going on work out today. I got all this going on work out today. I got all this going on or I'm tired or whatever. I'm just going or I'm tired or whatever. I'm just going or I'm tired or whatever. I'm just going to do the work out anyways and get to do the work out anyways and get to do the work out anyways and get through it. through it. through it. Okay. If you can go, you know what though? If you can go, you know what though? If you can go, you know what though? Like I'm going to cut 15 minutes out of Like I'm going to cut 15 minutes out of Like I'm going to cut 15 minutes out of this thing. this thing. this thing. I'm going to get my head right. I'm going to get my head right. I'm going to get my head right. I'm going to go get 20 minutes of quality going to go get 20 minutes of quality going to go get 20 minutes of quality work done. work done. work done. That's that's your best option by far. That's that's your best option by far. That's that's your best option by far. &gt;&gt; Are there ways that people can &gt;&gt; Are there ways that people can &gt;&gt; Are there ways that people can learn to engage particular muscle groups learn to engage particular muscle groups learn to engage particular muscle groups more effectively over time for sake of more effectively over time for sake of more effectively over time for sake of hypertrophy or strength or for cases of hypertrophy or strength or for cases of hypertrophy or strength or for cases of trying to overcome injury potential or trying to overcome injury potential or trying to overcome injury potential or injury because imbalances are bad across injury because imbalances are bad across injury because imbalances are bad across the board. the board. the board. &gt;&gt; Yeah, this is actually very common and I &gt;&gt; Yeah, this is actually very common and I &gt;&gt; Yeah, this is actually very common and I think everyone has probably gone through think everyone has probably gone through think everyone has probably gone through this. There's some part that you just this. There's some part that you just this. There's some part that you just can't get going. This goes back to can't get going. This goes back to can't get going. This goes back to earlier part of our conversation, which earlier part of our conversation, which earlier part of our conversation, which is why exercises themselves do not is why exercises themselves do not is why exercises themselves do not determine the adaptation. determine the adaptation. determine the adaptation. It's the execution that matters, right? It's the execution that matters, right? It's the execution that matters, right? It's the technique, it's the rep range. It's the technique, it's the rep range. It's the technique, it's the rep range. All of those are going to determine your All of those are going to determine your All of those are going to determine your actual result. actual result. actual result. So if anytime you were you're So if anytime you were you're So if anytime you were you're banging your head against the wall and banging your head against the wall and banging your head against the wall and thinking like why am I not getting thinking like why am I not getting thinking like why am I not getting movement here? Growth or strength or movement here? Growth or strength or movement here? Growth or strength or whatever. It's guaranteed to be one of whatever. It's guaranteed to be one of whatever. It's guaranteed to be one of those areas, right? You're probably not those areas, right? You're probably not those areas, right? You're probably not getting um the muscle groups to getting um the muscle groups to getting um the muscle groups to activate. Whenever I'm diagnosing activate. Whenever I'm diagnosing activate. Whenever I'm diagnosing movement quality, movement quality, movement quality, I look for a handful of things, but very I look for a handful of things, but very I look for a handful of things, but very first one is awareness. You'd be first one is awareness. You'd be first one is awareness. You'd be surprised how many folks um when you just simply how many folks um when you just simply how many folks um when you just simply tell them that muscle group right there tell them that muscle group right there tell them that muscle group right there and maybe you give them a tactical and maybe you give them a tactical and maybe you give them a tactical prompt. So you touch it and you just prompt. So you touch it and you just prompt. So you touch it and you just tell them things like, "Hey, squeeze my tell them things like, "Hey, squeeze my tell them things like, "Hey, squeeze my finger. Squeeze my finger." As you're finger. Squeeze my finger." As you're finger. Squeeze my finger." As you're doing your bent row or your pull down, doing your bent row or your pull down, doing your bent row or your pull down, you can touch the lat. All this stuff you can touch the lat. All this stuff you can touch the lat. All this stuff can help can help can help get people uh to activate. Outside of get people uh to activate. Outside of get people uh to activate. Outside of simple awareness, eccentric overload is simple awareness, eccentric overload is simple awareness, eccentric overload is a very effective way for um activation a very effective way for um activation a very effective way for um activation of a difficult to target muscle. Things of a difficult to target muscle. Things of a difficult to target muscle. Things like a pull-up. Okay, so if I'm like a pull-up. Okay, so if I'm like a pull-up. Okay, so if I'm going to do a pull-up and I have poor going to do a pull-up and I have poor going to do a pull-up and I have poor lat activation, to make the movement lat activation, to make the movement lat activation, to make the movement simpler, I'm going to go all the way to simpler, I'm going to go all the way to simpler, I'm going to go all the way to the top. So imagine stepping on a box or the top. So imagine stepping on a box or the top. So imagine stepping on a box or something going all the way to that top something going all the way to that top something going all the way to that top of that pull-up position and starting of that pull-up position and starting of that pull-up position and starting from there and I want you to simply from there and I want you to simply from there and I want you to simply lower it lower it lower it under control. And so you're just simply under control. And so you're just simply under control. And so you're just simply breaking the movement down into smaller breaking the movement down into smaller breaking the movement down into smaller pieces that allow you to focus on the pieces that allow you to focus on the pieces that allow you to focus on the execution more. Eccentrics are great for execution more. Eccentrics are great for execution more. Eccentrics are great for strength development, very good for strength development, very good for strength development, very good for hypertrophy, and allow you to focus on hypertrophy, and allow you to focus on hypertrophy, and allow you to focus on control. I control. I control. I I'm willing to bet a huge percentage of I'm willing to bet a huge percentage of I'm willing to bet a huge percentage of you out there who've like I've never had you out there who've like I've never had you out there who've like I've never had a sore lat, even though I've done a lot a sore lat, even though I've done a lot a sore lat, even though I've done a lot of pull-ups and things like that. If you of pull-ups and things like that. If you of pull-ups and things like that. If you do that eccentric only, you'll probably do that eccentric only, you'll probably do that eccentric only, you'll probably wake up the next day going, "Oh gosh, I wake up the next day going, "Oh gosh, I wake up the next day going, "Oh gosh, I feel it there." feel it there." feel it there." And that's a sign, even if you didn't And that's a sign, even if you didn't And that's a sign, even if you didn't feel it in the workout, but it got a feel it in the workout, but it got a feel it in the workout, but it got a little sore the next day, keep down that little sore the next day, keep down that little sore the next day, keep down that path. And eventually work that into a path. And eventually work that into a path. And eventually work that into a progression where you can do the progression where you can do the progression where you can do the concentric, eccentric, and isometric concentric, eccentric, and isometric concentric, eccentric, and isometric portions and get activation. So, that portions and get activation. So, that portions and get activation. So, that may take you 6 weeks. that may take you 6 weeks. that may take you 6 weeks. May take you 6 months. May take you 6 months. May take you 6 months. But, that's generally a pretty good But, that's generally a pretty good But, that's generally a pretty good strategy for learning how to activate a strategy for learning how to activate a strategy for learning how to activate a muscle group. muscle group. muscle group. &gt;&gt; Is there a uh prescriptive for how to &gt;&gt; Is there a uh prescriptive for how to &gt;&gt; Is there a uh prescriptive for how to breathe during resistance training that breathe during resistance training that breathe during resistance training that applies 75% of the time to 75% of applies 75% of the time to 75% of applies 75% of the time to 75% of people? &gt;&gt; In general, &gt;&gt; In general, &gt;&gt; In general, a decent strategy is to maintain a decent strategy is to maintain a decent strategy is to maintain a breath hold during the lowering or breath hold during the lowering or breath hold during the lowering or eccentric or most dangerous part of the eccentric or most dangerous part of the eccentric or most dangerous part of the movement, and then you can exhale on the movement, and then you can exhale on the movement, and then you can exhale on the concentric portion. So, if the bench concentric portion. So, if the bench concentric portion. So, if the bench press is our example, press is our example, press is our example, if you held in, if you held in, if you held in, braced, lowered under control, braced, lowered under control, braced, lowered under control, and now started the concentric pushing and now started the concentric pushing and now started the concentric pushing away force, and then you wanted to take away force, and then you wanted to take away force, and then you wanted to take an expiration an expiration an expiration during the last half of the concentric during the last half of the concentric during the last half of the concentric portion, that's an okay strategy. portion, that's an okay strategy. portion, that's an okay strategy. If you're going to do a single rep, If you're going to do a single rep, If you're going to do a single rep, you don't need to worry about it. you don't need to worry about it. you don't need to worry about it. You you can just avoid or omit breathing You you can just avoid or omit breathing You you can just avoid or omit breathing entirely. You're going to be just fine. entirely. You're going to be just fine. entirely. You're going to be just fine. If you're doing more than that, If you're doing more than that, If you're doing more than that, especially three to four to five to especially three to four to five to especially three to four to five to seven eight, you're going to have to seven eight, you're going to have to seven eight, you're going to have to have some breathing strategy. A very have some breathing strategy. A very have some breathing strategy. A very common one is common one is common one is um probably every third breath. I'm um probably every third breath. I'm um probably every third breath. I'm going to do like Shh. Exhale on the third. Reset, Shh. Exhale on the third. Reset, Shh. Exhale on the third. Reset, re-breathe. Something like that. If you feel like Something like that. If you feel like Something like that. If you feel like you need to breathe after every one, you need to breathe after every one, you need to breathe after every one, that's okay, but it's going to get that's okay, but it's going to get that's okay, but it's going to get wasteful cuz you have to take time in wasteful cuz you have to take time in wasteful cuz you have to take time in between reps of sitting there. If it's a between reps of sitting there. If it's a between reps of sitting there. If it's a squat, that's different squat, that's different squat, that's different um versus a deadlift if you're resting um versus a deadlift if you're resting um versus a deadlift if you're resting at the bottom. So, there is a at the bottom. So, there is a at the bottom. So, there is a little bit of game here. So, in general little bit of game here. So, in general little bit of game here. So, in general though is that is that 75 kind of though is that is that 75 kind of though is that is that 75 kind of rule you thrown out. You threw out rule you thrown out. You threw out rule you thrown out. You threw out Breathe in. Breathe in. Breathe in. Do the lowering and exhale on the out. Do the lowering and exhale on the out. Do the lowering and exhale on the out. If you have to, less reps, don't worry If you have to, less reps, don't worry If you have to, less reps, don't worry about it. More reps, then you need to about it. More reps, then you need to about it. More reps, then you need to come up with some sort of breathing come up with some sort of breathing come up with some sort of breathing strategy. &gt;&gt; How about breathing in between sets? &gt;&gt; How about breathing in between sets? &gt;&gt; How about breathing in between sets? Um and maybe even after the workout. Um and maybe even after the workout. Um and maybe even after the workout. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We're not going to just finish a &gt;&gt; Yeah. We're not going to just finish a &gt;&gt; Yeah. We're not going to just finish a workout, high-five, drink water, and workout, high-five, drink water, and workout, high-five, drink water, and walk out of the gym. There will be a walk out of the gym. There will be a walk out of the gym. There will be a down-regulation strategy that is heavily down-regulation strategy that is heavily down-regulation strategy that is heavily involved with some sort of light control involved with some sort of light control involved with some sort of light control as well as breath control. Um the as well as breath control. Um the as well as breath control. Um the individual prescription on that individual prescription on that individual prescription on that there's a ton of variation with what you there's a ton of variation with what you there's a ton of variation with what you can do. can do. can do. The easiest thing is do something that The easiest thing is do something that The easiest thing is do something that calms you down. Most likely that's going calms you down. Most likely that's going calms you down. Most likely that's going to be move towards as much nasal to be move towards as much nasal to be move towards as much nasal breathing as you can possibly do. And a breathing as you can possibly do. And a breathing as you can possibly do. And a really easy rule of thumb is a double a really easy rule of thumb is a double a really easy rule of thumb is a double exhale length exhale length exhale length relative to inhale. So, if you need to relative to inhale. So, if you need to relative to inhale. So, if you need to take a like 4-second inhale, take a like 4-second inhale, take a like 4-second inhale, double that time and breathe out for 8 double that time and breathe out for 8 double that time and breathe out for 8 seconds. A box breathing is fine, so equal A box breathing is fine, so equal A box breathing is fine, so equal inhale, equal hold, equal exhale, equal inhale, equal hold, equal exhale, equal inhale, equal hold, equal exhale, equal hold. So, 4-second inhale, 4-second hold. So, 4-second inhale, 4-second hold. So, 4-second inhale, 4-second hold, etc., etc. And just breathe for 5 hold, etc., etc. And just breathe for 5 hold, etc., etc. And just breathe for 5 minutes. &gt;&gt; And I started doing this and it &gt;&gt; And I started doing this and it &gt;&gt; And I started doing this and it completely changed the rate of recovery completely changed the rate of recovery completely changed the rate of recovery for me. I realized that I was leaving for me. I realized that I was leaving for me. I realized that I was leaving workouts, both endurance workouts and workouts, both endurance workouts and workouts, both endurance workouts and strength hypertrophy workouts, feeling strength hypertrophy workouts, feeling strength hypertrophy workouts, feeling great, but looking at my phone, getting great, but looking at my phone, getting great, but looking at my phone, getting right into email and meetings, not right into email and meetings, not right into email and meetings, not concentrating on my breathing. And all I concentrating on my breathing. And all I concentrating on my breathing. And all I did was to introduce a on your did was to introduce a on your did was to introduce a on your recommendation a 5-minute recommendation a 5-minute recommendation a 5-minute down-regulation, so exhale emphasized down-regulation, so exhale emphasized down-regulation, so exhale emphasized breathing of breathing of breathing of a bunch of different varieties, a bunch of different varieties, a bunch of different varieties, physiological sighs, box breathing, physiological sighs, box breathing, physiological sighs, box breathing, exhale emphasized twice as long as the exhale emphasized twice as long as the exhale emphasized twice as long as the inhale component for 5 minutes. And component for 5 minutes. And component for 5 minutes. And I noticed two things. One, I recovered I noticed two things. One, I recovered I noticed two things. One, I recovered more quickly workout to workout, no more quickly workout to workout, no more quickly workout to workout, no question about it. question about it. question about it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And the other is that I used to have &gt;&gt; And the other is that I used to have &gt;&gt; And the other is that I used to have this dip in energy that would occur 3 or 4 dip in energy that would occur 3 or 4 dip in energy that would occur 3 or 4 hours after a hard workout, and I always hours after a hard workout, and I always hours after a hard workout, and I always thought that had to do with the fact thought that had to do with the fact thought that had to do with the fact that I generally eaten a meal at some that I generally eaten a meal at some that I generally eaten a meal at some point post-workout. point post-workout. point post-workout. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Turns out it wasn't the meal at all. &gt;&gt; Turns out it wasn't the meal at all. &gt;&gt; Turns out it wasn't the meal at all. It's that adrenaline It's that adrenaline It's that adrenaline ramp up during the workouts. I wasn't ramp up during the workouts. I wasn't ramp up during the workouts. I wasn't clamping that at the end and so I think clamping that at the end and so I think clamping that at the end and so I think eventually it just crashed. Turns out eventually it just crashed. Turns out eventually it just crashed. Turns out the down regulations allowed me to work the down regulations allowed me to work the down regulations allowed me to work through the afternoon. It's really been through the afternoon. It's really been through the afternoon. It's really been quite powerful and so I'm grateful to quite powerful and so I'm grateful to quite powerful and so I'm grateful to you for that and I think this is you for that and I think this is you for that and I think this is something that I think 98% something that I think 98% something that I think 98% of people are not doing and it's only 5 of people are not doing and it's only 5 of people are not doing and it's only 5 minutes. &gt;&gt; You don't even have to do five. Give me &gt;&gt; You don't even have to do five. Give me &gt;&gt; You don't even have to do five. Give me three. If you really have to push it, give me If you really have to push it, give me If you really have to push it, give me three. You can do this in the shower if three. You can do this in the shower if three. You can do this in the shower if you have to. You need some sort of you have to. You need some sort of you have to. You need some sort of internal signal that internal signal that internal signal that we're safe. Throttle down here. We're we're safe. Throttle down here. We're we're safe. Throttle down here. We're going to move on. That has to happen. going to move on. That has to happen. going to move on. That has to happen. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and you're saving energy. I mean &gt;&gt; Yeah, and you're saving energy. I mean &gt;&gt; Yeah, and you're saving energy. I mean the energy here is neural energy. I the energy here is neural energy. I the energy here is neural energy. I think fighters do this good fighters think fighters do this good fighters think fighters do this good fighters learn to do this between rounds. learn to do this between rounds. learn to do this between rounds. Sprinters learn to do this between Sprinters learn to do this between Sprinters learn to do this between events. I think humans should learn how events. I think humans should learn how events. I think humans should learn how to do this between any to do this between any to do this between any social engagement. I mean this is so social engagement. I mean this is so social engagement. I mean this is so such a powerful tool. such a powerful tool. such a powerful tool. &gt;&gt; Do this for 1 minute after every &gt;&gt; Do this for 1 minute after every &gt;&gt; Do this for 1 minute after every important whether it's an individual high volatile whether it's an individual high volatile whether it's an individual high volatile interaction or if it's a you just did a interaction or if it's a you just did a interaction or if it's a you just did a nice 45 minute sprint to work and you're nice 45 minute sprint to work and you're nice 45 minute sprint to work and you're deep into it or whatever, fine. Just deep into it or whatever, fine. Just deep into it or whatever, fine. Just give me 1 minute and that also will pay give me 1 minute and that also will pay give me 1 minute and that also will pay dividends. &gt;&gt; I think the listeners and I can well &gt;&gt; I think the listeners and I can well &gt;&gt; I think the listeners and I can well appreciate on the basis of today's appreciate on the basis of today's appreciate on the basis of today's discussion what a enormous wealth of discussion what a enormous wealth of discussion what a enormous wealth of information you are, how clear and you are, how clear and you are, how clear and potently you communicate that and potently you communicate that and potently you communicate that information and also how you can information and also how you can information and also how you can take a huge cloud of information and take a huge cloud of information and take a huge cloud of information and still distill it into still distill it into still distill it into protocols that ought to work for 75% of protocols that ought to work for 75% of protocols that ought to work for 75% of people 75% of the time which is an people 75% of the time which is an people 75% of the time which is an immensely valuable immensely valuable immensely valuable thing to do. So, thing to do. So, thing to do. So, for me and from the listeners I just for me and from the listeners I just for me and from the listeners I just want to say thank you so much. want to say thank you so much. want to say thank you so much. &gt;&gt; My pleasure, man. I'm fine. I'm glad we &gt;&gt; My pleasure, man. I'm fine. I'm glad we &gt;&gt; My pleasure, man. I'm fine. I'm glad we finally got to connect. finally got to connect. finally got to connect. &gt;&gt; Professor Andy Galpin, thank you ever so &gt;&gt; Professor Andy Galpin, thank you ever so &gt;&gt; Professor Andy Galpin, thank you ever so much. &gt;&gt; My pleasure.