When people come to train with me, I When people come to train with me, I When people come to train with me, I said our objective is to get an exercise said our objective is to get an exercise said our objective is to get an exercise and go to real muscular failure. You got and go to real muscular failure. You got and go to real muscular failure. You got to give it more than it's used to. The to give it more than it's used to. The to give it more than it's used to. The body does not want to change. It wants body does not want to change. It wants body does not want to change. It wants to keep status quo. So you got to give to keep status quo. So you got to give to keep status quo. So you got to give it a bloody good reason as we would say it a bloody good reason as we would say it a bloody good reason as we would say in England to change, right? So you got in England to change, right? So you got in England to change, right? So you got to put more stress on the body than it's to put more stress on the body than it's to put more stress on the body than it's used to. And then you need to recover used to. And then you need to recover used to. And then you need to recover from that. That's the idea to do enough from that. That's the idea to do enough from that. That's the idea to do enough to stimulate but not more than that to stimulate but not more than that to stimulate but not more than that because this is an overload you got to because this is an overload you got to because this is an overload you got to recover from. And the number one thing recover from. And the number one thing recover from. And the number one thing that I hear from people is I don't that I hear from people is I don't that I hear from people is I don't really have time for that. I have a really have time for that. I have a really have time for that. I have a business. I have a family. I said if you business. I have a family. I said if you business. I have a family. I said if you could give me 45 minutes twice a week, could give me 45 minutes twice a week, could give me 45 minutes twice a week, that's all you need to do. And it's not that's all you need to do. And it's not that's all you need to do. And it's not theory because I've done it. You change theory because I've done it. You change theory because I've done it. You change your life literally with that and a good your life literally with that and a good your life literally with that and a good diet. So the whole time thing diet. So the whole time thing diet. So the whole time thing [clears throat] excuses, it's not [clears throat] excuses, it's not [clears throat] excuses, it's not relevant. I'm not listening. You don't relevant. I'm not listening. You don't relevant. I'm not listening. You don't need a lot of time. need a lot of time. need a lot of time. &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast where we discuss [music] science and where we discuss [music] science and where we discuss [music] science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dorian Yates. Dorian Yates is a today is Dorian Yates. Dorian Yates is a today is Dorian Yates. Dorian Yates is a legendary six-time Mr. Olympia winner legendary six-time Mr. Olympia winner legendary six-time Mr. Olympia winner who is also considered one of the who is also considered one of the who is also considered one of the greatest pioneers of training methods greatest pioneers of training methods greatest pioneers of training methods for bodybuilding health and fitness. He for bodybuilding health and fitness. He for bodybuilding health and fitness. He is known for using and recommending low- is known for using and recommending low- is known for using and recommending low- volume highintensity workouts, meaning volume highintensity workouts, meaning volume highintensity workouts, meaning very few sets done with maximal focus, very few sets done with maximal focus, very few sets done with maximal focus, perfect form, and directed muscle perfect form, and directed muscle perfect form, and directed muscle engagement taken to muscular failure and engagement taken to muscular failure and engagement taken to muscular failure and beyond. Today, Dorian teaches us how the beyond. Today, Dorian teaches us how the beyond. Today, Dorian teaches us how the typical person who is not interested in typical person who is not interested in typical person who is not interested in competitive bodybuilding should train competitive bodybuilding should train competitive bodybuilding should train for health and fitness and overall best for health and fitness and overall best for health and fitness and overall best results. We cover muscle building, fat results. We cover muscle building, fat results. We cover muscle building, fat loss, mobility, what forms of cardio are loss, mobility, what forms of cardio are loss, mobility, what forms of cardio are best, when to do them, and much more. best, when to do them, and much more. best, when to do them, and much more. The advice Dorian provides today is The advice Dorian provides today is The advice Dorian provides today is immensely valuable and applicable to immensely valuable and applicable to immensely valuable and applicable to everyone, men, women, young, and old. He everyone, men, women, young, and old. He everyone, men, women, young, and old. He explains how for most people, the best explains how for most people, the best explains how for most people, the best muscle building and strength results muscle building and strength results muscle building and strength results will be achieved by training no more will be achieved by training no more will be achieved by training no more than three, and in some cases only two than three, and in some cases only two than three, and in some cases only two days per week. Dorian also shares days per week. Dorian also shares days per week. Dorian also shares valuable insights on how to mentally valuable insights on how to mentally valuable insights on how to mentally frame and navigate your life and goals. frame and navigate your life and goals. frame and navigate your life and goals. How to use your hardships as fuel. He How to use your hardships as fuel. He How to use your hardships as fuel. He has a lot to say about that based on his has a lot to say about that based on his has a lot to say about that based on his own experience, but also how to own experience, but also how to own experience, but also how to recognize and lean into your natural recognize and lean into your natural recognize and lean into your natural strengths. How to be practical in strengths. How to be practical in strengths. How to be practical in choosing what dreams you chase and how choosing what dreams you chase and how choosing what dreams you chase and how to know when to pivot from one endeavor to know when to pivot from one endeavor to know when to pivot from one endeavor to another. We also discuss cannabis. In to another. We also discuss cannabis. In to another. We also discuss cannabis. In fact, even though I of course knew he fact, even though I of course knew he fact, even though I of course knew he was, Dorian and I first connected was, Dorian and I first connected was, Dorian and I first connected because of an episode that I did about because of an episode that I did about because of an episode that I did about cannabis. Both the potential benefits of cannabis. Both the potential benefits of cannabis. Both the potential benefits of cannabis as well as the very serious cannabis as well as the very serious cannabis as well as the very serious risks that may exist for certain people. risks that may exist for certain people. risks that may exist for certain people. Dorian's experience and read of the data Dorian's experience and read of the data Dorian's experience and read of the data on cannabis contrasted with mine. And on cannabis contrasted with mine. And on cannabis contrasted with mine. And that led us to an ongoing discussion that led us to an ongoing discussion that led us to an ongoing discussion that we continue today on the podcast that we continue today on the podcast that we continue today on the podcast and that has me now reading into some and that has me now reading into some and that has me now reading into some newer studies. And I promise that I'll newer studies. And I promise that I'll newer studies. And I promise that I'll update everyone on my take of those update everyone on my take of those update everyone on my take of those studies once I get through them. Oh yes, studies once I get through them. Oh yes, studies once I get through them. Oh yes, and Dorian also took me through a Yates and Dorian also took me through a Yates and Dorian also took me through a Yates style highintensity workout at Gold's style highintensity workout at Gold's style highintensity workout at Gold's Gym Venice. We trained back, we filmed Gym Venice. We trained back, we filmed Gym Venice. We trained back, we filmed it, and it's posted to our Eclipse it, and it's posted to our Eclipse it, and it's posted to our Eclipse channel, so you can check that out. It's channel, so you can check that out. It's channel, so you can check that out. It's linked in the show note caption. Before linked in the show note caption. Before linked in the show note caption. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dorian Yates. The Dorian discussion with Dorian Yates. The Dorian discussion with Dorian Yates. The Dorian Yates. Welcome. Yates. Welcome. Yates. Welcome. &gt;&gt; Apparently. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Apparently. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Apparently. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh certainly uh big fan for many &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh certainly uh big fan for many &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh certainly uh big fan for many years. Thanks to you and thanks to Mike years. Thanks to you and thanks to Mike years. Thanks to you and thanks to Mike Menser and a few uh at the time real Menser and a few uh at the time real Menser and a few uh at the time real iconic class. Um I trained differently iconic class. Um I trained differently iconic class. Um I trained differently than everyone around me told me to. And than everyone around me told me to. And than everyone around me told me to. And while I never became a competitive while I never became a competitive while I never became a competitive athlete uh at anywhere near the level athlete uh at anywhere near the level athlete uh at anywhere near the level that you did certainly um it got me that you did certainly um it got me that you did certainly um it got me the results I wanted so much faster. I the results I wanted so much faster. I the results I wanted so much faster. I feel super healthy and great at 50. And feel super healthy and great at 50. And feel super healthy and great at 50. And I really want to talk about this I really want to talk about this I really want to talk about this highintensity, lowish volume training highintensity, lowish volume training highintensity, lowish volume training that really um can be credited to you um that really um can be credited to you um that really um can be credited to you um because for those that don't know uh the because for those that don't know uh the because for those that don't know uh the community that you come from um there community that you come from um there community that you come from um there have been people who have been big have been people who have been big have been people who have been big proponents of long sessions, many hours proponents of long sessions, many hours proponents of long sessions, many hours in the gym. At the opposite extreme, in the gym. At the opposite extreme, in the gym. At the opposite extreme, there's been people such as Mike Mener there's been people such as Mike Mener there's been people such as Mike Mener who have been proponents of very brief, who have been proponents of very brief, who have been proponents of very brief, very high intensity, even one set to very high intensity, even one set to very high intensity, even one set to failure and that's it. and you brought failure and that's it. and you brought failure and that's it. and you brought things into some sense of moderation. things into some sense of moderation. things into some sense of moderation. &gt;&gt; This is almost like a hybrid. &gt;&gt; This is almost like a hybrid. &gt;&gt; This is almost like a hybrid. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; I guess. &gt;&gt; I guess. &gt;&gt; I guess. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Between the purest &gt;&gt; Between the purest &gt;&gt; Between the purest &gt;&gt; hit, which uh I mean I didn't come up &gt;&gt; hit, which uh I mean I didn't come up &gt;&gt; hit, which uh I mean I didn't come up with the idea. The guy that really with the idea. The guy that really with the idea. The guy that really initiated the whole thing was Arthur initiated the whole thing was Arthur initiated the whole thing was Arthur Jones, who was the guy that made the Jones, who was the guy that made the Jones, who was the guy that made the Nautilus machines and then he passed it Nautilus machines and then he passed it Nautilus machines and then he passed it on, right? And Mike Mensah made it more on, right? And Mike Mensah made it more on, right? And Mike Mensah made it more popular because Mike Mensah was American popular because Mike Mensah was American popular because Mike Mensah was American champion, Mr. universe and it was in the champion, Mr. universe and it was in the champion, Mr. universe and it was in the magazines and um I read Arthur Jones's magazines and um I read Arthur Jones's magazines and um I read Arthur Jones's books and I think I'm a logical thinker books and I think I'm a logical thinker books and I think I'm a logical thinker so it made sense to me. so it made sense to me. so it made sense to me. &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Uh but if it made sense to me and it &gt;&gt; Uh but if it made sense to me and it &gt;&gt; Uh but if it made sense to me and it didn't work out practically, who cares, didn't work out practically, who cares, didn't work out practically, who cares, you know? So like yourself, I was kind you know? So like yourself, I was kind you know? So like yourself, I was kind of training like that and everyone was of training like that and everyone was of training like that and everyone was telling me this is not the way to do it. telling me this is not the way to do it. telling me this is not the way to do it. You need to train more often, uh do more You need to train more often, uh do more You need to train more often, uh do more sets and so on. So I tried it and uh the sets and so on. So I tried it and uh the sets and so on. So I tried it and uh the whole thing with my career is a bit like whole thing with my career is a bit like whole thing with my career is a bit like a science experiment in a way that I a science experiment in a way that I a science experiment in a way that I documented everything. So I've got every documented everything. So I've got every documented everything. So I've got every workout. The first time I stepped in the workout. The first time I stepped in the workout. The first time I stepped in the gym and said seriously, okay, I'm going gym and said seriously, okay, I'm going gym and said seriously, okay, I'm going to train and uh I want to be a to train and uh I want to be a to train and uh I want to be a competitive bodybuilder and this is how competitive bodybuilder and this is how competitive bodybuilder and this is how I'm going to change my life and maybe I'm going to change my life and maybe I'm going to change my life and maybe I'm going to get a gym or something like I'm going to get a gym or something like I'm going to get a gym or something like that. That was about it at the time. But that. That was about it at the time. But that. That was about it at the time. But I said, "Okay, so I'm tracking I said, "Okay, so I'm tracking I said, "Okay, so I'm tracking everything. My progress is going really everything. My progress is going really everything. My progress is going really well. I'm training like three times a well. I'm training like three times a well. I'm training like three times a week for maybe 45 minutes, an hour, but week for maybe 45 minutes, an hour, but week for maybe 45 minutes, an hour, but I'm working as well. I'm doing I'm working as well. I'm doing I'm working as well. I'm doing construction. I'm doing some heavy jobs. construction. I'm doing some heavy jobs. construction. I'm doing some heavy jobs. So, this is taking energy. Going well. So, this is taking energy. Going well. So, this is taking energy. Going well. Going well. Okay, then let me try it. Going well. Okay, then let me try it. Going well. Okay, then let me try it. Let me jack it up. And I'm train four Let me jack it up. And I'm train four Let me jack it up. And I'm train four times a week. I do a little bit more. times a week. I do a little bit more. times a week. I do a little bit more. What happened? Nothing. [laughter] What happened? Nothing. [laughter] What happened? Nothing. [laughter] That's what happened. Everything stopped That's what happened. Everything stopped That's what happened. Everything stopped for three or four weeks. I cut it back. for three or four weeks. I cut it back. for three or four weeks. I cut it back. Started growing again. So, [snorts] Started growing again. So, [snorts] Started growing again. So, [snorts] I didn't really need to learn that I didn't really need to learn that I didn't really need to learn that lesson too many times. Um, lesson too many times. Um, lesson too many times. Um, and I got to be British champion. I got and I got to be British champion. I got and I got to be British champion. I got to be pro, turned pro. And, uh, I read to be pro, turned pro. And, uh, I read to be pro, turned pro. And, uh, I read everything that Mike Mensah wrote in the everything that Mike Mensah wrote in the everything that Mike Mensah wrote in the magazines and everything like that. And magazines and everything like that. And magazines and everything like that. And got to meet him when I came out here and got to meet him when I came out here and got to meet him when I came out here and we discussed training and so, okay, what we discussed training and so, okay, what we discussed training and so, okay, what are you doing? You know, I'm warming up are you doing? You know, I'm warming up are you doing? You know, I'm warming up whatever it takes, couple of sets. I'm whatever it takes, couple of sets. I'm whatever it takes, couple of sets. I'm doing a set to failure and then I'm doing a set to failure and then I'm doing a set to failure and then I'm resting two or three minutes, dropping resting two or three minutes, dropping resting two or three minutes, dropping it down 10% maybe, and going to failure it down 10% maybe, and going to failure it down 10% maybe, and going to failure again. So, I'm hitting that nail in again. So, I'm hitting that nail in again. So, I'm hitting that nail in twice just to make sure it's in twice just to make sure it's in twice just to make sure it's in there. So, Mike said, "Why don't you try there. So, Mike said, "Why don't you try there. So, Mike said, "Why don't you try cutting back to one set to failure?" So, cutting back to one set to failure?" So, cutting back to one set to failure?" So, I started that around 91 92 and I feel I started that around 91 92 and I feel I started that around 91 92 and I feel like I got another, you know, another like I got another, you know, another like I got another, you know, another level of growth from that. Um, so people level of growth from that. Um, so people level of growth from that. Um, so people say, "Oh, Dorian doesn't do HIT." I say, "Oh, Dorian doesn't do HIT." I say, "Oh, Dorian doesn't do HIT." I don't know what category we want to put don't know what category we want to put don't know what category we want to put it in, but it's probably somewhere it in, but it's probably somewhere it in, but it's probably somewhere between conventional bodybuilding and between conventional bodybuilding and between conventional bodybuilding and the extreme of hit that Mike Mensah was the extreme of hit that Mike Mensah was the extreme of hit that Mike Mensah was doing and uh, Arthur Jones, which would doing and uh, Arthur Jones, which would doing and uh, Arthur Jones, which would be perfect for the average person. I be perfect for the average person. I be perfect for the average person. I mean, Arthur Jones was doing like a mean, Arthur Jones was doing like a mean, Arthur Jones was doing like a whole body workout couple of times a whole body workout couple of times a whole body workout couple of times a week. That was his initial week. That was his initial week. That was his initial recommendation. And I agree for the average person And I agree for the average person And I agree for the average person that's great because you want to build a that's great because you want to build a that's great because you want to build a certain level of muscle mass for your certain level of muscle mass for your certain level of muscle mass for your health, but I was a competitive bodybuilder. So but I was a competitive bodybuilder. So but I was a competitive bodybuilder. So you got to be concerned with a little you got to be concerned with a little you got to be concerned with a little bit like, you know, side delts, rear bit like, you know, side delts, rear bit like, you know, side delts, rear delts, average person could do one delts, average person could do one delts, average person could do one shoulder exerciser would be enough. So shoulder exerciser would be enough. So shoulder exerciser would be enough. So you need to do a little bit more as a you need to do a little bit more as a you need to do a little bit more as a competitive bodybuilder. Um, competitive bodybuilder. Um, competitive bodybuilder. Um, so somebody came up with a moniker blood so somebody came up with a moniker blood so somebody came up with a moniker blood and guts. They saw my training. That and guts. They saw my training. That and guts. They saw my training. That looks like blood and guts. So that's looks like blood and guts. So that's looks like blood and guts. So that's what we called it. Um, so it's high what we called it. Um, so it's high what we called it. Um, so it's high intensity training, a lot less than the intensity training, a lot less than the intensity training, a lot less than the other guys were doing probably, but other guys were doing probably, but other guys were doing probably, but maybe the hit purists will say, "Oh, maybe the hit purists will say, "Oh, maybe the hit purists will say, "Oh, it's not." But it is what it is. And it's not." But it is what it is. And it's not." But it is what it is. And it's all I've got it every workout it's all I've got it every workout it's all I've got it every workout written down so people can see what I written down so people can see what I written down so people can see what I did. And call it what you will, but you did. And call it what you will, but you did. And call it what you will, but you know, it was briefer than everyone else know, it was briefer than everyone else know, it was briefer than everyone else I was competing against. And it had an I was competing against. And it had an I was competing against. And it had an effect. Although not everyone followed effect. Although not everyone followed effect. Although not everyone followed what I was doing, but prior to myself what I was doing, but prior to myself what I was doing, but prior to myself being successful, it was like six times being successful, it was like six times being successful, it was like six times a week. Some people were doing twice a week. Some people were doing twice a week. Some people were doing twice a day. Not very often to be honest. day. Not very often to be honest. day. Not very often to be honest. There's a lot in the magazines. There's a lot in the magazines. There's a lot in the magazines. Arnold promoted that a lot, right? But Arnold promoted that a lot, right? But Arnold promoted that a lot, right? But if you look at Arnold, he was probably a if you look at Arnold, he was probably a if you look at Arnold, he was probably a full size when he was 21, 22. He was full size when he was 21, 22. He was full size when he was 21, 22. He was huge. How did he get there? He was bench huge. How did he get there? He was bench huge. How did he get there? He was bench pressing 500. [clears throat] He was pressing 500. [clears throat] He was pressing 500. [clears throat] He was doing deadlifts. He was doing squats, doing deadlifts. He was doing squats, doing deadlifts. He was doing squats, whatever. He built the foundation. And I whatever. He built the foundation. And I whatever. He built the foundation. And I believe competitive bodybuilders back believe competitive bodybuilders back believe competitive bodybuilders back then, they kind of use the weights as a then, they kind of use the weights as a then, they kind of use the weights as a calorie burner as well. So, they got the calorie burner as well. So, they got the calorie burner as well. So, they got the muscle mass, then they're doing more muscle mass, then they're doing more muscle mass, then they're doing more volume and more sets and more reps. And volume and more sets and more reps. And volume and more sets and more reps. And obviously, this is helping to maintain obviously, this is helping to maintain obviously, this is helping to maintain the muscle while at the same time burn a the muscle while at the same time burn a the muscle while at the same time burn a lot of calories. So, I said, wouldn't it lot of calories. So, I said, wouldn't it lot of calories. So, I said, wouldn't it be better to do the weight training just be better to do the weight training just be better to do the weight training just to build muscle and maintain muscle and to build muscle and maintain muscle and to build muscle and maintain muscle and do some cardio exercise to burn extra do some cardio exercise to burn extra do some cardio exercise to burn extra calories so then you'll be able to calories so then you'll be able to calories so then you'll be able to recover properly? So, that was my recover properly? So, that was my recover properly? So, that was my approach. So, it probably falls approach. So, it probably falls approach. So, it probably falls somewhere in between the two camps to be somewhere in between the two camps to be somewhere in between the two camps to be honest. Yeah, I remember trying the one honest. Yeah, I remember trying the one honest. Yeah, I remember trying the one set to failure, a couple warm-ups, one set to failure, a couple warm-ups, one set to failure, a couple warm-ups, one set to failure. You'd pre-exhaust, you set to failure. You'd pre-exhaust, you set to failure. You'd pre-exhaust, you know, leg extensions into leg press. And know, leg extensions into leg press. And know, leg extensions into leg press. And um it occurred to me after about a year um it occurred to me after about a year um it occurred to me after about a year or two that I needed to do a little bit or two that I needed to do a little bit or two that I needed to do a little bit more. I mentioned that because I think more. I mentioned that because I think more. I mentioned that because I think um I'm like most people in the sense um I'm like most people in the sense um I'm like most people in the sense that let me frame this right. Um I could that let me frame this right. Um I could that let me frame this right. Um I could get certain movements to really thrash get certain movements to really thrash get certain movements to really thrash the muscle that I needed to with one or the muscle that I needed to with one or the muscle that I needed to with one or two sets, but if there isn't really good two sets, but if there isn't really good two sets, but if there isn't really good mind muscle connection and fiber mind muscle connection and fiber mind muscle connection and fiber recruitment, you might need a bit more. recruitment, you might need a bit more. recruitment, you might need a bit more. &gt;&gt; It's possible. Yeah. I mean, it's none &gt;&gt; It's possible. Yeah. I mean, it's none &gt;&gt; It's possible. Yeah. I mean, it's none of this is written in stone. When people of this is written in stone. When people of this is written in stone. When people come to train with me, I said, "Our come to train with me, I said, "Our come to train with me, I said, "Our objective is to get an exercise and go objective is to get an exercise and go objective is to get an exercise and go to real muscular failure. We'll need to real muscular failure. We'll need to real muscular failure. We'll need to get there safely." So, we do a couple of get there safely." So, we do a couple of get there safely." So, we do a couple of sets to warm up. But if somehow you sets to warm up. But if somehow you sets to warm up. But if somehow you don't feel or I don't feel you nailed it don't feel or I don't feel you nailed it don't feel or I don't feel you nailed it in that set, let's do another one. You in that set, let's do another one. You in that set, let's do another one. You know, there's no law can't do a know, there's no law can't do a know, there's no law can't do a little bit more. So, you are correct in little bit more. So, you are correct in little bit more. So, you are correct in saying that somebody that's very saying that somebody that's very saying that somebody that's very experienced, they got that mind muscle experienced, they got that mind muscle experienced, they got that mind muscle connection where you can just link in connection where you can just link in connection where you can just link in and you can fully destroy it. So it and you can fully destroy it. So it and you can fully destroy it. So it depends on the person, but the idea is depends on the person, but the idea is depends on the person, but the idea is to not do more than is necessary. to not do more than is necessary. to not do more than is necessary. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Because then you're going to find it &gt;&gt; Because then you're going to find it &gt;&gt; Because then you're going to find it harder to recover. And the process is harder to recover. And the process is harder to recover. And the process is stimulate, right? So you got to train, stimulate, right? So you got to train, stimulate, right? So you got to train, you got to overload. And during this you got to overload. And during this you got to overload. And during this process, you're not growing. You're process, you're not growing. You're process, you're not growing. You're creating damage, stress to the muscle creating damage, stress to the muscle creating damage, stress to the muscle that then has to recover and then that then has to recover and then that then has to recover and then overcompensate. [snorts] So two things overcompensate. [snorts] So two things overcompensate. [snorts] So two things need to be in place. need to be need to be in place. need to be need to be in place. need to be sufficient intensity or overload or sufficient intensity or overload or sufficient intensity or overload or there'll be no reaction and then you there'll be no reaction and then you there'll be no reaction and then you need to recover from that. And let's need to recover from that. And let's need to recover from that. And let's just put it straight out there, man. You just put it straight out there, man. You just put it straight out there, man. You know, there's a big difference between know, there's a big difference between know, there's a big difference between somebody using anabolic steroids than somebody using anabolic steroids than somebody using anabolic steroids than somebody that's not. So, somebody that's somebody that's not. So, somebody that's somebody that's not. So, somebody that's using can recover from that process more using can recover from that process more using can recover from that process more quickly than somebody that isn't. So, I quickly than somebody that isn't. So, I quickly than somebody that isn't. So, I feel I should always say this because feel I should always say this because feel I should always say this because when you're looking at a champion when you're looking at a champion when you're looking at a champion bodybuilder, how he trains and you're bodybuilder, how he trains and you're bodybuilder, how he trains and you're young guy trying to build up, that's young guy trying to build up, that's young guy trying to build up, that's probably not appropriate for you right probably not appropriate for you right probably not appropriate for you right now. That guy has already got the size now. That guy has already got the size now. That guy has already got the size and is refining for a competition or and is refining for a competition or and is refining for a competition or something. So, uh that's the idea to do something. So, uh that's the idea to do something. So, uh that's the idea to do enough to stimulate but not more than enough to stimulate but not more than enough to stimulate but not more than that because this is an overload you got that because this is an overload you got that because this is an overload you got to recover from. So, you got to recover to recover from. So, you got to recover to recover from. So, you got to recover before you grow as well. So, you don't before you grow as well. So, you don't before you grow as well. So, you don't want to go back to the gym before that want to go back to the gym before that want to go back to the gym before that whole process is uh has taken place. So, whole process is uh has taken place. So, whole process is uh has taken place. So, I use some simple analogies sometimes I use some simple analogies sometimes I use some simple analogies sometimes when people are training with me, like when people are training with me, like when people are training with me, like we're going in now, we're knocking a we're going in now, we're knocking a we're going in now, we're knocking a wall down, right? We're rehabbing your wall down, right? We're rehabbing your wall down, right? We're rehabbing your house, we're knocking a wall down, and house, we're knocking a wall down, and house, we're knocking a wall down, and the guys need to come now with the guys need to come now with the guys need to come now with the bricks. So, they need materials and they bricks. So, they need materials and they bricks. So, they need materials and they need to do it, but they're halfway need to do it, but they're halfway need to do it, but they're halfway through building that wall and you come through building that wall and you come through building that wall and you come and knock it down again. We're not and knock it down again. We're not and knock it down again. We're not getting anywhere, you know? So, that's getting anywhere, you know? So, that's getting anywhere, you know? So, that's the process the process the process &gt;&gt; that you kind of have to understand. &gt;&gt; that you kind of have to understand. &gt;&gt; that you kind of have to understand. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. That's calories and zero gram of sugar. That's calories and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from protein. That's 50% calories come from protein. That's 50% calories come from protein. That's 50% higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein bar. These bars from David also taste bar. These bars from David also taste bar. These bars from David also taste amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I also like the chocolate chip cookie also like the chocolate chip cookie also like the chocolate chip cookie dough flavor, and I also like the salted dough flavor, and I also like the salted dough flavor, and I also like the salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like all the flavors. They're all delicious. all the flavors. They're all delicious. all the flavors. They're all delicious. Also, big news. David bars are now back Also, big news. David bars are now back Also, big news. David bars are now back in stock. They were sold out for several in stock. They were sold out for several in stock. They were sold out for several months because they are that popular, months because they are that popular, months because they are that popular, but they are now back in stock. By but they are now back in stock. By but they are now back in stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a grams of protein in the calories of a grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it very easy for me snack, which makes it very easy for me snack, which makes it very easy for me to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per day protein per pound of body weight per day protein per pound of body weight per day and to do so without eating excess and to do so without eating excess and to do so without eating excess calories. I generally eat a David Bar calories. I generally eat a David Bar calories. I generally eat a David Bar most afternoons and I always keep them most afternoons and I always keep them most afternoons and I always keep them with me when I'm away from home or with me when I'm away from home or with me when I'm away from home or traveling because they're incredibly traveling because they're incredibly traveling because they're incredibly convenient to get enough protein. As I convenient to get enough protein. As I convenient to get enough protein. As I mentioned, they're incredibly delicious mentioned, they're incredibly delicious mentioned, they're incredibly delicious and given that 28 g of protein, they're and given that 28 g of protein, they're and given that 28 g of protein, they're pretty filling for just 150 calories. pretty filling for just 150 calories. pretty filling for just 150 calories. So, they're great between meals as well. So, they're great between meals as well. So, they're great between meals as well. If you'd like to try David, you can go If you'd like to try David, you can go If you'd like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. to davidprotein.com/huberman. to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by JW. JWV makes medical grade red light JW. JWV makes medical grade red light JW. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near infrared sunlight, red light and near infrared sunlight, red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellar and organ health, aspects of cellar and organ health, aspects of cellar and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. What sets tube lights apart and why What sets tube lights apart and why What sets tube lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near wavelengths of red light and near wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger infrared light in combination to trigger infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. the optimal cellar adaptations. the optimal cellar adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week, panel about three to four times a week, panel about three to four times a week, and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to try JWV, you can go to JV, spelled try JWV, you can go to JV, spelled try JWV, you can go to JV, spelled Jovv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an exclusive discount to JWV is offering an exclusive discount to JWV is offering an exclusive discount to all Hubberman Lab listeners with up to all Hubberman Lab listeners with up to all Hubberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off JW products. Again, that's JW $400 off JW products. Again, that's JW $400 off JW products. Again, that's JW spelled J Ov.com/huberman spelled J Ov.com/huberman spelled J Ov.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. One of the um to get up to $400 off. One of the um to get up to $400 off. One of the um really kind of unfortunate things about really kind of unfortunate things about really kind of unfortunate things about resistance training is that it fills the resistance training is that it fills the resistance training is that it fills the muscle with blood temporarily. muscle with blood temporarily. muscle with blood temporarily. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; In part because of some quotes that came &gt;&gt; In part because of some quotes that came &gt;&gt; In part because of some quotes that came from Arnold in pumping iron. the from Arnold in pumping iron. the from Arnold in pumping iron. the so-called pump is it's an illusion, so-called pump is it's an illusion, so-called pump is it's an illusion, right? It's transient. And while it can right? It's transient. And while it can right? It's transient. And while it can be helpful in letting you know that you be helpful in letting you know that you be helpful in letting you know that you targeted a given muscle correctly, targeted a given muscle correctly, targeted a given muscle correctly, &gt;&gt; I think people get addicted to that &gt;&gt; I think people get addicted to that &gt;&gt; I think people get addicted to that feeling, but they're not realizing that feeling, but they're not realizing that feeling, but they're not realizing that the damage to the muscle tissue that the damage to the muscle tissue that the damage to the muscle tissue that then is allowed to recover is what makes then is allowed to recover is what makes then is allowed to recover is what makes the muscle actually larger when you're the muscle actually larger when you're the muscle actually larger when you're outside of the gym. outside of the gym. outside of the gym. &gt;&gt; A pump is just a temporary extra blood &gt;&gt; A pump is just a temporary extra blood &gt;&gt; A pump is just a temporary extra blood flow to the area that feels good. you're flow to the area that feels good. you're flow to the area that feels good. you're pumped up, you feel tight, but you could pumped up, you feel tight, but you could pumped up, you feel tight, but you could get a lightweight and get a great pump. get a lightweight and get a great pump. get a lightweight and get a great pump. It's not going to stimulate any growth. It's not going to stimulate any growth. It's not going to stimulate any growth. So, don't be fooled by the pump. It's So, don't be fooled by the pump. It's So, don't be fooled by the pump. It's nice and it's part of the process, but nice and it's part of the process, but nice and it's part of the process, but you got to overload the muscle. You got you got to overload the muscle. You got you got to overload the muscle. You got to give it to give it to give it uh more than it's used to. The body does uh more than it's used to. The body does uh more than it's used to. The body does not want to change. It wants to keep not want to change. It wants to keep not want to change. It wants to keep status quo. So, you got to give it a status quo. So, you got to give it a status quo. So, you got to give it a bloody good reason, as we would say in bloody good reason, as we would say in bloody good reason, as we would say in England, to change, right? So, you got England, to change, right? So, you got England, to change, right? So, you got to put more stress on the body than it's to put more stress on the body than it's to put more stress on the body than it's used to. Otherwise, you won't adapt. So used to. Otherwise, you won't adapt. So used to. Otherwise, you won't adapt. So even if it's like, [snorts] you know, even if it's like, [snorts] you know, even if it's like, [snorts] you know, half a pound more or one rep more, it's half a pound more or one rep more, it's half a pound more or one rep more, it's got to be something more that the body got to be something more that the body got to be something more that the body says, "Hey, th this stress, I can't says, "Hey, th this stress, I can't says, "Hey, th this stress, I can't handle it. I need to reinforce myself handle it. I need to reinforce myself handle it. I need to reinforce myself and adapt to this stress so next time it and adapt to this stress so next time it and adapt to this stress so next time it won't be so stressful." That's basically won't be so stressful." That's basically won't be so stressful." That's basically the process. So, and it can't be the process. So, and it can't be the process. So, and it can't be linear forever, right? Maybe in your linear forever, right? Maybe in your linear forever, right? Maybe in your first year of training, first 18 months, first year of training, first 18 months, first year of training, first 18 months, you just go in like I put 20 25 pounds you just go in like I put 20 25 pounds you just go in like I put 20 25 pounds on in the first 18 months that I was on in the first 18 months that I was on in the first 18 months that I was training. and natural as well. So you know it and natural as well. So you know it and natural as well. So you know it becomes a case of diminishing returns becomes a case of diminishing returns becomes a case of diminishing returns though &gt;&gt; and at some point you can't just keep &gt;&gt; and at some point you can't just keep &gt;&gt; and at some point you can't just keep going up like this. So I tell people going up like this. So I tell people going up like this. So I tell people train [clears throat] real hard for like train [clears throat] real hard for like train [clears throat] real hard for like five or six weeks and then come down for five or six weeks and then come down for five or six weeks and then come down for two weeks maybe submaximal. two weeks maybe submaximal. two weeks maybe submaximal. &gt;&gt; So you'll sort of saw to it like that &gt;&gt; So you'll sort of saw to it like that &gt;&gt; So you'll sort of saw to it like that hard for five or six weeks then back hard for five or six weeks then back hard for five or six weeks then back off. And during that two weeks are you off. And during that two weeks are you off. And during that two weeks are you telling people to stay out of the gym telling people to stay out of the gym telling people to stay out of the gym entirely? &gt;&gt; No. I'm telling them you can go in and &gt;&gt; No. I'm telling them you can go in and &gt;&gt; No. I'm telling them you can go in and do some light weight like but nowhere do some light weight like but nowhere do some light weight like but nowhere near failure blood flow keep the near failure blood flow keep the near failure blood flow keep the maintenance if you want to take a week maintenance if you want to take a week maintenance if you want to take a week off I think is good couple of times a off I think is good couple of times a off I think is good couple of times a year a lot of guys when I had a gym you year a lot of guys when I had a gym you year a lot of guys when I had a gym you know the guys I'm stuck on this and that know the guys I'm stuck on this and that know the guys I'm stuck on this and that I said okay take a week off I said okay take a week off I said okay take a week off &gt;&gt; no what do you mean I said man just take &gt;&gt; no what do you mean I said man just take &gt;&gt; no what do you mean I said man just take a week off yeah come back in a week and a week off yeah come back in a week and a week off yeah come back in a week and tell me how you feel and I came back and tell me how you feel and I came back and tell me how you feel and I came back and I was stronger I was like yeah no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I was stronger I was like yeah no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I was stronger I was like yeah no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] man &gt;&gt; because you've rested you let your body &gt;&gt; because you've rested you let your body &gt;&gt; because you've rested you let your body rest and rebuild so that be a lesson to rest and rebuild so that be a lesson to rest and rebuild so that be a lesson to So, if I could travel back in time, I So, if I could travel back in time, I So, if I could travel back in time, I wouldn't have called the movie Pumping wouldn't have called the movie Pumping wouldn't have called the movie Pumping Iron. I would have called it Stress and Iron. I would have called it Stress and Iron. I would have called it Stress and Adapt. Stress stress recover adapt. Adapt. Stress stress recover adapt. Adapt. Stress stress recover adapt. &gt;&gt; Not quite so sexy. Like I feel like I'm &gt;&gt; Not quite so sexy. Like I feel like I'm &gt;&gt; Not quite so sexy. Like I feel like I'm coming. &gt;&gt; But that whole notion of the pump plus &gt;&gt; But that whole notion of the pump plus &gt;&gt; But that whole notion of the pump plus this idea that um you know many this idea that um you know many this idea that um you know many hours in the gym is what's required. I hours in the gym is what's required. I hours in the gym is what's required. I think if it kept a lot of the general think if it kept a lot of the general think if it kept a lot of the general public out of resistance training. public out of resistance training. public out of resistance training. &gt;&gt; I think now that's changed. Um and &gt;&gt; I think now that's changed. Um and &gt;&gt; I think now that's changed. Um and fortunately because I think it is fortunately because I think it is fortunately because I think it is very beneficial. Um, if we could get a very beneficial. Um, if we could get a very beneficial. Um, if we could get a little granular about training and little granular about training and little granular about training and recovery, I think it'd be helpful for recovery, I think it'd be helpful for recovery, I think it'd be helpful for people. I realize that you laid out the people. I realize that you laid out the people. I realize that you laid out the top contour uh really nicely. So, for a top contour uh really nicely. So, for a top contour uh really nicely. So, for a person who's natural, not taking hormone person who's natural, not taking hormone person who's natural, not taking hormone replacement therapy or anabolics, um, replacement therapy or anabolics, um, replacement therapy or anabolics, um, you think two maybe three whole body you think two maybe three whole body you think two maybe three whole body sessions to start out to learn the sessions to start out to learn the sessions to start out to learn the movements? Um, is that doing one or two movements? Um, is that doing one or two movements? Um, is that doing one or two sets to failure? What does that look sets to failure? What does that look sets to failure? What does that look like for the for the raw beginner? a raw like for the for the raw beginner? a raw like for the for the raw beginner? a raw beginner first of all you need to learn beginner first of all you need to learn beginner first of all you need to learn how to do the movements correctly before how to do the movements correctly before how to do the movements correctly before let's thinking about going to failure. let's thinking about going to failure. let's thinking about going to failure. So it'll be a certain period of time So it'll be a certain period of time So it'll be a certain period of time learning to do the exercise correctly. learning to do the exercise correctly. learning to do the exercise correctly. Uh putting some kind of idea in their head putting some kind of idea in their head putting some kind of idea in their head of what's going on. of what's going on. of what's going on. &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Uh you know what do the pecs do? Bring &gt;&gt; Uh you know what do the pecs do? Bring &gt;&gt; Uh you know what do the pecs do? Bring your arms down and across the body. What your arms down and across the body. What your arms down and across the body. What do your lats do? They bring your upper do your lats do? They bring your upper do your lats do? They bring your upper arm down and back. So, you'll be amazed arm down and back. So, you'll be amazed arm down and back. So, you'll be amazed like if your nephew are pro like if your nephew are pro like if your nephew are pro bodybuilders, some of them don't know bodybuilders, some of them don't know bodybuilders, some of them don't know like why they're doing what they're like why they're doing what they're like why they're doing what they're doing. What's the mechanics involved? doing. What's the mechanics involved? doing. What's the mechanics involved? And I get them to do light sets very And I get them to do light sets very And I get them to do light sets very perfect. Do you feel that? Do you feel perfect. Do you feel that? Do you feel perfect. Do you feel that? Do you feel how it contracts when you lats and you how it contracts when you lats and you how it contracts when you lats and you squeeze and you contract? Yeah, I feel squeeze and you contract? Yeah, I feel squeeze and you contract? Yeah, I feel it. Feel it. Okay, now you got it. But it. Feel it. Okay, now you got it. But it. Feel it. Okay, now you got it. But you've got to try to maintain that you've got to try to maintain that you've got to try to maintain that &gt;&gt; when it gets really hard because &gt;&gt; when it gets really hard because &gt;&gt; when it gets really hard because we're going against the natural we're going against the natural we're going against the natural mechanics of the body here, right? mechanics of the body here, right? mechanics of the body here, right? Because we're, as I say, we're doing Because we're, as I say, we're doing Because we're, as I say, we're doing chest. Yeah. Trying to isolate the pecs. chest. Yeah. Trying to isolate the pecs. chest. Yeah. Trying to isolate the pecs. There's some delts involved and triceps There's some delts involved and triceps There's some delts involved and triceps and work that or we're working legs, and work that or we're working legs, and work that or we're working legs, we're working back. The body normally we're working back. The body normally we're working back. The body normally doesn't work like that. It works as a doesn't work like that. It works as a doesn't work like that. It works as a unit, right? If you throw something, you unit, right? If you throw something, you unit, right? If you throw something, you don't do that from your tricep, right? don't do that from your tricep, right? don't do that from your tricep, right? It'll be from your foot through the It'll be from your foot through the It'll be from your foot through the hips, through the shoulder, whole body hips, through the shoulder, whole body hips, through the shoulder, whole body thing. So, when the exercise gets really thing. So, when the exercise gets really thing. So, when the exercise gets really hard, your brain is going to try to hard, your brain is going to try to hard, your brain is going to try to recruit or change the exercise to make recruit or change the exercise to make recruit or change the exercise to make it easier. So, I got to get people to it easier. So, I got to get people to it easier. So, I got to get people to override that instinct. Just stick with override that instinct. Just stick with override that instinct. Just stick with the form the form the form &gt;&gt; until we get to the point where you &gt;&gt; until we get to the point where you &gt;&gt; until we get to the point where you can't do anymore and understand, you can't do anymore and understand, you can't do anymore and understand, you know, that's why I get them to do light know, that's why I get them to do light know, that's why I get them to do light stuff at first to really feel it, stuff at first to really feel it, stuff at first to really feel it, understand. I explain what's going on. understand. I explain what's going on. understand. I explain what's going on. Couple of weeks after that, we can start Couple of weeks after that, we can start Couple of weeks after that, we can start pushing to failure. Actually, I had a pushing to failure. Actually, I had a pushing to failure. Actually, I had a guy recently that we had a business guy recently that we had a business guy recently that we had a business meeting and he told me he was diabetic meeting and he told me he was diabetic meeting and he told me he was diabetic and he had liver problems and he was and he had liver problems and he was and he had liver problems and he was overweight and this and that. I gave him overweight and this and that. I gave him overweight and this and that. I gave him a challenge. a challenge. a challenge. I said, "He trained with me for a month. I said, "He trained with me for a month. I said, "He trained with me for a month. I'll fix all that shit." Yeah. Oh, but I'll fix all that shit." Yeah. Oh, but I'll fix all that shit." Yeah. Oh, but my doc took this and that. I said, my doc took this and that. I said, my doc took this and that. I said, "Listen, he trained with me three times "Listen, he trained with me three times "Listen, he trained with me three times a week for about 45 minutes. After one a week for about 45 minutes. After one a week for about 45 minutes. After one month, obviously, I changed his diet as month, obviously, I changed his diet as month, obviously, I changed his diet as well. Basically, for a short period of well. Basically, for a short period of well. Basically, for a short period of time, very low carbs. Uh after one time, very low carbs. Uh after one time, very low carbs. Uh after one month, he was not in the diabetic zone. month, he was not in the diabetic zone. month, he was not in the diabetic zone. He was out of the pre-diabetic zone. It He was out of the pre-diabetic zone. It He was out of the pre-diabetic zone. It was in the normal range. was in the normal range. was in the normal range. &gt;&gt; Great. and his liver function that was &gt;&gt; Great. and his liver function that was &gt;&gt; Great. and his liver function that was three times the normal amount liver three times the normal amount liver three times the normal amount liver enzymes was back to normal. enzymes was back to normal. enzymes was back to normal. Uh I told him, "Check it out. You got a Uh I told him, "Check it out. You got a Uh I told him, "Check it out. You got a fatty liver." So yeah, I had a fatty liver." So yeah, I had a fatty liver." So yeah, I had a fatty liver. I said, "I know." He said, "My liver. I said, "I know." He said, "My liver. I said, "I know." He said, "My doctor told me not to eat fat." I'm doctor told me not to eat fat." I'm doctor told me not to eat fat." I'm like, "Man, like, "Man, like, "Man, do you know how long, at least I don't do you know how long, at least I don't do you know how long, at least I don't know here, but in England, how long an know here, but in England, how long an know here, but in England, how long an MD, a doctor spends studying nutrition?" MD, a doctor spends studying nutrition?" MD, a doctor spends studying nutrition?" &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's trivial. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's trivial. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's trivial. &gt;&gt; One afternoon, two or three hours. I &gt;&gt; One afternoon, two or three hours. I &gt;&gt; One afternoon, two or three hours. I mean, you can learn nothing. So, the mean, you can learn nothing. So, the mean, you can learn nothing. So, the doctor was telling me he's got a fatty doctor was telling me he's got a fatty doctor was telling me he's got a fatty liver, so stop eating fat. I said, liver, so stop eating fat. I said, liver, so stop eating fat. I said, that's absolutely the worst advice you that's absolutely the worst advice you that's absolutely the worst advice you could get because the reason you've got could get because the reason you've got could get because the reason you've got fatty liver is because uncontrolled fatty liver is because uncontrolled fatty liver is because uncontrolled blood sugar. blood sugar. blood sugar. &gt;&gt; So, we get your blood sugar down. &gt;&gt; So, we get your blood sugar down. &gt;&gt; So, we get your blood sugar down. [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] &gt;&gt; One month, &gt;&gt; One month, &gt;&gt; One month, &gt;&gt; his liver was normal. His blood sugar &gt;&gt; his liver was normal. His blood sugar &gt;&gt; his liver was normal. His blood sugar was normal. was normal. was normal. He lost like five, six kilos of body fat He lost like five, six kilos of body fat He lost like five, six kilos of body fat just in a month. And we're doing three just in a month. And we're doing three just in a month. And we're doing three times a week, times a week, times a week, &gt;&gt; whole body. &gt;&gt; whole body. &gt;&gt; whole body. &gt;&gt; Uh, we split it up actually into &gt;&gt; Uh, we split it up actually into &gt;&gt; Uh, we split it up actually into [clears throat] three workouts. So, he's [clears throat] three workouts. So, he's [clears throat] three workouts. So, he's hitting everything uh once a week. hitting everything uh once a week. hitting everything uh once a week. &gt;&gt; When our uh mutual friend, you knew him &gt;&gt; When our uh mutual friend, you knew him &gt;&gt; When our uh mutual friend, you knew him better than I did, uh the now deceased, better than I did, uh the now deceased, better than I did, uh the now deceased, unfortunately, Mike Mener, told me to unfortunately, Mike Mener, told me to unfortunately, Mike Mener, told me to train each body part once per week. train each body part once per week. train each body part once per week. &gt;&gt; At first, I thought he was crazy. So, &gt;&gt; At first, I thought he was crazy. So, &gt;&gt; At first, I thought he was crazy. So, legs once a week, calves once a week, legs once a week, calves once a week, legs once a week, calves once a week, maybe twice for some people, the calves, maybe twice for some people, the calves, maybe twice for some people, the calves, but um shoulders and arms and chest and but um shoulders and arms and chest and but um shoulders and arms and chest and back on three separate days. Legs, chest back on three separate days. Legs, chest back on three separate days. Legs, chest and back, and back, and back, &gt;&gt; shoulders and arms. I thought he was &gt;&gt; shoulders and arms. I thought he was &gt;&gt; shoulders and arms. I thought he was crazy, but then, you know, I thought crazy, but then, you know, I thought crazy, but then, you know, I thought about it and the chest and back workout, about it and the chest and back workout, about it and the chest and back workout, you're indirectly targeting the arms. Y you're indirectly targeting the arms. Y you're indirectly targeting the arms. Y &gt;&gt; legs is a if you do them right is a &gt;&gt; legs is a if you do them right is a &gt;&gt; legs is a if you do them right is a whole body experience whole body experience whole body experience &gt;&gt; and uh stress on a lot of stress on your &gt;&gt; and uh stress on a lot of stress on your &gt;&gt; and uh stress on a lot of stress on your nervous system which has to recover nervous system which has to recover nervous system which has to recover independently of the whatever muscle independently of the whatever muscle independently of the whatever muscle group you're training um if you do legs group you're training um if you do legs group you're training um if you do legs I mean really to failure there's a lot I mean really to failure there's a lot I mean really to failure there's a lot of stress on your nervous system as well of stress on your nervous system as well of stress on your nervous system as well so that also has to recover that's why I so that also has to recover that's why I so that also has to recover that's why I say after 6 weeks I've just noticed with say after 6 weeks I've just noticed with say after 6 weeks I've just noticed with myself and many people it seems to like myself and many people it seems to like myself and many people it seems to like you hit a plateau there so try to push you hit a plateau there so try to push you hit a plateau there so try to push through it through it through it &gt;&gt; come down and I take a rest and &gt;&gt; come down and I take a rest and &gt;&gt; come down and I take a rest and &gt;&gt; uh go again later. &gt;&gt; uh go again later. &gt;&gt; uh go again later. &gt;&gt; So, I know that your opinion on &gt;&gt; So, I know that your opinion on &gt;&gt; So, I know that your opinion on real world results versus um uh real world results versus um uh real world results versus um uh laboratory studies, but these days, let laboratory studies, but these days, let laboratory studies, but these days, let me just put something out there. I'd me just put something out there. I'd me just put something out there. I'd like to see your response. These days, like to see your response. These days, like to see your response. These days, uh you know, people will talk a lot uh you know, people will talk a lot uh you know, people will talk a lot about, okay, the studies or muscle about, okay, the studies or muscle about, okay, the studies or muscle biopsies show you train a muscle and biopsies show you train a muscle and biopsies show you train a muscle and stimulate uh hypertrophy, growth, and stimulate uh hypertrophy, growth, and stimulate uh hypertrophy, growth, and then muscle protein synthesis peaks, you then muscle protein synthesis peaks, you then muscle protein synthesis peaks, you know, 48 hours later, which means that know, 48 hours later, which means that know, 48 hours later, which means that you can hit the muscle again, ideally 3 you can hit the muscle again, ideally 3 you can hit the muscle again, ideally 3 days later or two days later. I tried days later or two days later. I tried days later or two days later. I tried that because I thought, "Hey, listen. that because I thought, "Hey, listen. that because I thought, "Hey, listen. I'm a scientist. I'll try it." And I I'm a scientist. I'll try it." And I I'm a scientist. I'll try it." And I immediately started going backwards with immediately started going backwards with immediately started going backwards with my progress. This was a few years ago. my progress. This was a few years ago. my progress. This was a few years ago. And um went back to training each thing And um went back to training each thing And um went back to training each thing directly once per week and where there's directly once per week and where there's directly once per week and where there's indirect uh stuff, you know, arms indirect uh stuff, you know, arms indirect uh stuff, you know, arms getting hit once indirectly because of a getting hit once indirectly because of a getting hit once indirectly because of a chest and back workout on a separate chest and back workout on a separate chest and back workout on a separate day. Found I went right back to day. Found I went right back to day. Found I went right back to progress again. And so, you know, I'm a progress again. And so, you know, I'm a progress again. And so, you know, I'm a scientist trained to do science. So what scientist trained to do science. So what scientist trained to do science. So what how do you think about something where how do you think about something where how do you think about something where in a laboratory you can see something in a laboratory you can see something in a laboratory you can see something like protein synthesis peaks 48 hours like protein synthesis peaks 48 hours like protein synthesis peaks 48 hours later therefore train every 72 hours later therefore train every 72 hours later therefore train every 72 hours versus the real world phenomenon. This versus the real world phenomenon. This versus the real world phenomenon. This is all very interesting, but if it is all very interesting, but if it is all very interesting, but if it doesn't work in practicality, what's it doesn't work in practicality, what's it doesn't work in practicality, what's it worth? You know, I hear this a lot now worth? You know, I hear this a lot now worth? You know, I hear this a lot now about this science-based training, about this science-based training, about this science-based training, but I actually don't know what science but I actually don't know what science but I actually don't know what science they're talking about. I mean, some meta they're talking about. I mean, some meta they're talking about. I mean, some meta studies, I think, but how were those studies, I think, but how were those studies, I think, but how were those studies carried out, with whom, and so studies carried out, with whom, and so studies carried out, with whom, and so on and so on? I don't know. I know the on and so on? I don't know. I know the on and so on? I don't know. I know the case of Viettor study where he put on 65 case of Viettor study where he put on 65 case of Viettor study where he put on 65 pounds of muscle verified in a month by pounds of muscle verified in a month by pounds of muscle verified in a month by training like training like training like &gt;&gt; less than about an hour a week. I think &gt;&gt; less than about an hour a week. I think &gt;&gt; less than about an hour a week. I think &gt;&gt; those were whole body &gt;&gt; those were whole body &gt;&gt; those were whole body &gt;&gt; sets to failure. &gt;&gt; sets to failure. &gt;&gt; sets to failure. &gt;&gt; And yes, he was very underweight because &gt;&gt; And yes, he was very underweight because &gt;&gt; And yes, he was very underweight because he wasn't on anything and then he got he wasn't on anything and then he got he wasn't on anything and then he got sick. So sick. So sick. So &gt;&gt; he's underweight. So he's building back &gt;&gt; he's underweight. So he's building back &gt;&gt; he's underweight. So he's building back muscle, but he wouldn't build it back muscle, but he wouldn't build it back muscle, but he wouldn't build it back without much stimulus. without much stimulus. without much stimulus. &gt;&gt; So 65 pound of muscle, although it was &gt;&gt; So 65 pound of muscle, although it was &gt;&gt; So 65 pound of muscle, although it was &gt;&gt; uh muscle memory, let's say, had been &gt;&gt; uh muscle memory, let's say, had been &gt;&gt; uh muscle memory, let's say, had been that big before, but he put it on that big before, but he put it on that big before, but he put it on &gt;&gt; in a month. And you compare that with &gt;&gt; in a month. And you compare that with &gt;&gt; in a month. And you compare that with Arnold that dieted down to 210, I think, Arnold that dieted down to 210, I think, Arnold that dieted down to 210, I think, to do this film, Stay Hungry. Then he to do this film, Stay Hungry. Then he to do this film, Stay Hungry. Then he went back up to 230 for the Mr. Olympia, went back up to 230 for the Mr. Olympia, went back up to 230 for the Mr. Olympia, but that took him like 3 months. So you but that took him like 3 months. So you but that took him like 3 months. So you can compare the two. So when the people can compare the two. So when the people can compare the two. So when the people talk about these science-based studies, talk about these science-based studies, talk about these science-based studies, and he shouldn't train to failure, it's and he shouldn't train to failure, it's and he shouldn't train to failure, it's better to keep reps in reserve. better to keep reps in reserve. better to keep reps in reserve. I don't know which studies they're I don't know which studies they're I don't know which studies they're talking about. I'm not saying they're talking about. I'm not saying they're talking about. I'm not saying they're not out there, but I'm not familiar with not out there, but I'm not familiar with not out there, but I'm not familiar with them. I'm not familiar with how they them. I'm not familiar with how they them. I'm not familiar with how they carried out the studies. carried out the studies. carried out the studies. &gt;&gt; But if it doesn't work in practicality, &gt;&gt; But if it doesn't work in practicality, &gt;&gt; But if it doesn't work in practicality, does it does it really matter? Mhm. does it does it really matter? Mhm. does it does it really matter? Mhm. &gt;&gt; Well, often I I've spent some time with &gt;&gt; Well, often I I've spent some time with &gt;&gt; Well, often I I've spent some time with these and you might not be surprised to these and you might not be surprised to these and you might not be surprised to learn that a lot of times it's, you learn that a lot of times it's, you learn that a lot of times it's, you know, we got some college students, know, we got some college students, know, we got some college students, they're doing leg extensions, you know, they're doing leg extensions, you know, they're doing leg extensions, you know, we're looking at, you know, biopsies of we're looking at, you know, biopsies of we're looking at, you know, biopsies of the quadriceps, this kind of thing. the quadriceps, this kind of thing. the quadriceps, this kind of thing. Rarely is it the kind of compound Rarely is it the kind of compound Rarely is it the kind of compound movements, multi- joint movements. Um, movements, multi- joint movements. Um, movements, multi- joint movements. Um, sometimes, but not always. Well, I sometimes, but not always. Well, I sometimes, but not always. Well, I look, my experience with the HIT, look, my experience with the HIT, look, my experience with the HIT, highintensity, lowish volume training highintensity, lowish volume training highintensity, lowish volume training has been has been has been I'll say it's not just about gaining I'll say it's not just about gaining I'll say it's not just about gaining muscle. I mean, I'm now 50. I know muscle. I mean, I'm now 50. I know muscle. I mean, I'm now 50. I know you're almost 64. Yep. you're almost 64. Yep. you're almost 64. Yep. &gt;&gt; Looking [clears throat] looking amazing. &gt;&gt; Looking [clears throat] looking amazing. &gt;&gt; Looking [clears throat] looking amazing. Um we'll tell us more about longevity Um we'll tell us more about longevity Um we'll tell us more about longevity stuff in a in a bit. But stuff in a in a bit. But stuff in a in a bit. But &gt;&gt; I have to say part of it is also that if &gt;&gt; I have to say part of it is also that if &gt;&gt; I have to say part of it is also that if one trains the way that you're one trains the way that you're one trains the way that you're describing each muscle once per week, describing each muscle once per week, describing each muscle once per week, focusing on intensity, not volume, and focusing on intensity, not volume, and focusing on intensity, not volume, and so forth, six weeks or so, then backing so forth, six weeks or so, then backing so forth, six weeks or so, then backing off for two weeks. off for two weeks. off for two weeks. &gt;&gt; You also find that in your peer in your &gt;&gt; You also find that in your peer in your &gt;&gt; You also find that in your peer in your peer group, you're not the one always peer group, you're not the one always peer group, you're not the one always complaining about pain. And you have complaining about pain. And you have complaining about pain. And you have energy for other things, which we'll get energy for other things, which we'll get energy for other things, which we'll get back to. I mean, unless you're a back to. I mean, unless you're a back to. I mean, unless you're a competitive bodybuilder, I most people, competitive bodybuilder, I most people, competitive bodybuilder, I most people, including myself, need energy to tend to including myself, need energy to tend to including myself, need energy to tend to life and want to be able to enjoy not life and want to be able to enjoy not life and want to be able to enjoy not be. It's not the soreness, it's the be. It's not the soreness, it's the be. It's not the soreness, it's the constant aches and pains that come from constant aches and pains that come from constant aches and pains that come from overtraining. I think that most people overtraining. I think that most people overtraining. I think that most people uh don't have to live with, but think uh don't have to live with, but think uh don't have to live with, but think they do. they do. they do. &gt;&gt; It depends on your goals. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It depends on your goals. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It depends on your goals. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But I really believe the average person &gt;&gt; But I really believe the average person &gt;&gt; But I really believe the average person Yeah. that wants to get health benefits Yeah. that wants to get health benefits Yeah. that wants to get health benefits from bodybuilding, weight training, from bodybuilding, weight training, from bodybuilding, weight training, resistance, whatever you want to call resistance, whatever you want to call resistance, whatever you want to call it, right? it, right? it, right? they let's you have a guy that's 40 or they let's you have a guy that's 40 or they let's you have a guy that's 40 or 50 or 60 guy or a lady whatever the idea 50 or 60 guy or a lady whatever the idea 50 or 60 guy or a lady whatever the idea is if you could because you've lost is if you could because you've lost is if you could because you've lost muscle mass slowly since maybe 1% a year muscle mass slowly since maybe 1% a year muscle mass slowly since maybe 1% a year since you're 40 right and this is since you're 40 right and this is since you're 40 right and this is affecting your health your metabolism affecting your health your metabolism affecting your health your metabolism your ability to process sugar many your ability to process sugar many your ability to process sugar many things yeah uh bone strength things yeah uh bone strength things yeah uh bone strength and the number one thing that I hear and the number one thing that I hear and the number one thing that I hear from people is I don't really have time from people is I don't really have time from people is I don't really have time for that I have a business I have a for that I have a business I have a for that I have a business I have a family I said, "That if you could give family I said, "That if you could give family I said, "That if you could give me 45 minutes twice a week, me 45 minutes twice a week, me 45 minutes twice a week, that's all you need to do." Okay, you that's all you need to do." Okay, you that's all you need to do." Okay, you need to eat properly and everything like need to eat properly and everything like need to eat properly and everything like that, but that's all you need to do for that, but that's all you need to do for that, but that's all you need to do for the average person. If you took eight to the average person. If you took eight to the average person. If you took eight to 10 exercises that covered your whole 10 exercises that covered your whole 10 exercises that covered your whole body and you did it twice a week, that body and you did it twice a week, that body and you did it twice a week, that would be enough for the average person. would be enough for the average person. would be enough for the average person. One for chest, one or two for back, one One for chest, one or two for back, one One for chest, one or two for back, one or two for legs. Hey, if you want to do or two for legs. Hey, if you want to do or two for legs. Hey, if you want to do some bicep curls and some triceps, you some bicep curls and some triceps, you some bicep curls and some triceps, you can do it. But you're doing pressing can do it. But you're doing pressing can do it. But you're doing pressing anyway. So, for the average person, that anyway. So, for the average person, that anyway. So, for the average person, that would actually be enough. And it's not would actually be enough. And it's not would actually be enough. And it's not theory because I've done it with people. theory because I've done it with people. theory because I've done it with people. Like I'm saying, this gentleman that Like I'm saying, this gentleman that Like I'm saying, this gentleman that came along, we put 45 minutes in uh came along, we put 45 minutes in uh came along, we put 45 minutes in uh nearly an hour, three times a week cuz I nearly an hour, three times a week cuz I nearly an hour, three times a week cuz I had him doing cardio as well. had him doing cardio as well. had him doing cardio as well. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Well, guess how long the cardio was? &gt;&gt; Well, guess how long the cardio was? &gt;&gt; Well, guess how long the cardio was? &gt;&gt; Six minutes. [clears throat] Six &gt;&gt; Six minutes. [clears throat] Six &gt;&gt; Six minutes. [clears throat] Six minutes. &gt;&gt; You mean pedal hard? &gt;&gt; You mean pedal hard? &gt;&gt; You mean pedal hard? &gt;&gt; We're doing We're doing um sprints. &gt;&gt; We're doing We're doing um sprints. &gt;&gt; We're doing We're doing um sprints. &gt;&gt; Mhm. like on an air bike. It's my &gt;&gt; Mhm. like on an air bike. It's my &gt;&gt; Mhm. like on an air bike. It's my favorite because it engages every favorite because it engages every favorite because it engages every muscle. Push, pull, legs. muscle. Push, pull, legs. muscle. Push, pull, legs. &gt;&gt; If you do a 20 second all out and you &gt;&gt; If you do a 20 second all out and you &gt;&gt; If you do a 20 second all out and you can see how you got on the side of the can see how you got on the side of the can see how you got on the side of the thing, you can see how much watts you're thing, you can see how much watts you're thing, you can see how much watts you're generating. So now you have a target to generating. So now you have a target to generating. So now you have a target to hit or exceed every time. hit or exceed every time. hit or exceed every time. &gt;&gt; So do a minute, minute and a half &gt;&gt; So do a minute, minute and a half &gt;&gt; So do a minute, minute and a half warm-up, whatever. Feel warm. All out. warm-up, whatever. Feel warm. All out. warm-up, whatever. Feel warm. All out. Balls out like the devil's chasing you Balls out like the devil's chasing you Balls out like the devil's chasing you for 20 seconds. First one's tough, but for 20 seconds. First one's tough, but for 20 seconds. First one's tough, but it's okay. Go down slowly for a minute. it's okay. Go down slowly for a minute. it's okay. Go down slowly for a minute. do the second one all out. The second do the second one all out. The second do the second one all out. The second one's really tough. one's really tough. one's really tough. The third one is I've never met anybody The third one is I've never met anybody The third one is I've never met anybody that wants to do one after the third one that wants to do one after the third one that wants to do one after the third one because literally you can't breathe. Um, because literally you can't breathe. Um, because literally you can't breathe. Um, and the benefits from that again, I and the benefits from that again, I and the benefits from that again, I think there's a book called the one think there's a book called the one think there's a book called the one minute cardio. It's a bit tricky because minute cardio. It's a bit tricky because minute cardio. It's a bit tricky because it's not really one minute. It's one it's not really one minute. It's one it's not really one minute. It's one minute of sprints, minute of sprints, minute of sprints, &gt;&gt; but it's 6 minutes in total. and they &gt;&gt; but it's 6 minutes in total. and they &gt;&gt; but it's 6 minutes in total. and they compared that to 45 minutes of steady compared that to 45 minutes of steady compared that to 45 minutes of steady cardio on a treadmill or whatever it is. cardio on a treadmill or whatever it is. cardio on a treadmill or whatever it is. &gt;&gt; And the results are more or less the &gt;&gt; And the results are more or less the &gt;&gt; And the results are more or less the same. [clears throat] same. [clears throat] same. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, what do you want to do? Do you want &gt;&gt; So, what do you want to do? Do you want &gt;&gt; So, what do you want to do? Do you want to spend six minutes? Do you want to spend six minutes? Do you want to spend six minutes? Do you want to spend 45 minutes? I rather do the six spend 45 minutes? I rather do the six spend 45 minutes? I rather do the six minutes. Um, I do a bit of long cardio minutes. Um, I do a bit of long cardio minutes. Um, I do a bit of long cardio as well myself cuz I like biking in the as well myself cuz I like biking in the as well myself cuz I like biking in the mountains and stuff, but if you did that mountains and stuff, but if you did that mountains and stuff, but if you did that twice a week along with some weight twice a week along with some weight twice a week along with some weight training, that would be amazing. You training, that would be amazing. You training, that would be amazing. You change your life literally with that and change your life literally with that and change your life literally with that and a good diet. So the whole time thing a good diet. So the whole time thing a good diet. So the whole time thing excuses, it's not relevant. I'm not excuses, it's not relevant. I'm not excuses, it's not relevant. I'm not listening. You don't need a lot of time. listening. You don't need a lot of time. listening. You don't need a lot of time. &gt;&gt; Well, what I love about you is that &gt;&gt; Well, what I love about you is that &gt;&gt; Well, what I love about you is that you've done things at the ultra elite you've done things at the ultra elite you've done things at the ultra elite level within bodybuilding. But the level within bodybuilding. But the level within bodybuilding. But the advice that you're giving right now is advice that you're giving right now is advice that you're giving right now is very practical for the everyday person. very practical for the everyday person. very practical for the everyday person. And I'm not a psychologist, but I'm And I'm not a psychologist, but I'm And I'm not a psychologist, but I'm going to venture a hypothesis here, going to venture a hypothesis here, going to venture a hypothesis here, which is that some of that has to do which is that some of that has to do which is that some of that has to do with the fact that you grew up with the fact that you grew up with the fact that you grew up bluecollar background from Birmingham, bluecollar background from Birmingham, bluecollar background from Birmingham, working full-time while building out working full-time while building out working full-time while building out your bodybuilding career. You didn't your bodybuilding career. You didn't your bodybuilding career. You didn't come to it with a briefcase full of cash come to it with a briefcase full of cash come to it with a briefcase full of cash and have the opportunity to just and have the opportunity to just and have the opportunity to just say, "Oh, how much training can you do?" say, "Oh, how much training can you do?" say, "Oh, how much training can you do?" Uh, well, let's figure it out. Like, you Uh, well, let's figure it out. Like, you Uh, well, let's figure it out. Like, you had to be very practical. And my guess had to be very practical. And my guess had to be very practical. And my guess is that you had to be very practical is that you had to be very practical is that you had to be very practical about recovery and nutrition as well. about recovery and nutrition as well. about recovery and nutrition as well. You probably I'm guessing there was a You probably I'm guessing there was a You probably I'm guessing there was a point in your life where you couldn't point in your life where you couldn't point in your life where you couldn't afford, you know, uh, grass-fed meat afford, you know, uh, grass-fed meat afford, you know, uh, grass-fed meat shipped in from, uh, south of France. shipped in from, uh, south of France. shipped in from, uh, south of France. And this guy, I'm not saying you do And this guy, I'm not saying you do And this guy, I'm not saying you do that. &gt;&gt; Let me tell you a story, man. When I was &gt;&gt; Let me tell you a story, man. When I was &gt;&gt; Let me tell you a story, man. When I was uh, British champion, that was a big uh, British champion, that was a big uh, British champion, that was a big thing back then. British champion, thing back then. British champion, thing back then. British champion, right? 3,000 people in the audience packed out. 3,000 people in the audience packed out. 3,000 people in the audience packed out. We had buses coming from our gym. All We had buses coming from our gym. All We had buses coming from our gym. All this stuff, you know, air horns. British this stuff, you know, air horns. British this stuff, you know, air horns. British bodybuilding crowds are not like they're bodybuilding crowds are not like they're bodybuilding crowds are not like they're pretty rowdy. They're not. [laughter] pretty rowdy. They're not. [laughter] pretty rowdy. They're not. [laughter] &gt;&gt; I think the Brits around any sport get &gt;&gt; I think the Brits around any sport get &gt;&gt; I think the Brits around any sport get pretty rowdy. pretty rowdy. pretty rowdy. &gt;&gt; They're pretty rowdy. If you see boxing &gt;&gt; They're pretty rowdy. If you see boxing &gt;&gt; They're pretty rowdy. If you see boxing in Vegas and there's a British fighter, in Vegas and there's a British fighter, in Vegas and there's a British fighter, they take over the whole place, you they take over the whole place, you they take over the whole place, you know. &gt;&gt; Uh so anyway, this great accolade. I'm &gt;&gt; Uh so anyway, this great accolade. I'm &gt;&gt; Uh so anyway, this great accolade. I'm British champion now. And I went home. I British champion now. And I went home. I British champion now. And I went home. I got no car. got no car. got no car. I'm living in a council estate. It's I'm living in a council estate. It's I'm living in a council estate. It's like projects, you know, council estate. like projects, you know, council estate. like projects, you know, council estate. I got no carpet in my bedroom. I don't I got no carpet in my bedroom. I don't I got no carpet in my bedroom. I don't even have a proper bed. I just got a even have a proper bed. I just got a even have a proper bed. I just got a mattress. Yeah. I got a TV that barely mattress. Yeah. I got a TV that barely mattress. Yeah. I got a TV that barely works. And I got a trophy. And I got a trophy. And I got a trophy. I'm like, "Wow, look, I'm British I'm like, "Wow, look, I'm British I'm like, "Wow, look, I'm British champion, but nobody gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] champion, but nobody gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] champion, but nobody gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] really." Like, you know, I do and the really." Like, you know, I do and the really." Like, you know, I do and the people that's in the bodybuilding people that's in the bodybuilding people that's in the bodybuilding community, but this hasn't translated community, but this hasn't translated community, but this hasn't translated into anything yet. It took me about five into anything yet. It took me about five into anything yet. It took me about five years of really like you know 100% years of really like you know 100% years of really like you know 100% dedication for me to be turn pro and the dedication for me to be turn pro and the dedication for me to be turn pro and the ironic thing is I guess like when you're ironic thing is I guess like when you're ironic thing is I guess like when you're starting and you got nothing nobody's starting and you got nothing nobody's starting and you got nothing nobody's very interested and nobody wants to help very interested and nobody wants to help very interested and nobody wants to help you when you start when you become you when you start when you become you when you start when you become successes then successful people want to successes then successful people want to successes then successful people want to help you because they want to help you because they want to help you because they want to help themselves which is it's fair enough themselves which is it's fair enough themselves which is it's fair enough it's a transaction but until then no so it's a transaction but until then no so it's a transaction but until then no so Uh I got my first car when I was 25. All Uh I got my first car when I was 25. All Uh I got my first car when I was 25. All my friends were driving 18, 19. But the my friends were driving 18, 19. But the my friends were driving 18, 19. But the funny thing is I didn't feel like I was funny thing is I didn't feel like I was funny thing is I didn't feel like I was missing out on anything. I knew I was on missing out on anything. I knew I was on missing out on anything. I knew I was on this mission and this in itself was so this mission and this in itself was so this mission and this in itself was so powerful like nobody else had that had powerful like nobody else had that had powerful like nobody else had that had this mission that I was doing was just this mission that I was doing was just this mission that I was doing was just to change my life basically and to change my life basically and to change my life basically and bodybuilding was the vehicle. And uh bodybuilding was the vehicle. And uh bodybuilding was the vehicle. And uh I think uh something that really helped I think uh something that really helped I think uh something that really helped me is I'm an avid reader. I have been me is I'm an avid reader. I have been me is I'm an avid reader. I have been since I was about 10 years old. And I since I was about 10 years old. And I since I was about 10 years old. And I can take in a lot of information on a can take in a lot of information on a can take in a lot of information on a subject if I'm very interested. I'll subject if I'm very interested. I'll subject if I'm very interested. I'll almost be get obsessed with it for a almost be get obsessed with it for a almost be get obsessed with it for a while and then I might just I forget while and then I might just I forget while and then I might just I forget about that. I go interested in something about that. I go interested in something about that. I go interested in something else. Um so all the guys that I was else. Um so all the guys that I was else. Um so all the guys that I was training with, they were like just training with, they were like just training with, they were like just watching videos and listen to other guys watching videos and listen to other guys watching videos and listen to other guys in the gym. I was reading Mike Menso. I in the gym. I was reading Mike Menso. I in the gym. I was reading Mike Menso. I was reading Arthur Jones. I was trying was reading Arthur Jones. I was trying was reading Arthur Jones. I was trying to figure it out for myself. Um, to figure it out for myself. Um, to figure it out for myself. Um, which means you need a very uh which means you need a very uh which means you need a very uh independent kind of personality. independent kind of personality. independent kind of personality. So, yeah, let me try do a bit more. So, yeah, let me try do a bit more. So, yeah, let me try do a bit more. Doesn't work. Finished, Doesn't work. Finished, Doesn't work. Finished, &gt;&gt; you know. And the fact that I've got all &gt;&gt; you know. And the fact that I've got all &gt;&gt; you know. And the fact that I've got all this every single workout from 1983 to this every single workout from 1983 to this every single workout from 1983 to 1997 written down all the diets later on 1997 written down all the diets later on 1997 written down all the diets later on when I'm using anabolics, what I'm using when I'm using anabolics, what I'm using when I'm using anabolics, what I'm using and how long and all this stuff so I and how long and all this stuff so I and how long and all this stuff so I could uh analyze it, you know, see could uh analyze it, you know, see could uh analyze it, you know, see what's working and what's not working. A what's working and what's not working. A what's working and what's not working. A lot of guys were like shooting in the lot of guys were like shooting in the lot of guys were like shooting in the dark uh hoping they're going to hit dark uh hoping they're going to hit dark uh hoping they're going to hit something, but they don't. And I, you something, but they don't. And I, you something, but they don't. And I, you know, I didn't have time to waste. This know, I didn't have time to waste. This know, I didn't have time to waste. This was a mission. Uh, I didn't have skills. was a mission. Uh, I didn't have skills. was a mission. Uh, I didn't have skills. I didn't have a family, you know, all I didn't have a family, you know, all I didn't have a family, you know, all this stuff. So, bodybuilding was my road this stuff. So, bodybuilding was my road this stuff. So, bodybuilding was my road to change my life. Where it was going at to change my life. Where it was going at to change my life. Where it was going at first, I didn't know, but I knew it was first, I didn't know, but I knew it was first, I didn't know, but I knew it was going somewhere. I knew I could be very going somewhere. I knew I could be very going somewhere. I knew I could be very good at it. Did you have the sense even good at it. Did you have the sense even good at it. Did you have the sense even before all this that uh perhaps you were before all this that uh perhaps you were before all this that uh perhaps you were uh different or that you were uh different or that you were uh different or that you were destined to pursue something destined to pursue something destined to pursue something &gt;&gt; 100% &gt;&gt; 100% &gt;&gt; 100% &gt;&gt; from the what's your earliest &gt;&gt; from the what's your earliest &gt;&gt; from the what's your earliest recollection of knowing that you were recollection of knowing that you were recollection of knowing that you were going to aspire to some very high peak? going to aspire to some very high peak? going to aspire to some very high peak? &gt;&gt; Well, the first thing I was into was uh &gt;&gt; Well, the first thing I was into was uh &gt;&gt; Well, the first thing I was into was uh Bruce Lee, right? So, you know, Bruce Lee, right? So, you know, Bruce Lee, right? So, you know, Bruce Lee and then even I was impressed with Lee and then even I was impressed with Lee and then even I was impressed with his physique then, but now I look his physique then, but now I look his physique then, but now I look compared to a bodybuer on the wall, you know, with the cuts on the wall, you know, with the cuts on the wall, you know, with the cuts down there and everything. So, I was down there and everything. So, I was down there and everything. So, I was doing push-ups. doing push-ups. doing push-ups. Uh, just at my last year at school, I Uh, just at my last year at school, I Uh, just at my last year at school, I started getting bodybuilding magazines started getting bodybuilding magazines started getting bodybuilding magazines and doing a bit of weight training. Um, and doing a bit of weight training. Um, and doing a bit of weight training. Um, so there was that. Then I left home at so there was that. Then I left home at so there was that. Then I left home at 16 and I just didn't have the lifestyle 16 and I just didn't have the lifestyle 16 and I just didn't have the lifestyle to pursue it. And for some reason, I'm to pursue it. And for some reason, I'm to pursue it. And for some reason, I'm not doing this. I said, [snorts] "I'm not doing this. I said, [snorts] "I'm not doing this. I said, [snorts] "I'm not doing this until I can do it not doing this until I can do it not doing this until I can do it properly." And uh And uh And uh I always knew I was different, I guess, I always knew I was different, I guess, I always knew I was different, I guess, [clears throat] you know, but you didn't [clears throat] you know, but you didn't [clears throat] you know, but you didn't I didn't know why and I didn't know I didn't know why and I didn't know I didn't know why and I didn't know where it was going, but I knew it was where it was going, but I knew it was where it was going, but I knew it was going somewhere. And it's a strange going somewhere. And it's a strange going somewhere. And it's a strange feeling through my whole process. feeling through my whole process. feeling through my whole process. I feel like I've done it before almost, I feel like I've done it before almost, I feel like I've done it before almost, you know, like it was destined. It you know, like it was destined. It you know, like it was destined. It wasn't a surprise. wasn't a surprise. wasn't a surprise. uh in the earlier years it's like uh in the earlier years it's like uh in the earlier years it's like I just knew I got to just put everything I just knew I got to just put everything I just knew I got to just put everything into this. I got to put everything into this. I got to put everything into this. I got to put everything into and I can't let anything distract me and I can't let anything distract me and I can't let anything distract me 100% into this. Um so yeah I was I knew 100% into this. Um so yeah I was I knew 100% into this. Um so yeah I was I knew I was destined for something and when I was destined for something and when I was destined for something and when I started doing bodybuilding I was ah so started doing bodybuilding I was ah so started doing bodybuilding I was ah so this is it. Yeah. I don't know if you this is it. Yeah. I don't know if you this is it. Yeah. I don't know if you heard the story but I got a little bit heard the story but I got a little bit heard the story but I got a little bit of trouble just rowdy guys really. We of trouble just rowdy guys really. We of trouble just rowdy guys really. We got picked up on a street at the wrong got picked up on a street at the wrong got picked up on a street at the wrong time because there were some street time because there were some street time because there were some street riots in Birmingham which we weren't riots in Birmingham which we weren't riots in Birmingham which we weren't involved with but wrong place wrong involved with but wrong place wrong involved with but wrong place wrong time. Got sent to a detention center and time. Got sent to a detention center and time. Got sent to a detention center and in there they had weights and there was in there they had weights and there was in there they had weights and there was 300 guys and like I was nearly the 300 guys and like I was nearly the 300 guys and like I was nearly the strongest guy in there. There was only strongest guy in there. There was only strongest guy in there. There was only guy who was stronger than me was like 50 guy who was stronger than me was like 50 guy who was stronger than me was like 50 60 lbs heavier and I was really lean. I 60 lbs heavier and I was really lean. I 60 lbs heavier and I was really lean. I had abs and everything. Everyone was had abs and everything. Everyone was had abs and everything. Everyone was like wow the physique. Even the prison like wow the physique. Even the prison like wow the physique. Even the prison officers in there were like you should officers in there were like you should officers in there were like you should do something with this. said, "Don't do something with this. said, "Don't do something with this. said, "Don't worry, I'm going to." So, that was worry, I'm going to." So, that was worry, I'm going to." So, that was another one like, "Hey, another one like, "Hey, another one like, "Hey, &gt;&gt; you've got something here." &gt;&gt; you've got something here." &gt;&gt; you've got something here." You know, there was a crossroads here You know, there was a crossroads here You know, there was a crossroads here and I was like, I never want to be in a and I was like, I never want to be in a and I was like, I never want to be in a place like this again and lose my place like this again and lose my place like this again and lose my freedom, but you literally become a freedom, but you literally become a freedom, but you literally become a number and you're told when to get up number and you're told when to get up number and you're told when to get up and when to do this. And and when to do this. And and when to do this. And &gt;&gt; those places suck. &gt;&gt; those places suck. &gt;&gt; those places suck. &gt;&gt; And I saw people in there that would I &gt;&gt; And I saw people in there that would I &gt;&gt; And I saw people in there that would I knew they were destined to like this is knew they were destined to like this is knew they were destined to like this is their life. Even they didn't care. Yeah, their life. Even they didn't care. Yeah, their life. Even they didn't care. Yeah, I know. But I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I might I know. But I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I might I know. But I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I might be in jail, but this is just the life be in jail, but this is just the life be in jail, but this is just the life I've chosen. Good luck with that, man. I've chosen. Good luck with that, man. I've chosen. Good luck with that, man. It's not for me, you know. So, that It's not for me, you know. So, that It's not for me, you know. So, that again was like, hey, you need to do again was like, hey, you need to do again was like, hey, you need to do something with this. And uh when I left something with this. And uh when I left something with this. And uh when I left there, I didn't start training. I was there, I didn't start training. I was there, I didn't start training. I was like, I got to get a job. I got to get like, I got to get a job. I got to get like, I got to get a job. I got to get an apartment. I got to get stability. Uh an apartment. I got to get stability. Uh an apartment. I got to get stability. Uh and when I did, I was like, right, I and when I did, I was like, right, I and when I did, I was like, right, I start my bodybuilding journey. Write it start my bodybuilding journey. Write it start my bodybuilding journey. Write it down today. The date. I still got it, down today. The date. I still got it, down today. The date. I still got it, man. &gt;&gt; What's in those notebooks? Um everything &gt;&gt; What's in those notebooks? Um everything &gt;&gt; What's in those notebooks? Um everything from what you did for a warmup, how you from what you did for a warmup, how you from what you did for a warmup, how you felt going into felt going into felt going into &gt;&gt; all the sets and reps, warmup, how I was &gt;&gt; all the sets and reps, warmup, how I was &gt;&gt; all the sets and reps, warmup, how I was feeling that day. Some days I was feeling that day. Some days I was feeling that day. Some days I was feeling overtrained and tired. Even feeling overtrained and tired. Even feeling overtrained and tired. Even though I was training three days a week, though I was training three days a week, though I was training three days a week, sometimes I had to back off the sometimes I had to back off the sometimes I had to back off the intensity because of work and stuff like intensity because of work and stuff like intensity because of work and stuff like that. U but how I was feeling. And you that. U but how I was feeling. And you that. U but how I was feeling. And you know, it's interesting if I look at my know, it's interesting if I look at my know, it's interesting if I look at my books over the years. The first ones are books over the years. The first ones are books over the years. The first ones are quite childish. Got these little go for quite childish. Got these little go for quite childish. Got these little go for it, you know, mass and power. it, you know, mass and power. it, you know, mass and power. &gt;&gt; Kind of cool, too. I'm glad actually you &gt;&gt; Kind of cool, too. I'm glad actually you &gt;&gt; Kind of cool, too. I'm glad actually you mentioned that. I've kept training mentioned that. I've kept training mentioned that. I've kept training logs inspired by you and by Mike uh um logs inspired by you and by Mike uh um logs inspired by you and by Mike uh um for many years. and for many years. and for many years. and getting to read that kind of stuff, the getting to read that kind of stuff, the getting to read that kind of stuff, the kind of silly stuff. Yeah. kind of silly stuff. Yeah. kind of silly stuff. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I mean, it captures the spirit of it at &gt;&gt; I mean, it captures the spirit of it at &gt;&gt; I mean, it captures the spirit of it at the time. the time. the time. &gt;&gt; Not only that, I wouldn't forget half of &gt;&gt; Not only that, I wouldn't forget half of &gt;&gt; Not only that, I wouldn't forget half of the stuff that I did if I hadn't the stuff that I did if I hadn't the stuff that I did if I hadn't documented it. Even now, I'm like, my documented it. Even now, I'm like, my documented it. Even now, I'm like, my guys on social media was like, when were guys on social media was like, when were guys on social media was like, when were you doing this exercise and when did you doing this exercise and when did you doing this exercise and when did you start when did you change to this one? start when did you change to this one? start when did you change to this one? I'm like, I don't know, man. I have to I'm like, I don't know, man. I have to I'm like, I don't know, man. I have to go back and look. And sometimes it's not go back and look. And sometimes it's not go back and look. And sometimes it's not as I thought it was when I go back. It as I thought it was when I go back. It as I thought it was when I go back. It was a little bit different. So, it's was a little bit different. So, it's was a little bit different. So, it's great that I got all that written down great that I got all that written down great that I got all that written down and documented. And uh I used to have and documented. And uh I used to have and documented. And uh I used to have every month a review every month a review every month a review &gt;&gt; where [clears throat] I'm at and the &gt;&gt; where [clears throat] I'm at and the &gt;&gt; where [clears throat] I'm at and the goals for the next month. Try to make goals for the next month. Try to make goals for the next month. Try to make them realistic, but you know the goals them realistic, but you know the goals them realistic, but you know the goals in mind for the next month. in mind for the next month. in mind for the next month. &gt;&gt; Super methodical. &gt;&gt; Super methodical. &gt;&gt; Super methodical. &gt;&gt; Very methodical, analytical, logic. &gt;&gt; Very methodical, analytical, logic. &gt;&gt; Very methodical, analytical, logic. &gt;&gt; Do you get that from one of your parents &gt;&gt; Do you get that from one of your parents &gt;&gt; Do you get that from one of your parents or because to go in the opposite or because to go in the opposite or because to go in the opposite direction of your parents? What's the direction of your parents? What's the direction of your parents? What's the &gt;&gt; uh Well, my mother was uh actually quite &gt;&gt; uh Well, my mother was uh actually quite &gt;&gt; uh Well, my mother was uh actually quite very educated. Mhm. very educated. Mhm. very educated. Mhm. &gt;&gt; She was private school and everything, &gt;&gt; She was private school and everything, &gt;&gt; She was private school and everything, but my dad was very workingass car but my dad was very workingass car but my dad was very workingass car mechanic and everything, but he managed mechanic and everything, but he managed mechanic and everything, but he managed to &gt;&gt; perfect combo. &gt;&gt; perfect combo. &gt;&gt; perfect combo. &gt;&gt; Yeah. He managed to uh you know, I was &gt;&gt; Yeah. He managed to uh you know, I was &gt;&gt; Yeah. He managed to uh you know, I was young. I lost my father at 13, right, young. I lost my father at 13, right, young. I lost my father at 13, right, from a heart attack. Um, but he was a from a heart attack. Um, but he was a from a heart attack. Um, but he was a working-class guy that managed to buy a working-class guy that managed to buy a working-class guy that managed to buy a small farm. small farm. small farm. He managed to learn to fly an airplane. He managed to learn to fly an airplane. He managed to learn to fly an airplane. I went up with my dad when I was like I went up with my dad when I was like I went up with my dad when I was like four or five years old. He was flying four or five years old. He was flying four or five years old. He was flying little four seat Cessnas and everything little four seat Cessnas and everything little four seat Cessnas and everything like that. So, I mean, he must have been like that. So, I mean, he must have been like that. So, I mean, he must have been a smart guy and very driven to be able a smart guy and very driven to be able a smart guy and very driven to be able to do that as a working-class guy. to do that as a working-class guy. to do that as a working-class guy. Imagine back in the 1970s flying Imagine back in the 1970s flying Imagine back in the 1970s flying airplanes and you work as a airplanes and you work as a airplanes and you work as a maintenance engineer at the rover plant maintenance engineer at the rover plant maintenance engineer at the rover plant or something. or something. or something. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think for Americans, they don't &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think for Americans, they don't &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think for Americans, they don't realize how stratified the class system realize how stratified the class system realize how stratified the class system in England was in that time. Yeah. in England was in that time. Yeah. in England was in that time. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Is very different. Very &gt;&gt; Is very different. Very &gt;&gt; Is very different. Very &gt;&gt; absolutely a working-class guy flying an &gt;&gt; absolutely a working-class guy flying an &gt;&gt; absolutely a working-class guy flying an airplane. &gt;&gt; There was nobody else doing that. Um, so &gt;&gt; There was nobody else doing that. Um, so &gt;&gt; There was nobody else doing that. Um, so he must have been a guy above average he must have been a guy above average he must have been a guy above average intelligence. So my mom was as well. So intelligence. So my mom was as well. So intelligence. So my mom was as well. So I probably got the logical stuff from my I probably got the logical stuff from my I probably got the logical stuff from my dad. I would say, you know, my mom's dad. I would say, you know, my mom's dad. I would say, you know, my mom's more female, more emotional. My dad was more female, more emotional. My dad was more female, more emotional. My dad was probably very uh you know, logical in probably very uh you know, logical in probably very uh you know, logical in his ways. And an engineer, you know, his ways. And an engineer, you know, his ways. And an engineer, you know, engineering is about numbers and engineering is about numbers and engineering is about numbers and everything. So uh everything. So uh everything. So uh &gt;&gt; well, a lot of people ask me what &gt;&gt; well, a lot of people ask me what &gt;&gt; well, a lot of people ask me what happened if you didn't lose your father happened if you didn't lose your father happened if you didn't lose your father when you were 13. when you were 13. when you were 13. You Dorian Yates the bodybuilder You Dorian Yates the bodybuilder You Dorian Yates the bodybuilder probably wouldn't exist. probably wouldn't exist. probably wouldn't exist. Because if life's comfortable, you won't Because if life's comfortable, you won't Because if life's comfortable, you won't put yourself through this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] man. I put yourself through this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] man. I put yourself through this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] man. I mean, it's a lot of work, a lot of mean, it's a lot of work, a lot of mean, it's a lot of work, a lot of dedication, a lot of sacrifice, and uh dedication, a lot of sacrifice, and uh dedication, a lot of sacrifice, and uh over many, many years. It's not a, you over many, many years. It's not a, you over many, many years. It's not a, you know, it's not a short-term thing to get know, it's not a short-term thing to get know, it's not a short-term thing to get from being starting bodybuilding to be from being starting bodybuilding to be from being starting bodybuilding to be to be a pro bodybuilder took me seven to be a pro bodybuilder took me seven to be a pro bodybuilder took me seven years. And that was quick. That was years. And that was quick. That was years. And that was quick. That was relatively quick. So, seven years of relatively quick. So, seven years of relatively quick. So, seven years of absolute this is my main focus of life. This is this is my main focus of life. This is this is my main focus of life. This is what I'm doing for seven years to get to what I'm doing for seven years to get to what I'm doing for seven years to get to be a pro and then I was seven years as a be a pro and then I was seven years as a be a pro and then I was seven years as a pro as well. pro as well. pro as well. &gt;&gt; By now, I'm sure that many of you have &gt;&gt; By now, I'm sure that many of you have &gt;&gt; By now, I'm sure that many of you have heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 for more than a decade. And indeed, for more than a decade. And indeed, for more than a decade. And indeed, that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most the highest quality and most the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away six free sample packs of is giving away six free sample packs of is giving away six free sample packs of AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, which by the way is fantastic. It's the which by the way is fantastic. It's the which by the way is fantastic. It's the only sleep supplement I take. It only sleep supplement I take. It only sleep supplement I take. It eliminates the need for all these pills, eliminates the need for all these pills, eliminates the need for all these pills, and my sleep has never been better. The and my sleep has never been better. The and my sleep has never been better. The special offer gives you six free samples special offer gives you six free samples special offer gives you six free samples of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your first subscription. Just go to your first subscription. Just go to your first subscription. Just go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get started. Today's episode is also to get started. Today's episode is also to get started. Today's episode is also brought to us by ourplace. Our place brought to us by ourplace. Our place brought to us by ourplace. Our place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other makes my favorite pots, pans, and other makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are such as PASES or forever chemicals are such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as still found in 80% of non-stick pans as still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils, appliances, and well as utensils, appliances, and well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As countless other kitchen products. As countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, I've discussed before on this podcast, I've discussed before on this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like these PASES or forever chemicals like these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health Teflon have been linked to major health Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Ourplace why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Ourplace why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Ourplace products are made with the highest products are made with the highest products are made with the highest quality materials and are all PAS and quality materials and are all PAS and quality materials and are all PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it always puts a and steaks in it, and it always puts a and steaks in it, and it always puts a really nice sear on the meat, but again, really nice sear on the meat, but again, really nice sear on the meat, but again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I use it safe. I love it, and I use it safe. I love it, and I use it constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full line of titanium Pro cookware that uses line of titanium Pro cookware that uses line of titanium Pro cookware that uses the first of its kind titanium non-stick the first of its kind titanium non-stick the first of its kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code Huberman. With a and use the code Huberman. With a and use the code Huberman. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can try ourplace and free returns, you can try ourplace and free returns, you can try ourplace with zero risk, and you can see why more with zero risk, and you can see why more with zero risk, and you can see why more than 1 million people have made the than 1 million people have made the than 1 million people have made the switch to ourplace kitchen wear. I have switch to ourplace kitchen wear. I have switch to ourplace kitchen wear. I have two questions, one practical, one uh two questions, one practical, one uh two questions, one practical, one uh more related to your personal story. Uh more related to your personal story. Uh more related to your personal story. Uh the practical one is one you know the practical one is one you know the practical one is one you know nowadays there's an almost obsession uh nowadays there's an almost obsession uh nowadays there's an almost obsession uh online of uh young guys teens 20s 30s online of uh young guys teens 20s 30s online of uh young guys teens 20s 30s who immediately think they should be on who immediately think they should be on who immediately think they should be on testosterone enhancement TRT that you testosterone enhancement TRT that you testosterone enhancement TRT that you know going beyond TRT getting on gear know going beyond TRT getting on gear know going beyond TRT getting on gear how long gear for the folks that don't how long gear for the folks that don't how long gear for the folks that don't know is uh is a verbiage for know is uh is a verbiage for know is uh is a verbiage for steroids um TRT testosterone replacement steroids um TRT testosterone replacement steroids um TRT testosterone replacement therapy you know lower dosages designed therapy you know lower dosages designed therapy you know lower dosages designed to bring things into upper normal range to bring things into upper normal range to bring things into upper normal range um in some cases a little higher. What um in some cases a little higher. What um in some cases a little higher. What uh from the time you picked up a weight uh from the time you picked up a weight uh from the time you picked up a weight maybe in this youth detention center maybe in this youth detention center maybe in this youth detention center until the first time you went on gear, until the first time you went on gear, until the first time you went on gear, how long was that and how much did you how long was that and how much did you how long was that and how much did you achieve doing the sorts of training you achieve doing the sorts of training you achieve doing the sorts of training you were talking about before? I want to were talking about before? I want to were talking about before? I want to separate this out from the competit from separate this out from the competit from separate this out from the competit from the competitive phase. Um in part the competitive phase. Um in part the competitive phase. Um in part because frankly I think and I've been because frankly I think and I've been because frankly I think and I've been very open. I went on I'm on lowdose TRT. very open. I went on I'm on lowdose TRT. very open. I went on I'm on lowdose TRT. I started when I was 45 about 125 I started when I was 45 about 125 I started when I was 45 about 125 milligrams a week. Okay. Um the same as milligrams a week. Okay. Um the same as milligrams a week. Okay. Um the same as you. Uh so um but I always tell people you. Uh so um but I always tell people you. Uh so um but I always tell people they really should they really should they really should wait if do it at all. How long did you wait if do it at all. How long did you wait if do it at all. How long did you have without anything where it's have without anything where it's have without anything where it's you know okay food training sleep maybe you know okay food training sleep maybe you know okay food training sleep maybe some supplements like some creatine some supplements like some creatine some supplements like some creatine some protein powder some protein powder some protein powder &gt;&gt; right so I started in 83 &gt;&gt; right so I started in 83 &gt;&gt; right so I started in 83 earlier in the year earlier in the year earlier in the year uh I was uh I was uh I was 180 185 but very lean you can see some 180 185 but very lean you can see some 180 185 but very lean you can see some pictures of me pictures of me pictures of me &gt;&gt; when you have those thick joints I mean &gt;&gt; when you have those thick joints I mean &gt;&gt; when you have those thick joints I mean you're you have an athletic you're you have an athletic you're you have an athletic &gt;&gt; I got very low body fat as well &gt;&gt; I got very low body fat as well &gt;&gt; I got very low body fat as well naturally uh my son and my daughter they naturally uh my son and my daughter they naturally uh my son and my daughter they both like had abs and like when 11 years both like had abs and like when 11 years both like had abs and like when 11 years old, very lean, pale skin, low body old, very lean, pale skin, low body old, very lean, pale skin, low body fat, thin skin, uh type of thing. So you fat, thin skin, uh type of thing. So you fat, thin skin, uh type of thing. So you wouldn't say, "Wow, look at that guy. wouldn't say, "Wow, look at that guy. wouldn't say, "Wow, look at that guy. He's big." But you would say, "Wow, he's He's big." But you would say, "Wow, he's He's big." But you would say, "Wow, he's really cut this guy." That's how I he's really cut this guy." That's how I he's really cut this guy." That's how I started, 180. So, uh, started, 180. So, uh, started, 180. So, uh, after 6 months, I think I was 195 after 6 months, I think I was 195 after 6 months, I think I was 195 and the gym owner put on a contest in and the gym owner put on a contest in and the gym owner put on a contest in Birmingham, local gym thing, and he was Birmingham, local gym thing, and he was Birmingham, local gym thing, and he was like, "Come on, go in a contest." like, "Come on, go in a contest." like, "Come on, go in a contest." I don't know. Okay. So, I went in, no I don't know. Okay. So, I went in, no I don't know. Okay. So, I went in, no diet, no steroids, nothing. It was the diet, no steroids, nothing. It was the diet, no steroids, nothing. It was the first time as contest. I still got the first time as contest. I still got the first time as contest. I still got the pictures, but the two guys that I was pictures, but the two guys that I was pictures, but the two guys that I was competing, they came second and third. I competing, they came second and third. I competing, they came second and third. I won. But both these guys were already on won. But both these guys were already on won. But both these guys were already on stuff. So, I was able to beat them not stuff. So, I was able to beat them not stuff. So, I was able to beat them not using anything, right? Because using anything, right? Because using anything, right? Because genetically I'm better, I guess. I'm not genetically I'm better, I guess. I'm not genetically I'm better, I guess. I'm not saying in six months uh I overtook them. saying in six months uh I overtook them. saying in six months uh I overtook them. I probably started ahead of them. So I probably started ahead of them. So I probably started ahead of them. So that was with nothing. I got up to 210. that was with nothing. I got up to 210. that was with nothing. I got up to 210. &gt;&gt; So I just looking back uh because we did &gt;&gt; So I just looking back uh because we did &gt;&gt; So I just looking back uh because we did some social media posts with my early some social media posts with my early some social media posts with my early training. Yeah. So I'm benching three training. Yeah. So I'm benching three training. Yeah. So I'm benching three plates aside for like three or four reps plates aside for like three or four reps plates aside for like three or four reps and I want to go now into the IFBB and I want to go now into the IFBB and I want to go now into the IFBB and compete. Yeah. Which I know everybody's compete. Yeah. Which I know everybody's compete. Yeah. Which I know everybody's using, right? So I was 210 using, right? So I was 210 using, right? So I was 210 uh when I decided I'm going to do this uh when I decided I'm going to do this uh when I decided I'm going to do this competition and I did some deb 20 milligrams a day and I did some deb 20 milligrams a day and I did some deb 20 milligrams a day for about 6 weeks and I switched to for about 6 weeks and I switched to for about 6 weeks and I switched to Anavar for the contest. Anavar for the contest. Anavar for the contest. So I went from 180 to 210. So that's 30 So I went from 180 to 210. So that's 30 So I went from 180 to 210. So that's 30 lbs I put on in a year and a half lbs I put on in a year and a half lbs I put on in a year and a half training or something. Then I decided to training or something. Then I decided to training or something. Then I decided to do the composition. So do the composition. So do the composition. So in 6 weeks I think on 20 milligrams of in 6 weeks I think on 20 milligrams of in 6 weeks I think on 20 milligrams of DB bar I went to like 230 you know it's DB bar I went to like 230 you know it's DB bar I went to like 230 you know it's a big boost in 6 weeks but I already put a big boost in 6 weeks but I already put a big boost in 6 weeks but I already put on 30 lbs like without anything. Um and on 30 lbs like without anything. Um and on 30 lbs like without anything. Um and for me it was always like I'm going to for me it was always like I'm going to for me it was always like I'm going to do competitive bodybuilding and I intend do competitive bodybuilding and I intend do competitive bodybuilding and I intend to make a career out of it. So I just to make a career out of it. So I just to make a career out of it. So I just want to be on the same playing field as want to be on the same playing field as want to be on the same playing field as everybody else. everybody else. everybody else. So I won the novice competition in the IFBB I won the novice competition in the IFBB I won the novice competition in the IFBB and like just everyone was like freaking and like just everyone was like freaking and like just everyone was like freaking out. The guy who was the head of the out. The guy who was the head of the out. The guy who was the head of the federation who's also a judge at the Mr. federation who's also a judge at the Mr. federation who's also a judge at the Mr. Olympia and some other guys came Olympia and some other guys came Olympia and some other guys came backstage and said who the where the backstage and said who the where the backstage and said who the where the hell have you come from and why are you hell have you come from and why are you hell have you come from and why are you in the novice competition? I said well in the novice competition? I said well in the novice competition? I said well I'm from Birmingham and this is my first I'm from Birmingham and this is my first I'm from Birmingham and this is my first competition in the federation. So I competition in the federation. So I competition in the federation. So I start at the bottom and wait. start at the bottom and wait. start at the bottom and wait. You're probably better than our best You're probably better than our best You're probably better than our best heavyweight. I'm like, "No, come on." heavyweight. I'm like, "No, come on." heavyweight. I'm like, "No, come on." And they were laughing like this kid. And they were laughing like this kid. And they were laughing like this kid. Like, [sighs] Like, [sighs] Like, [sighs] we want you to join the British team in we want you to join the British team in we want you to join the British team in two weeks time at the World Games, which two weeks time at the World Games, which two weeks time at the World Games, which is world championship. So, I went from a is world championship. So, I went from a is world championship. So, I went from a novice two weeks later to compete in the novice two weeks later to compete in the novice two weeks later to compete in the World Games against Buried Demay, who World Games against Buried Demay, who World Games against Buried Demay, who became a top Olympian, Matt Mendesol, became a top Olympian, Matt Mendesol, became a top Olympian, Matt Mendesol, who was the best amateur in USA at the who was the best amateur in USA at the who was the best amateur in USA at the time. And I got seventh place there. And time. And I got seventh place there. And time. And I got seventh place there. And I remember like I basically I remember like I basically I remember like I basically spent out all my funds spent out all my funds spent out all my funds to get ready for this concert. I had to get ready for this concert. I had to get ready for this concert. I had nothing left. I had to buy a tracksuit, nothing left. I had to buy a tracksuit, nothing left. I had to buy a tracksuit, tanning lotion. Like I was earning very tanning lotion. Like I was earning very tanning lotion. Like I was earning very little money. So this took all my money little money. So this took all my money little money. So this took all my money and I'm broke and I had to ask my and I'm broke and I had to ask my and I'm broke and I had to ask my brother-in-law, "Can you lend me like 20 brother-in-law, "Can you lend me like 20 brother-in-law, "Can you lend me like 20 pounds cuz I need to do this and get a pounds cuz I need to do this and get a pounds cuz I need to do this and get a taxi to the taxi to the taxi to the uh the team selection, uh the team selection, uh the team selection, &gt;&gt; right?" [clears throat] So I went to the &gt;&gt; right?" [clears throat] So I went to the &gt;&gt; right?" [clears throat] So I went to the team selection. I got picked. But I was team selection. I got picked. But I was team selection. I got picked. But I was like amongst all these guys and I'm like amongst all these guys and I'm like amongst all these guys and I'm thinking like I just borrowed some money thinking like I just borrowed some money thinking like I just borrowed some money to get here, [laughter] you know, but to get here, [laughter] you know, but to get here, [laughter] you know, but they picked me for the World Games team. they picked me for the World Games team. they picked me for the World Games team. So I went quite uniquely I think from a So I went quite uniquely I think from a So I went quite uniquely I think from a novice competition to a world novice competition to a world novice competition to a world championship in two weeks. championship in two weeks. championship in two weeks. &gt;&gt; So that's, you know, kind of the level I &gt;&gt; So that's, you know, kind of the level I &gt;&gt; So that's, you know, kind of the level I was at when I first started competing. I was at when I first started competing. I was at when I first started competing. I don't want to put words into your mouth, don't want to put words into your mouth, don't want to put words into your mouth, but um do you think it's fair to say but um do you think it's fair to say but um do you think it's fair to say that for people who are not going to that for people who are not going to that for people who are not going to pursue competitive bodybuilding that pursue competitive bodybuilding that pursue competitive bodybuilding that it's probably best to explore how far it's probably best to explore how far it's probably best to explore how far they can go with their training and good they can go with their training and good they can go with their training and good nutrition and perhaps even without nutrition and perhaps even without nutrition and perhaps even without hormone replacement until they're really hormone replacement until they're really hormone replacement until they're really need it or later. I mean, to me it seems need it or later. I mean, to me it seems need it or later. I mean, to me it seems like given the health risks, unless like given the health risks, unless like given the health risks, unless there's it's sort of like boxing like there's it's sort of like boxing like there's it's sort of like boxing like boxing's fun. I've done some like boxing's fun. I've done some like boxing's fun. I've done some boxing, done some sparring, but at some boxing, done some sparring, but at some boxing, done some sparring, but at some point you realize, wait, if I'm not point you realize, wait, if I'm not point you realize, wait, if I'm not going to make money doing this, if this going to make money doing this, if this going to make money doing this, if this isn't my career, getting hit in the head isn't my career, getting hit in the head isn't my career, getting hit in the head is just not worth it, especially for my is just not worth it, especially for my is just not worth it, especially for my job. &gt;&gt; I'm not asking you to be a public health &gt;&gt; I'm not asking you to be a public health &gt;&gt; I'm not asking you to be a public health adviser, but you've been in this sport. adviser, but you've been in this sport. adviser, but you've been in this sport. A lot of young guys are uh and gals are A lot of young guys are uh and gals are A lot of young guys are uh and gals are interested in looking better, feeling interested in looking better, feeling interested in looking better, feeling better, and going immediately to what better, and going immediately to what better, and going immediately to what peptides can I take? What, you know, peptides can I take? What, you know, peptides can I take? What, you know, should I be on HRT? Should I take should I be on HRT? Should I take should I be on HRT? Should I take Anavar? And Anavar? And Anavar? And &gt;&gt; I've got my opinions, but you're the &gt;&gt; I've got my opinions, but you're the &gt;&gt; I've got my opinions, but you're the expert here. Well, it's my opinion and expert here. Well, it's my opinion and expert here. Well, it's my opinion and the way I looked at it was like I'm the way I looked at it was like I'm the way I looked at it was like I'm going to do this as a sport, right? So, going to do this as a sport, right? So, going to do this as a sport, right? So, I justified it because everyone else is I justified it because everyone else is I justified it because everyone else is doing it and I did it as a professional doing it and I did it as a professional doing it and I did it as a professional and uh 1990. and uh 1990. and uh 1990. So, I was two times British champion, So, I was two times British champion, So, I was two times British champion, overall British champion in 1988. I got overall British champion in 1988. I got overall British champion in 1988. I got my pro card and my first pro contest was my pro card and my first pro contest was my pro card and my first pro contest was Night of Champions, which was probably Night of Champions, which was probably Night of Champions, which was probably second or third, you know, uh below the second or third, you know, uh below the second or third, you know, uh below the Mr. Olympia cuz those of you who don't Mr. Olympia cuz those of you who don't Mr. Olympia cuz those of you who don't know, you can't just go into Mr. know, you can't just go into Mr. know, you can't just go into Mr. Olympia, right? You have to win a pro Olympia, right? You have to win a pro Olympia, right? You have to win a pro show or place in the top three as it show or place in the top three as it show or place in the top three as it used to be then. I'm not sure. Now, they used to be then. I'm not sure. Now, they used to be then. I'm not sure. Now, they seem to give out so many pro cards. It's seem to give out so many pro cards. It's seem to give out so many pro cards. It's kind of lost its value. But then it was kind of lost its value. But then it was kind of lost its value. But then it was tough to get a pro card. So, I said, tough to get a pro card. So, I said, tough to get a pro card. So, I said, "Look, I've been doing all this. Yeah, "Look, I've been doing all this. Yeah, "Look, I've been doing all this. Yeah, I'm taking steroids, which may have some I'm taking steroids, which may have some I'm taking steroids, which may have some negative effects on my health later on. negative effects on my health later on. negative effects on my health later on. May do. May do. May do. So, I'm going to go to Knight of So, I'm going to go to Knight of So, I'm going to go to Knight of Champions. If I don't get in the top Champions. If I don't get in the top Champions. If I don't get in the top five, I'm not good enough. five, I'm not good enough. five, I'm not good enough. So, at that point, if that's the case, So, at that point, if that's the case, So, at that point, if that's the case, no longer justified to take the no longer justified to take the no longer justified to take the steroids, right? Or compete because I've steroids, right? Or compete because I've steroids, right? Or compete because I've gone as far as my genetics will allow gone as far as my genetics will allow gone as far as my genetics will allow me. As I observed the history of me. As I observed the history of me. As I observed the history of bodybuilding, the guys that were great bodybuilding, the guys that were great bodybuilding, the guys that were great champions, they were great like out the champions, they were great like out the champions, they were great like out the gate. They didn't get, I don't know, gate. They didn't get, I don't know, gate. They didn't get, I don't know, 12th place in Mr. Olympia and then next 12th place in Mr. Olympia and then next 12th place in Mr. Olympia and then next year win it. Like, you got it, you don't year win it. Like, you got it, you don't year win it. Like, you got it, you don't have it, right? That's what I thought. have it, right? That's what I thought. have it, right? That's what I thought. I'm going to be brutally honest with I'm going to be brutally honest with I'm going to be brutally honest with myself. I have a gym. I'm making okay myself. I have a gym. I'm making okay myself. I have a gym. I'm making okay money now. If I don't compete, I could money now. If I don't compete, I could money now. If I don't compete, I could open more gyms, put more time into that. open more gyms, put more time into that. open more gyms, put more time into that. Uh I have a young son. You know, there's Uh I have a young son. You know, there's Uh I have a young son. You know, there's kind of making a sacrifice of time and kind of making a sacrifice of time and kind of making a sacrifice of time and energy and everything because I'm energy and everything because I'm energy and everything because I'm putting everything into this. So, if I putting everything into this. So, if I putting everything into this. So, if I don't get in the top five in the night don't get in the top five in the night don't get in the top five in the night of champions, competitive career is of champions, competitive career is of champions, competitive career is over. Steroids are over. Steroids are over. Steroids are over. Do something else within the sport. Open Do something else within the sport. Open Do something else within the sport. Open more gyms or something like that. Uh more gyms or something like that. Uh more gyms or something like that. Uh anyway, the story is I got second. So, uh I the story is I got second. So, uh I the story is I got second. So, uh I continued to do what I got to do as a continued to do what I got to do as a continued to do what I got to do as a professional and I feel it was justified professional and I feel it was justified professional and I feel it was justified because I was earning a lot of money, because I was earning a lot of money, because I was earning a lot of money, more money than anyone else I knew ever more money than anyone else I knew ever more money than anyone else I knew ever earned. Um but what's my advice earned. Um but what's my advice earned. Um but what's my advice if you were a 20-year-old guy and you if you were a 20-year-old guy and you if you were a 20-year-old guy and you were speaking to me and I'm giving you were speaking to me and I'm giving you were speaking to me and I'm giving you advice? you advice? you advice? Get as far as you can naturally. Yeah. Get as far as you can naturally. Yeah. Get as far as you can naturally. Yeah. and then look at it. But and then look at it. But and then look at it. But whatever gains you make by taking whatever gains you make by taking whatever gains you make by taking anabolics is a temporary situation. You anabolics is a temporary situation. You anabolics is a temporary situation. You will lose it when you get off. All will lose it when you get off. All will lose it when you get off. All right? So, it's a merrygoround. Once you right? So, it's a merrygoround. Once you right? So, it's a merrygoround. Once you get on the merry-go round, you don't get on the merry-go round, you don't get on the merry-go round, you don't really want to get off because when you really want to get off because when you really want to get off because when you do get off, you start to lose all those do get off, you start to lose all those do get off, you start to lose all those gains. You start to feel mentally gains. You start to feel mentally gains. You start to feel mentally depressed because now your hormones are depressed because now your hormones are depressed because now your hormones are on the floor. So, what you going to do? on the floor. So, what you going to do? on the floor. So, what you going to do? Jump right back on again. And it becomes Jump right back on again. And it becomes Jump right back on again. And it becomes this merrygoround. this merrygoround. this merrygoround. As far as I'm concerned, everybody As far as I'm concerned, everybody As far as I'm concerned, everybody should make their own choices in life should make their own choices in life should make their own choices in life and be able to do what they want to do. and be able to do what they want to do. and be able to do what they want to do. But keep that in mind. Is it worth it? But keep that in mind. Is it worth it? But keep that in mind. Is it worth it? Because negative possible negative Because negative possible negative Because negative possible negative effects uh physically and also is not talked uh physically and also is not talked uh physically and also is not talked about a lot mentally. about a lot mentally. about a lot mentally. I believe there's a lot of people in the I believe there's a lot of people in the I believe there's a lot of people in the sport with mental health problems, sport with mental health problems, sport with mental health problems, especially women now, because they're in especially women now, because they're in especially women now, because they're in the high doses now, where before they the high doses now, where before they the high doses now, where before they really weren't. really weren't. really weren't. Um, and we're in this age of instant Um, and we're in this age of instant Um, and we're in this age of instant gratification. [clears throat] Everybody gratification. [clears throat] Everybody gratification. [clears throat] Everybody wants everything now, right? And I see wants everything now, right? And I see wants everything now, right? And I see it a bit like this, maybe from the guy's it a bit like this, maybe from the guy's it a bit like this, maybe from the guy's point of view. Well, listen, women are point of view. Well, listen, women are point of view. Well, listen, women are having breast implants, right? having breast implants, right? having breast implants, right? They're having lip fillers and Botox and They're having lip fillers and Botox and They're having lip fillers and Botox and all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] So, why can't we take all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] So, why can't we take all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] So, why can't we take some anabolics just to look good and some anabolics just to look good and some anabolics just to look good and have abs on the beach? Why not? Uh have abs on the beach? Why not? Uh have abs on the beach? Why not? Uh because of that. And ask yourself if because of that. And ask yourself if because of that. And ask yourself if it's worth it because this is a reality. it's worth it because this is a reality. it's worth it because this is a reality. You can't keep those gains. So, you're You can't keep those gains. So, you're You can't keep those gains. So, you're probably going to be forced to probably going to be forced to probably going to be forced to continually do this over a long period continually do this over a long period continually do this over a long period of time and that might be bad for your of time and that might be bad for your of time and that might be bad for your health. Um health. Um health. Um I seem to be in very good health. Uh, I seem to be in very good health. Uh, I seem to be in very good health. Uh, but I've changed my lifestyle and done a but I've changed my lifestyle and done a but I've changed my lifestyle and done a lot of different things to kind of lot of different things to kind of lot of different things to kind of recover from the stress that I put on my recover from the stress that I put on my recover from the stress that I put on my body in a professional career. And I'm body in a professional career. And I'm body in a professional career. And I'm here today and I'm healthy and I'm here today and I'm healthy and I'm here today and I'm healthy and I'm successful and my business is good and successful and my business is good and successful and my business is good and I'm happy. Uh, but it could have been I'm happy. Uh, but it could have been I'm happy. Uh, but it could have been different. You know, it was different different. You know, it was different different. You know, it was different for a lot of guys that I used to compete for a lot of guys that I used to compete for a lot of guys that I used to compete against. &gt;&gt; Yeah. A lot of them are dead. &gt;&gt; Yeah. A lot of them are dead. &gt;&gt; Yeah. A lot of them are dead. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, is it worth the risk? I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, is it worth the risk? I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, is it worth the risk? I mean, that's their question to answer, but I that's their question to answer, but I that's their question to answer, but I would say it's not. But, hey, that's would say it's not. But, hey, that's would say it's not. But, hey, that's just my opinion. Well, I'm struck again just my opinion. Well, I'm struck again just my opinion. Well, I'm struck again by how rational you were. If I place in by how rational you were. If I place in by how rational you were. If I place in the top five, etc., I'll move forward. the top five, etc., I'll move forward. the top five, etc., I'll move forward. If not, very grounded. If not, very grounded. If not, very grounded. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they So, that was the first &gt;&gt; Yeah, they So, that was the first &gt;&gt; Yeah, they So, that was the first question. Um, and we will return to some question. Um, and we will return to some question. Um, and we will return to some training things. But the second question training things. But the second question training things. But the second question relates to this, uh, thing that you relates to this, uh, thing that you relates to this, uh, thing that you mentioned about your dad had he not mentioned about your dad had he not mentioned about your dad had he not passed away young. Um, a friend of mine, passed away young. Um, a friend of mine, passed away young. Um, a friend of mine, uh, we were talking recently about, uh, we were talking recently about, uh, we were talking recently about, uh, having daughters versus sons. Uh, I having daughters versus sons. Uh, I having daughters versus sons. Uh, I won't provide the context for this, but won't provide the context for this, but won't provide the context for this, but and he said to me, uh, he's got three and he said to me, uh, he's got three and he said to me, uh, he's got three daughters and he's very happy with his daughters and he's very happy with his daughters and he's very happy with his three daughters. And he said and he said three daughters. And he said and he said three daughters. And he said and he said uh you know the one thing about uh sons uh you know the one thing about uh sons uh you know the one thing about uh sons is they feel I think he was talking is they feel I think he was talking is they feel I think he was talking about himself they feel like they have about himself they feel like they have about himself they feel like they have to fill their father's shoes. to fill their father's shoes. to fill their father's shoes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; There's going to be a phase where &gt;&gt; There's going to be a phase where &gt;&gt; There's going to be a phase where they're competing with their dad no they're competing with their dad no they're competing with their dad no matter what. matter what. matter what. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And my reflexive response was &gt;&gt; And my reflexive response was &gt;&gt; And my reflexive response was [clears throat] and then I realized [clears throat] and then I realized [clears throat] and then I realized listen I went through all that stuff. listen I went through all that stuff. listen I went through all that stuff. All that stuff. And in many ways my dad All that stuff. And in many ways my dad All that stuff. And in many ways my dad and I are on good terms now but we had and I are on good terms now but we had and I are on good terms now but we had some choppy years in there but uh for some choppy years in there but uh for some choppy years in there but uh for sure but now we're good. But the sure but now we're good. But the sure but now we're good. But the friction, I mean, that grew me a lot, too. I mean, that grew me a lot, too. I mean, that grew me a lot, too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I mean, it uh forced me to work &gt;&gt; I mean, it uh forced me to work &gt;&gt; I mean, it uh forced me to work harder. I mean, there were probably some harder. I mean, there were probably some harder. I mean, there were probably some long nights that, you know, I just I long nights that, you know, I just I long nights that, you know, I just I wasn't consciously tying it to like, oh, wasn't consciously tying it to like, oh, wasn't consciously tying it to like, oh, I'm trying to, you know, outdo him, but I'm trying to, you know, outdo him, but I'm trying to, you know, outdo him, but I pushed myself to become somebody that I pushed myself to become somebody that I pushed myself to become somebody that was at least as, you know, successful in was at least as, you know, successful in was at least as, you know, successful in certain ways and ideally more. And so, certain ways and ideally more. And so, certain ways and ideally more. And so, do you think this is a this is a do you think this is a this is a do you think this is a this is a &gt;&gt; I think every situation can go two ways, &gt;&gt; I think every situation can go two ways, &gt;&gt; I think every situation can go two ways, right? &gt;&gt; I mean, you have a son now. So, how do &gt;&gt; I mean, you have a son now. So, how do &gt;&gt; I mean, you have a son now. So, how do you think about this with him? you think about this with him? you think about this with him? &gt;&gt; I think he found it tough. He confined &gt;&gt; I think he found it tough. He confined &gt;&gt; I think he found it tough. He confined uh with my wife a little bit that he uh with my wife a little bit that he uh with my wife a little bit that he found it tough like uh but I'm like found it tough like uh but I'm like found it tough like uh but I'm like don't try to compete with me in what I don't try to compete with me in what I don't try to compete with me in what I do because but take the principles of do because but take the principles of do because but take the principles of discipline and hard work and you can discipline and hard work and you can discipline and hard work and you can apply that really to anything. Uh but apply that really to anything. Uh but apply that really to anything. Uh but yeah, I think you know uh my son did yeah, I think you know uh my son did yeah, I think you know uh my son did some bodybuilding. you know, was he was some bodybuilding. you know, was he was some bodybuilding. you know, was he was uh playing with the idea of competing, uh playing with the idea of competing, uh playing with the idea of competing, which he probably could have done uh which he probably could have done uh which he probably could have done uh quite well. quite well. quite well. But I said, "Look, you're a sensitive But I said, "Look, you're a sensitive But I said, "Look, you're a sensitive guy." Yeah. Much more sensitive than me. guy." Yeah. Much more sensitive than me. guy." Yeah. Much more sensitive than me. I got thick skin. But let me tell you I got thick skin. But let me tell you I got thick skin. But let me tell you what will happen if you compete. You what will happen if you compete. You what will happen if you compete. You win. Ah, of course he won his Dorian win. Ah, of course he won his Dorian win. Ah, of course he won his Dorian son. [snorts] You lose. How can he lose son. [snorts] You lose. How can he lose son. [snorts] You lose. How can he lose his Dorian son? I said, "Either way, his Dorian son? I said, "Either way, his Dorian son? I said, "Either way, that's be prepared for that's going to that's be prepared for that's going to that's be prepared for that's going to be the reaction." So, you know, if you be the reaction." So, you know, if you be the reaction." So, you know, if you want to do it, I'll support you. But he want to do it, I'll support you. But he want to do it, I'll support you. But he decided not to get into the competitive decided not to get into the competitive decided not to get into the competitive side of things. side of things. side of things. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um, well, he trains people and stuff. &gt;&gt; Um, well, he trains people and stuff. &gt;&gt; Um, well, he trains people and stuff. So, you know, there's still both of my So, you know, there's still both of my So, you know, there's still both of my kids are in the fitness world, let's kids are in the fitness world, let's kids are in the fitness world, let's say. &gt;&gt; Um, but competitive world is a is a &gt;&gt; Um, but competitive world is a is a &gt;&gt; Um, but competitive world is a is a different thing. And there's very few different thing. And there's very few different thing. And there's very few people that can get to the top and make people that can get to the top and make people that can get to the top and make it work for them. you know, it work for them. you know, it work for them. you know, &gt;&gt; more people now because before you had &gt;&gt; more people now because before you had &gt;&gt; more people now because before you had to compete and you had to win and you to compete and you had to win and you to compete and you had to win and you had to be in the magazines. Now you a had to be in the magazines. Now you a had to be in the magazines. Now you a lot of people can make money online lot of people can make money online lot of people can make money online coaching or whatever it is. Uh so coaching or whatever it is. Uh so coaching or whatever it is. Uh so there's more avenues now that you can go there's more avenues now that you can go there's more avenues now that you can go into to make money in the what's called into to make money in the what's called into to make money in the what's called now the fitness industry is so much now the fitness industry is so much now the fitness industry is so much bigger than when I was competing. But I bigger than when I was competing. But I bigger than when I was competing. But I would say purist bodybuilding is less would say purist bodybuilding is less would say purist bodybuilding is less people doing it, more people going to people doing it, more people going to people doing it, more people going to the gym and doing fitness in general. the gym and doing fitness in general. the gym and doing fitness in general. Uh, but I think bodybuilding per se was Uh, but I think bodybuilding per se was Uh, but I think bodybuilding per se was more popular in the 80s and '90s cuz it more popular in the 80s and '90s cuz it more popular in the 80s and '90s cuz it was all new and there was less there was all new and there was less there was all new and there was less there was no CrossFit, there was no MMA, there's, no CrossFit, there was no MMA, there's, no CrossFit, there was no MMA, there's, you know, things have changed since you know, things have changed since you know, things have changed since then. There was no fitness Mr. Olympia, then. There was no fitness Mr. Olympia, then. There was no fitness Mr. Olympia, there's no I don't know, they got so there's no I don't know, they got so there's no I don't know, they got so many classes now. So, there's many more many classes now. So, there's many more many classes now. So, there's many more things for people to do than, you know, things for people to do than, you know, things for people to do than, you know, maybe they figure it's not worth it to maybe they figure it's not worth it to maybe they figure it's not worth it to be a competitive bodybuilder if you can be a competitive bodybuilder if you can be a competitive bodybuilder if you can learn uh earn an income online and not, learn uh earn an income online and not, learn uh earn an income online and not, you know, put yourself online in you know, put yourself online in you know, put yourself online in competition. So, things have changed a competition. So, things have changed a competition. So, things have changed a lot since then. lot since then. lot since then. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the bodies that are in &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the bodies that are in &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the bodies that are in movies have changed tremendously. I movies have changed tremendously. I movies have changed tremendously. I mean, the average size of a male or mean, the average size of a male or mean, the average size of a male or female, the shape is so much more female, the shape is so much more female, the shape is so much more bodybuilderesque now. bodybuilderesque now. bodybuilderesque now. Everyone's using juice, right? You know, Everyone's using juice, right? You know, Everyone's using juice, right? You know, it's uh it's mainstream now. When I it's uh it's mainstream now. When I it's uh it's mainstream now. When I started bodybuilding in 1980s, started bodybuilding in 1980s, started bodybuilding in 1980s, &gt;&gt; I don't think the general public really &gt;&gt; I don't think the general public really &gt;&gt; I don't think the general public really knew about steroids or, you know, they knew about steroids or, you know, they knew about steroids or, you know, they get a little inkling when Ben Johnson's get a little inkling when Ben Johnson's get a little inkling when Ben Johnson's got a positive. Now, everybody's it's got a positive. Now, everybody's it's got a positive. Now, everybody's it's mainstream, right? Everybody knows about mainstream, right? Everybody knows about mainstream, right? Everybody knows about steroids. And I think it's seen as by steroids. And I think it's seen as by steroids. And I think it's seen as by males as a cosmetic enhancement just males as a cosmetic enhancement just males as a cosmetic enhancement just like females putting blush pants in or like females putting blush pants in or like females putting blush pants in or Botox and or whatever they put in their Botox and or whatever they put in their Botox and or whatever they put in their lips and everything uh to make that lips and everything uh to make that lips and everything uh to make that change. So it's mainstream. You got change. So it's mainstream. You got change. So it's mainstream. You got rappers, you got movie stars like they rappers, you got movie stars like they rappers, you got movie stars like they want to get in shape for a movie. Come want to get in shape for a movie. Come want to get in shape for a movie. Come on, man. It's not happening in two on, man. It's not happening in two on, man. It's not happening in two months that transformation without some months that transformation without some months that transformation without some chemical help which you know they're chemical help which you know they're chemical help which you know they're earning million in the millions in the earning million in the millions in the earning million in the millions in the movie. So maybe it's worth it for them. movie. So maybe it's worth it for them. movie. So maybe it's worth it for them. Of course. Of course. Of course. &gt;&gt; Mhm. You mentioned you have a thick &gt;&gt; Mhm. You mentioned you have a thick &gt;&gt; Mhm. You mentioned you have a thick skin. Um one of the things that uh got skin. Um one of the things that uh got skin. Um one of the things that uh got me to learn about you early on because me to learn about you early on because me to learn about you early on because frankly I was involved in other frankly I was involved in other frankly I was involved in other things. Uh a little bit of martial arts, things. Uh a little bit of martial arts, things. Uh a little bit of martial arts, some soccer, some things. And and some soccer, some things. And and some soccer, some things. And and bodybuilding to me wasn't something I bodybuilding to me wasn't something I bodybuilding to me wasn't something I really wanted to pursue as a sport, but really wanted to pursue as a sport, but really wanted to pursue as a sport, but I wanted to put on muscle. I was tall I wanted to put on muscle. I was tall I wanted to put on muscle. I was tall skinny kid. Um, that's what led me to skinny kid. Um, that's what led me to skinny kid. Um, that's what led me to Mensor and how I learned about your Mensor and how I learned about your Mensor and how I learned about your training, discovered what you were training, discovered what you were training, discovered what you were doing, and then, um, really learned to doing, and then, um, really learned to doing, and then, um, really learned to extract the what I think is the best extract the what I think is the best extract the what I think is the best of bodybuilding for somebody who of bodybuilding for somebody who of bodybuilding for somebody who doesn't want to do it. Like, how are doesn't want to do it. Like, how are doesn't want to do it. Like, how are they training, how are they eating, what they training, how are they eating, what they training, how are they eating, what are they doing that's separate from the are they doing that's separate from the are they doing that's separate from the drugs that I can benefit from this kind drugs that I can benefit from this kind drugs that I can benefit from this kind of thing. of thing. of thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; And to be fair, TRT is can be very &gt;&gt; And to be fair, TRT is can be very &gt;&gt; And to be fair, TRT is can be very useful to treat depression and other useful to treat depression and other useful to treat depression and other things for men and in some cases even things for men and in some cases even things for men and in some cases even women. We'll get back to that, but I women. We'll get back to that, but I women. We'll get back to that, but I want to just kind of frame this in a want to just kind of frame this in a want to just kind of frame this in a certain way. However, the um you know, certain way. However, the um you know, certain way. However, the um you know, one of the things that I think drew me one of the things that I think drew me one of the things that I think drew me to what you were doing at the time is to what you were doing at the time is to what you were doing at the time is that you had this kind of like mellow that you had this kind of like mellow that you had this kind of like mellow um sort of I would say kind of like um sort of I would say kind of like um sort of I would say kind of like quiet thick skin stance. We also have quiet thick skin stance. We also have quiet thick skin stance. We also have kind of commonalities through our music kind of commonalities through our music kind of commonalities through our music tastes. So, I saw that and I recognize tastes. So, I saw that and I recognize tastes. So, I saw that and I recognize certain things in the tattoos, the punk certain things in the tattoos, the punk certain things in the tattoos, the punk rock thing. I Yeah. Oi music and that rock thing. I Yeah. Oi music and that rock thing. I Yeah. Oi music and that kind of thing. And so, you go, "Oh, kind of thing. And so, you go, "Oh, kind of thing. And so, you go, "Oh, here's somebody who's kind of different here's somebody who's kind of different here's somebody who's kind of different than the rest of this community." than the rest of this community." than the rest of this community." But when people see the videos of you But when people see the videos of you But when people see the videos of you training, we'll put some links to those. training, we'll put some links to those. training, we'll put some links to those. It's so striking because you're like It's so striking because you're like It's so striking because you're like this, but then in the moment of a set, this, but then in the moment of a set, this, but then in the moment of a set, it's like I mean, intensity it's like I mean, intensity it's like I mean, intensity is doesn't quite explain it. It's like, is doesn't quite explain it. It's like, is doesn't quite explain it. It's like, and I'm curious because people can see and I'm curious because people can see and I'm curious because people can see those videos. those videos. those videos. What was going on in your head? Were you What was going on in your head? Were you What was going on in your head? Were you think going into the set, through the think going into the set, through the think going into the set, through the set, were you thinking about I'm just set, were you thinking about I'm just set, were you thinking about I'm just guessing your dad uh how you were guessing your dad uh how you were guessing your dad uh how you were an underdog. Were you just thinking an underdog. Were you just thinking an underdog. Were you just thinking about the muscle? What were you using about the muscle? What were you using about the muscle? What were you using besides listening to loud music and um besides listening to loud music and um besides listening to loud music and um &gt;&gt; intensity doesn't come from nowhere. It &gt;&gt; intensity doesn't come from nowhere. It &gt;&gt; intensity doesn't come from nowhere. It comes from someplace. What's your comes from someplace. What's your comes from someplace. What's your internal narrative at those times? internal narrative at those times? internal narrative at those times? &gt;&gt; Well, I always prepared myself before I &gt;&gt; Well, I always prepared myself before I &gt;&gt; Well, I always prepared myself before I went to the gym. Just walk through the went to the gym. Just walk through the went to the gym. Just walk through the doors casually. doors casually. doors casually. I'd review my training before I went I'd review my training before I went I'd review my training before I went there. This is what I did last week. there. This is what I did last week. there. This is what I did last week. This is what I want to do today. And I This is what I want to do today. And I This is what I want to do today. And I would sit and do a visualization. would sit and do a visualization. would sit and do a visualization. So I'd have specific clothes for the day So I'd have specific clothes for the day So I'd have specific clothes for the day and like OCD maybe. And I used to have and like OCD maybe. And I used to have and like OCD maybe. And I used to have this thing which seems strange to me this thing which seems strange to me this thing which seems strange to me now. Yeah. I used to iron my clothes now. Yeah. I used to iron my clothes now. Yeah. I used to iron my clothes before I went to the gym, right? They before I went to the gym, right? They before I went to the gym, right? They had to be ironed. They had to be thing. had to be ironed. They had to be thing. had to be ironed. They had to be thing. And I just read a study how ironing And I just read a study how ironing And I just read a study how ironing clothes really lowers your cortisol by clothes really lowers your cortisol by clothes really lowers your cortisol by about 40%. I didn't know that. I was about 40%. I didn't know that. I was about 40%. I didn't know that. I was just doing it. I trained with my friend just doing it. I trained with my friend just doing it. I trained with my friend in New York. He's like, "What the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in New York. He's like, "What the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in New York. He's like, "What the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you doing, man? Just put your t-shirt." you doing, man? Just put your t-shirt." you doing, man? Just put your t-shirt." No, no, no. I got to iron it. There was No, no, no. I got to iron it. There was No, no, no. I got to iron it. There was a whole a whole a whole &gt;&gt; game preparation going on to get me in &gt;&gt; game preparation going on to get me in &gt;&gt; game preparation going on to get me in uh maybe OCD, maybe too much, but it worked maybe OCD, maybe too much, but it worked maybe OCD, maybe too much, but it worked for me. Yeah. So, I review, go to the for me. Yeah. So, I review, go to the for me. Yeah. So, I review, go to the gym, and have my targets. And uh I use a gym, and have my targets. And uh I use a gym, and have my targets. And uh I use a special type of motivation. It's called special type of motivation. It's called special type of motivation. It's called [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you motivation. Uh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you to all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you motivation. Uh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you to all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you motivation. Uh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you to all the teachers at school that said you the teachers at school that said you the teachers at school that said you couldn't get anywhere. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] couldn't get anywhere. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] couldn't get anywhere. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] anyone. So I'm going to show you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] anyone. So I'm going to show you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] anyone. So I'm going to show you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. So [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [laughter] your motivation. you. So [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [laughter] your motivation. you. So [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [laughter] your motivation. It's a great one. Yeah. Whatever you got It's a great one. Yeah. Whatever you got It's a great one. Yeah. Whatever you got inside you, anger, inside you, anger, inside you, anger, negative emotions, negative emotions, negative emotions, use it all. Use it all like fire. And use it all. Use it all like fire. And use it all. Use it all like fire. And then when I go home, I'm like, I'm then when I go home, I'm like, I'm then when I go home, I'm like, I'm chilled. I've slayed dragons in the gym. I've slayed dragons in the gym. I've slayed dragons in the gym. I've hacked people up with my sword. I've And hacked people up with my sword. I've And hacked people up with my sword. I've And it's like a form of it's like a form of it's like a form of mastery over oneself, mastery [snorts] mastery over oneself, mastery [snorts] mastery over oneself, mastery [snorts] over the whole thing with the dieting as over the whole thing with the dieting as over the whole thing with the dieting as well for competitions. well for competitions. well for competitions. Maybe I went a little bit overboard with Maybe I went a little bit overboard with Maybe I went a little bit overboard with it and came down a little bit too much it and came down a little bit too much it and came down a little bit too much because then it was like mastery over my because then it was like mastery over my because then it was like mastery over my instincts of want to eat and do I do instincts of want to eat and do I do instincts of want to eat and do I do this? No. this? No. this? No. I'm deciding here. I'm in control. And I'm deciding here. I'm in control. And I'm deciding here. I'm in control. And maybe this worked against me a bit as maybe this worked against me a bit as maybe this worked against me a bit as well because I would be like going to well because I would be like going to well because I would be like going to the world. I don't care if you if I feel the world. I don't care if you if I feel the world. I don't care if you if I feel a little I'm going through it, you know. a little I'm going through it, you know. a little I'm going through it, you know. So, um So, um So, um yeah, I used all these anger, negative yeah, I used all these anger, negative yeah, I used all these anger, negative emotions, whatever it is. I I'll show emotions, whatever it is. I I'll show emotions, whatever it is. I I'll show you. I'm going to make it. I'm going to you. I'm going to make it. I'm going to you. I'm going to make it. I'm going to do this. So, whatever works for you, but do this. So, whatever works for you, but do this. So, whatever works for you, but for me, that worked. You know the for me, that worked. You know the for me, that worked. You know the anything negative turn it into something anything negative turn it into something anything negative turn it into something positive. &gt;&gt; You know it's um transforming the &gt;&gt; You know it's um transforming the &gt;&gt; You know it's um transforming the negative energy which could be negative energy which could be negative energy which could be destructive to myself or maybe other destructive to myself or maybe other destructive to myself or maybe other people around me taking it people around me taking it people around me taking it uh alchemy you know changing it into uh alchemy you know changing it into uh alchemy you know changing it into something else. So I used all that something else. So I used all that something else. So I used all that negative feeling negative emotions and I negative feeling negative emotions and I negative feeling negative emotions and I stayed in Birmingham as well while I was stayed in Birmingham as well while I was stayed in Birmingham as well while I was Mr. Olympia for 6 years. uh more Mr. Olympia for 6 years. uh more Mr. Olympia for 6 years. uh more opportunities here and everything, but opportunities here and everything, but opportunities here and everything, but more distractions as well. So, I wanted more distractions as well. So, I wanted more distractions as well. So, I wanted to stay in the same gym, try to keep to stay in the same gym, try to keep to stay in the same gym, try to keep that same attitude even though I got that same attitude even though I got that same attitude even though I got more money in the bank and I'm driving a more money in the bank and I'm driving a more money in the bank and I'm driving a Mercedes instead of jumping on the bus, Mercedes instead of jumping on the bus, Mercedes instead of jumping on the bus, right? But I wanted to keep that. That's right? But I wanted to keep that. That's right? But I wanted to keep that. That's why I didn't move over here. A lot of why I didn't move over here. A lot of why I didn't move over here. A lot of people asked me, well, I didn't go to people asked me, well, I didn't go to people asked me, well, I didn't go to the States cuz the industry is there. the States cuz the industry is there. the States cuz the industry is there. Um, but by the time I got to be Mr. Um, but by the time I got to be Mr. Um, but by the time I got to be Mr. Olympia, I could kind of dictate things. Olympia, I could kind of dictate things. Olympia, I could kind of dictate things. So, I did what I wanted to do, which was So, I did what I wanted to do, which was So, I did what I wanted to do, which was keep my head down and keep that hunger keep my head down and keep that hunger keep my head down and keep that hunger going. &gt;&gt; I love the transmutation of anger and &gt;&gt; I love the transmutation of anger and &gt;&gt; I love the transmutation of anger and the everyone's got their stories of the everyone's got their stories of the everyone's got their stories of the man and I can remember in the third man and I can remember in the third man and I can remember in the third grade someone said something about the grade someone said something about the grade someone said something about the jacket that my mom gave me that day to jacket that my mom gave me that day to jacket that my mom gave me that day to wear and like these little things. I wear and like these little things. I wear and like these little things. I mean, they don't bother me anymore, but mean, they don't bother me anymore, but mean, they don't bother me anymore, but there were times when, you know, we can there were times when, you know, we can there were times when, you know, we can we can layer in we can layer in we can layer in &gt;&gt; it's fuel, man. Use it for fuel. &gt;&gt; it's fuel, man. Use it for fuel. &gt;&gt; it's fuel, man. Use it for fuel. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Take that anger, the negative &gt;&gt; Yeah. Take that anger, the negative &gt;&gt; Yeah. Take that anger, the negative thing, whatever, change it into thing, whatever, change it into thing, whatever, change it into something positive. Uh, and we were something positive. Uh, and we were something positive. Uh, and we were discussing earlier like do we know any discussing earlier like do we know any discussing earlier like do we know any like elite level athletes that came from like elite level athletes that came from like elite level athletes that came from a very comfortable wealthy family? I a very comfortable wealthy family? I a very comfortable wealthy family? I don't know any. I'm not saying there don't know any. I'm not saying there don't know any. I'm not saying there isn't, but I don't know any. You need isn't, but I don't know any. You need isn't, but I don't know any. You need that. You need that motivation. You that. You need that motivation. You that. You need that motivation. You know, you want to make something. You know, you want to make something. You know, you want to make something. You want to want to want to &gt;&gt; make something of your life. You want to &gt;&gt; make something of your life. You want to &gt;&gt; make something of your life. You want to prove to yourself and everybody else uh prove to yourself and everybody else uh prove to yourself and everybody else uh you know that you've got something. you know that you've got something. you know that you've got something. And uh I just when I was young I looked And uh I just when I was young I looked And uh I just when I was young I looked at life around me. I thought I don't at life around me. I thought I don't at life around me. I thought I don't what is this? [snorts] what is this? [snorts] what is this? [snorts] I'm going to get a mate, have some I'm going to get a mate, have some I'm going to get a mate, have some children, go to work, come back. Uh for children, go to work, come back. Uh for children, go to work, come back. Uh for a lot of people, this is great. Maybe a lot of people, this is great. Maybe a lot of people, this is great. Maybe the love of the family and everything the love of the family and everything the love of the family and everything like that, but I didn't have that. Even like that, but I didn't have that. Even like that, but I didn't have that. Even when I had a family, it wasn't a family. when I had a family, it wasn't a family. when I had a family, it wasn't a family. I never, you know, my mom and dad were I never, you know, my mom and dad were I never, you know, my mom and dad were kind of together because it was the 60s, kind of together because it was the 60s, kind of together because it was the 60s, but I got the idea that, you know, that but I got the idea that, you know, that but I got the idea that, you know, that was because of me, maybe. Uh so we never was because of me, maybe. Uh so we never was because of me, maybe. Uh so we never sat down and had a meal as a family. sat down and had a meal as a family. sat down and had a meal as a family. What I never so we were mom and dad were What I never so we were mom and dad were What I never so we were mom and dad were married but they were leading kind of married but they were leading kind of married but they were leading kind of separate lives and I was in the middle separate lives and I was in the middle separate lives and I was in the middle somewhere I guess. Um somewhere I guess. Um somewhere I guess. Um yeah so if I didn't have that motivation yeah so if I didn't have that motivation yeah so if I didn't have that motivation you know maybe my dad would have taught you know maybe my dad would have taught you know maybe my dad would have taught me to be a mainten you know car engineer me to be a mainten you know car engineer me to be a mainten you know car engineer or something. I don't know. Uh it would or something. I don't know. Uh it would or something. I don't know. Uh it would be a whole different story. I'm sure be a whole different story. I'm sure be a whole different story. I'm sure &gt;&gt; I have this theory that um barring &gt;&gt; I have this theory that um barring &gt;&gt; I have this theory that um barring accident or injury that we kind of have accident or injury that we kind of have accident or injury that we kind of have a unconscious sense of how long we're a unconscious sense of how long we're a unconscious sense of how long we're going to live. going to live. going to live. &gt;&gt; I started thinking about this when I &gt;&gt; I started thinking about this when I &gt;&gt; I started thinking about this when I read the biography of Steve Jobs who, read the biography of Steve Jobs who, read the biography of Steve Jobs who, you know, he was really on a mission you know, he was really on a mission you know, he was really on a mission early on and kind of an odd guy. He early on and kind of an odd guy. He early on and kind of an odd guy. He he was in the area I grew up in and you he was in the area I grew up in and you he was in the area I grew up in and you know his whole thing with LSD but also know his whole thing with LSD but also know his whole thing with LSD but also scream therapy but also he thought that scream therapy but also he thought that scream therapy but also he thought that objects had personality and things like objects had personality and things like objects had personality and things like that. He was he's quite different and that. He was he's quite different and that. He was he's quite different and &gt;&gt; he was doing something different. &gt;&gt; he was doing something different. &gt;&gt; he was doing something different. &gt;&gt; He was doing something different. He saw &gt;&gt; He was doing something different. He saw &gt;&gt; He was doing something different. He saw the world very differently and he the world very differently and he the world very differently and he changed the world. Like him or hate him, changed the world. Like him or hate him, changed the world. Like him or hate him, he absolutely changed the world. If he absolutely changed the world. If he absolutely changed the world. If you learn about him, you realize that he you learn about him, you realize that he you learn about him, you realize that he had some sense that he might not live he had some sense that he might not live he had some sense that he might not live a very long time. a very long time. a very long time. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And he died quite young. Pancreatic &gt;&gt; And he died quite young. Pancreatic &gt;&gt; And he died quite young. Pancreatic cancer. &gt;&gt; Is it a sense or is a premonition? Is it &gt;&gt; Is it a sense or is a premonition? Is it &gt;&gt; Is it a sense or is a premonition? Is it &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, and you can edit these &gt;&gt; You know, and you can edit these &gt;&gt; You know, and you can edit these thoughts, I think, cuz I always had this thoughts, I think, cuz I always had this thoughts, I think, cuz I always had this bit of a fatalistic thing maybe because bit of a fatalistic thing maybe because bit of a fatalistic thing maybe because my dad died so young. So my dad died at my dad died so young. So my dad died at my dad died so young. So my dad died at 42. My mom quickly met another guy that 42. My mom quickly met another guy that 42. My mom quickly met another guy that she wanted to marry and he also died at she wanted to marry and he also died at she wanted to marry and he also died at 44. So I saw two guys, okay? They both smoke So I saw two guys, okay? They both smoke So I saw two guys, okay? They both smoke 40 cigarettes a day, which was usual at 40 cigarettes a day, which was usual at 40 cigarettes a day, which was usual at that time and don't exercise and drink that time and don't exercise and drink that time and don't exercise and drink alcoh get enough sleep and no sunlight, alcoh get enough sleep and no sunlight, alcoh get enough sleep and no sunlight, all these things. Um, all these things. Um, all these things. Um, but you know, I've changed this but you know, I've changed this but you know, I've changed this over the years because now I'm 63 over the years because now I'm 63 over the years because now I'm 63 going on 64 and uh appear to be very going on 64 and uh appear to be very going on 64 and uh appear to be very healthy. I feel great and I'm looking healthy. I feel great and I'm looking healthy. I feel great and I'm looking forward to the future. And I don't know, forward to the future. And I don't know, forward to the future. And I don't know, none of us know, right? I'm just trying none of us know, right? I'm just trying none of us know, right? I'm just trying to live the best life that I can live to live the best life that I can live to live the best life that I can live day by day and uh day by day and uh day by day and uh you know be the best version of myself you know be the best version of myself you know be the best version of myself and have a good quality of life and uh and have a good quality of life and uh and have a good quality of life and uh appreciate every day at a time. I mean appreciate every day at a time. I mean appreciate every day at a time. I mean this is what we learn from dogs. Yeah. this is what we learn from dogs. Yeah. this is what we learn from dogs. Yeah. They don't live in the future. They don't live in the future. They don't live in the future. They don't live in the past. They're just don't live in the past. They're just don't live in the past. They're just there all the time. They're there as a there all the time. They're there as a there all the time. They're there as a reminder. We're both dog lovers. So we reminder. We're both dog lovers. So we reminder. We're both dog lovers. So we were talking about that earlier on. So, were talking about that earlier on. So, were talking about that earlier on. So, uh, we don't know how long we're going uh, we don't know how long we're going uh, we don't know how long we're going to live. Just make the most of it every to live. Just make the most of it every to live. Just make the most of it every day. And, uh, I, you know, I said I read day. And, uh, I, you know, I said I read day. And, uh, I, you know, I said I read a lot. So, I was this book, um, by a lot. So, I was this book, um, by a lot. So, I was this book, um, by a lady that works in end care, you know, lady that works in end care, you know, lady that works in end care, you know, so she interviewed all these people so she interviewed all these people so she interviewed all these people that, you know, they know they're dying, that, you know, they know they're dying, that, you know, they know they're dying, right? They're on the way out and what right? They're on the way out and what right? They're on the way out and what they regret and all this stuff. they regret and all this stuff. they regret and all this stuff. Uh, mostly it was not doing the things Uh, mostly it was not doing the things Uh, mostly it was not doing the things they love. Mhm. they love. Mhm. they love. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Not telling the people that they love &gt;&gt; Not telling the people that they love &gt;&gt; Not telling the people that they love that they love them enough. Not one that they love them enough. Not one that they love them enough. Not one [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] person said, "I wish I worked [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] person said, "I wish I worked [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] person said, "I wish I worked harder." or anything like that, you harder." or anything like that, you harder." or anything like that, you know? So, I think we have to just make know? So, I think we have to just make know? So, I think we have to just make the most of the moment. Make the most of the most of the moment. Make the most of the most of the moment. Make the most of each day and uh appreciate it because each day and uh appreciate it because each day and uh appreciate it because it's, you know, it's going to end, it's, you know, it's going to end, it's, you know, it's going to end, right? We're going to move on. right? We're going to move on. right? We're going to move on. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I don't believe we stop. We just move &gt;&gt; I don't believe we stop. We just move &gt;&gt; I don't believe we stop. We just move on. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think we continue on in some &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think we continue on in some &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think we continue on in some in some form. in some form. in some form. &gt;&gt; We're already there. We're already &gt;&gt; We're already there. We're already &gt;&gt; We're already there. We're already everywhere at the same time. And that's everywhere at the same time. And that's everywhere at the same time. And that's what I think. We're just aware of this. what I think. We're just aware of this. what I think. We're just aware of this. We're on this channel right now. We're on this channel right now. We're on this channel right now. We're on this radio wave. on this radio wave. on this radio wave. &gt;&gt; I certainly subscribe to that. And I &gt;&gt; I certainly subscribe to that. And I &gt;&gt; I certainly subscribe to that. And I want to get into kind of your um want to get into kind of your um want to get into kind of your um exploration of psychedelics and uh exploration of psychedelics and uh exploration of psychedelics and uh consciousness um and then moving on from consciousness um and then moving on from consciousness um and then moving on from it, which not everyone is aware of. Um it, which not everyone is aware of. Um it, which not everyone is aware of. Um but before we do that um despite the but before we do that um despite the but before we do that um despite the living for the day by the day um you had living for the day by the day um you had living for the day by the day um you had this sense that like you're going to put this sense that like you're going to put this sense that like you're going to put everything you have into something and everything you have into something and everything you have into something and you went for in this I'm realizing now you went for in this I'm realizing now you went for in this I'm realizing now very logical like if this then that if very logical like if this then that if very logical like if this then that if that then not this it wasn't do more or that then not this it wasn't do more or that then not this it wasn't do more or die. &gt;&gt; It was maybe do or die during the &gt;&gt; It was maybe do or die during the &gt;&gt; It was maybe do or die during the training but it was um when the feedback training but it was um when the feedback training but it was um when the feedback signal was there's a real opportunity signal was there's a real opportunity signal was there's a real opportunity here you put everything inact but you here you put everything inact but you here you put everything inact but you weren't foolish with your life resource. weren't foolish with your life resource. weren't foolish with your life resource. No, I did it step by step, you know, and No, I did it step by step, you know, and No, I did it step by step, you know, and uh anabolics that I took when I was uh anabolics that I took when I was uh anabolics that I took when I was amateur was, you know, is fairly low. amateur was, you know, is fairly low. amateur was, you know, is fairly low. So, I don't think there was that much So, I don't think there was that much So, I don't think there was that much risk there. When I was becoming Mr. risk there. When I was becoming Mr. risk there. When I was becoming Mr. Olympia, it went up another level. And Olympia, it went up another level. And Olympia, it went up another level. And uh growth hormone was not available uh growth hormone was not available uh growth hormone was not available early 80s. So, that came in late 80s early 80s. So, that came in late 80s early 80s. So, that came in late 80s into the '9s and so on. But I don't into the '9s and so on. But I don't into the '9s and so on. But I don't think there's much danger in that. as think there's much danger in that. as think there's much danger in that. as danger is in the body weight. Um, high danger is in the body weight. Um, high danger is in the body weight. Um, high blood pressure, inflammation, blood pressure, inflammation, blood pressure, inflammation, &gt;&gt; diuretics, &gt;&gt; diuretics, &gt;&gt; diuretics, &gt;&gt; diuretics. I mean, that's a &gt;&gt; diuretics. I mean, that's a &gt;&gt; diuretics. I mean, that's a [clears throat] instant death sentence [clears throat] instant death sentence [clears throat] instant death sentence if you overdo that and it has happened. if you overdo that and it has happened. if you overdo that and it has happened. Uh, &gt;&gt; the guy I mean it hit me the guy that I &gt;&gt; the guy I mean it hit me the guy that I &gt;&gt; the guy I mean it hit me the guy that I got second to at my first night got second to at my first night got second to at my first night champions, Muhammad Benaziza. I don't champions, Muhammad Benaziza. I don't champions, Muhammad Benaziza. I don't know if you remember him. He was a short know if you remember him. He was a short know if you remember him. He was a short guy but amazing a lot of muscle guy but amazing a lot of muscle guy but amazing a lot of muscle &gt;&gt; and he passed away on a tour because he &gt;&gt; and he passed away on a tour because he &gt;&gt; and he passed away on a tour because he was doing extreme things with water and was doing extreme things with water and was doing extreme things with water and uh diuretics and they actually did uh diuretics and they actually did uh diuretics and they actually did uh introduce testing for diuretics 1996 in introduce testing for diuretics 1996 in introduce testing for diuretics 1996 in the Mr. Olympia because people were the Mr. Olympia because people were the Mr. Olympia because people were concerned about this. There was a few concerned about this. There was a few concerned about this. There was a few guys that died just trying to get guys that died just trying to get guys that died just trying to get dehydrated and get in condition. dehydrated and get in condition. dehydrated and get in condition. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; Um, but I think somebody failed the test &gt;&gt; Um, but I think somebody failed the test &gt;&gt; Um, but I think somebody failed the test and challenged it legally and it didn't and challenged it legally and it didn't and challenged it legally and it didn't stand up. So then they just dropped it. stand up. So then they just dropped it. stand up. So then they just dropped it. They did steroid testing interestingly They did steroid testing interestingly They did steroid testing interestingly in 1990. in 1990. in 1990. &gt;&gt; How'd that go? &gt;&gt; How'd that go? &gt;&gt; How'd that go? &gt;&gt; Sorry. Take a look online. &gt;&gt; Sorry. Take a look online. &gt;&gt; Sorry. Take a look online. &gt;&gt; I mean, it's got, [laughter] you know, &gt;&gt; I mean, it's got, [laughter] you know, &gt;&gt; I mean, it's got, [laughter] you know, it's funny there. It used to be a big it's funny there. It used to be a big it's funny there. It used to be a big deal to try and figure out is somebody deal to try and figure out is somebody deal to try and figure out is somebody taking stuff or not. I mean, there's taking stuff or not. I mean, there's taking stuff or not. I mean, there's just these telltale signs, right? A just these telltale signs, right? A just these telltale signs, right? A certain leanness, a certain uh, you certain leanness, a certain uh, you certain leanness, a certain uh, you know, uh, protrusion of uh, some know, uh, protrusion of uh, some know, uh, protrusion of uh, some vasculature in the neck. I mean, you can vasculature in the neck. I mean, you can vasculature in the neck. I mean, you can tell when people are on and when they're tell when people are on and when they're tell when people are on and when they're not, right? And um although there are a not, right? And um although there are a not, right? And um although there are a couple genetic freaks out there like couple genetic freaks out there like couple genetic freaks out there like yourself when you were younger, my yourself when you were younger, my yourself when you were younger, my friend Nimma, who uh works with Mark friend Nimma, who uh works with Mark friend Nimma, who uh works with Mark Bell, who you know, he's got really long Bell, who you know, he's got really long Bell, who you know, he's got really long muscle bellies. He's naturally lean and muscle bellies. He's naturally lean and muscle bellies. He's naturally lean and you just he's a real athlete and you just he's a real athlete and you just he's a real athlete and according to him, I think as of last according to him, I think as of last according to him, I think as of last time we spoke, you know, he hasn't time we spoke, you know, he hasn't time we spoke, you know, he hasn't touched anything and people would, you touched anything and people would, you touched anything and people would, you know, die to have his kind of know, die to have his kind of know, die to have his kind of musculature and but he trains hard. He musculature and but he trains hard. He musculature and but he trains hard. He does everything. But it's kind of scary does everything. But it's kind of scary does everything. But it's kind of scary to think what happens when guys like to think what happens when guys like to think what happens when guys like that would go on. I think that would go on. I think that would go on. I think &gt;&gt; you could look online 1990 Mr. Olympia. &gt;&gt; you could look online 1990 Mr. Olympia. &gt;&gt; you could look online 1990 Mr. Olympia. &gt;&gt; Uh I don't know because they didn't &gt;&gt; Uh I don't know because they didn't &gt;&gt; Uh I don't know because they didn't publish the weights. publish the weights. publish the weights. &gt;&gt; Uh but Lee Haney still won it. He was &gt;&gt; Uh but Lee Haney still won it. He was &gt;&gt; Uh but Lee Haney still won it. He was maybe a bit lucky to beat Lee Labrada. maybe a bit lucky to beat Lee Labrada. maybe a bit lucky to beat Lee Labrada. Uh but I'd say Haney was probably Uh but I'd say Haney was probably Uh but I'd say Haney was probably 20 down. 20 down. 20 down. &gt;&gt; I mean the fans were like, "Fuck this. &gt;&gt; I mean the fans were like, "Fuck this. &gt;&gt; I mean the fans were like, "Fuck this. We don't want to pay like a couple We don't want to pay like a couple We don't want to pay like a couple hundred dollars to see, you know, guys hundred dollars to see, you know, guys hundred dollars to see, you know, guys that are a lot less than before. But we that are a lot less than before. But we that are a lot less than before. But we want to see the same or more. You know, want to see the same or more. You know, want to see the same or more. You know, nobody wants to see a guy run 100 mters nobody wants to see a guy run 100 mters nobody wants to see a guy run 100 mters in 11 seconds when they've seen under 10 in 11 seconds when they've seen under 10 in 11 seconds when they've seen under 10 seconds. So, I think the people that seconds. So, I think the people that seconds. So, I think the people that control the sport, they realize this control the sport, they realize this control the sport, they realize this is not going to fly. So, they this is not going to fly. So, they this is not going to fly. So, they dropped it. dropped it. dropped it. &gt;&gt; It's so interesting because, you know, &gt;&gt; It's so interesting because, you know, &gt;&gt; It's so interesting because, you know, bodybuilding is an unusual sport. But, bodybuilding is an unusual sport. But, bodybuilding is an unusual sport. But, for that matter, so is free solo rock for that matter, so is free solo rock for that matter, so is free solo rock climbing. We had Alex Hunold on here. climbing. We had Alex Hunold on here. climbing. We had Alex Hunold on here. He, you know, climbed LCAP, probably the He, you know, climbed LCAP, probably the He, you know, climbed LCAP, probably the most dangerous athletic feet of all most dangerous athletic feet of all most dangerous athletic feet of all time. One slip and fall and you're dead. time. One slip and fall and you're dead. time. One slip and fall and you're dead. He said you can make mistakes but not He said you can make mistakes but not He said you can make mistakes but not slip and fall mistakes. Um things not slip and fall mistakes. Um things not slip and fall mistakes. Um things like that, things like bodybuilding, like that, things like bodybuilding, like that, things like bodybuilding, things like what we see from the Red things like what we see from the Red things like what we see from the Red Bull athletes. I do think that serves an Bull athletes. I do think that serves an Bull athletes. I do think that serves an important role in getting hum us as the important role in getting hum us as the important role in getting hum us as the rest of us to think about what's rest of us to think about what's rest of us to think about what's possible with the human body technology possible with the human body technology possible with the human body technology and pharmarmacology. And I do think that and pharmarmacology. And I do think that and pharmarmacology. And I do think that from each extreme sport, even from each extreme sport, even from each extreme sport, even skateboarding, a sport I was involved in skateboarding, a sport I was involved in skateboarding, a sport I was involved in early on, by the way, street early on, by the way, street early on, by the way, street skateboarders putting their theirelves skateboarders putting their theirelves skateboarders putting their theirelves at extreme risk, only one guy wears at extreme risk, only one guy wears at extreme risk, only one guy wears a helmet. a helmet. a helmet. &gt;&gt; Yeah. one on vert they wear helmets &gt;&gt; Yeah. one on vert they wear helmets &gt;&gt; Yeah. one on vert they wear helmets right but on the street they don't do it right but on the street they don't do it right but on the street they don't do it why because it's not part of the culture why because it's not part of the culture why because it's not part of the culture it would like asking professional it would like asking professional it would like asking professional bodybuilders to stop taking gear it's bodybuilders to stop taking gear it's bodybuilders to stop taking gear it's not going to happen it's embedded in the not going to happen it's embedded in the not going to happen it's embedded in the culture to see how far you can take culture to see how far you can take culture to see how far you can take something in a certain dimension I think something in a certain dimension I think something in a certain dimension I think these things provide a useful role in these things provide a useful role in these things provide a useful role in getting the rest of humans to understand getting the rest of humans to understand getting the rest of humans to understand what's possible and there's usual what's possible and there's usual what's possible and there's usual usually excuse me valuable takeaways usually excuse me valuable takeaways usually excuse me valuable takeaways like resistance training like resistance training like resistance training &gt;&gt; absolutely &gt;&gt; absolutely &gt;&gt; absolutely &gt;&gt; nutrition the new nutrition guidelines &gt;&gt; nutrition the new nutrition guidelines &gt;&gt; nutrition the new nutrition guidelines for the US just came out Today they it for the US just came out Today they it for the US just came out Today they it basically inverted the food pyramid. basically inverted the food pyramid. basically inverted the food pyramid. Limited amount of grains, fruits, Limited amount of grains, fruits, Limited amount of grains, fruits, vegetables, meat, eggs. You know, it's vegetables, meat, eggs. You know, it's vegetables, meat, eggs. You know, it's funny. It's it's basically funny. It's it's basically funny. It's it's basically [clears throat] what uh has been talked [clears throat] what uh has been talked [clears throat] what uh has been talked about in the fitness bodybuilding about in the fitness bodybuilding about in the fitness bodybuilding community for a very long time. Insulin community for a very long time. Insulin community for a very long time. Insulin management, low sugar. I mean, it's so management, low sugar. I mean, it's so management, low sugar. I mean, it's so funny because now everyone's like, "Oh, funny because now everyone's like, "Oh, funny because now everyone's like, "Oh, you know, this is so outrageous." But you know, this is so outrageous." But you know, this is so outrageous." But that was pulled from the sport that was pulled from the sport that was pulled from the sport that you're describing. So for people who you're describing. So for people who you're describing. So for people who might not be familiar with the names uh might not be familiar with the names uh might not be familiar with the names uh because our listenership is broad I because our listenership is broad I because our listenership is broad I think it's important for people to think it's important for people to think it's important for people to understand how something like fitness or understand how something like fitness or understand how something like fitness or health progresses. It pulls these things health progresses. It pulls these things health progresses. It pulls these things from the pioneers that were willing to from the pioneers that were willing to from the pioneers that were willing to frankly go pioneer how it's done. It frankly go pioneer how it's done. It frankly go pioneer how it's done. It doesn't come from university studies and doesn't come from university studies and doesn't come from university studies and I say that as a university professor. I say that as a university professor. I say that as a university professor. &gt;&gt; It comes from the real world it and then &gt;&gt; It comes from the real world it and then &gt;&gt; It comes from the real world it and then back through again. back through again. back through again. &gt;&gt; We were probably 20 years ahead. I mean &gt;&gt; We were probably 20 years ahead. I mean &gt;&gt; We were probably 20 years ahead. I mean I don't know about the US but uh I went I don't know about the US but uh I went I don't know about the US but uh I went to a conference in London to a conference in London to a conference in London &gt;&gt; and uh it was a national health service &gt;&gt; and uh it was a national health service &gt;&gt; and uh it was a national health service &gt;&gt; how they're now uh going to study more &gt;&gt; how they're now uh going to study more &gt;&gt; how they're now uh going to study more nutrition &gt;&gt; because in their five or six years they &gt;&gt; because in their five or six years they &gt;&gt; because in their five or six years they do they do two hours study on nutrition do they do two hours study on nutrition do they do two hours study on nutrition which is like I mean you can't even get which is like I mean you can't even get which is like I mean you can't even get high school level understanding in two high school level understanding in two high school level understanding in two hours right so I was pleased to hear hours right so I was pleased to hear hours right so I was pleased to hear that Now, they, you know, they're going that Now, they, you know, they're going that Now, they, you know, they're going to look at, uh, nutrition as part of the to look at, uh, nutrition as part of the to look at, uh, nutrition as part of the health thing, but it was funny because, health thing, but it was funny because, health thing, but it was funny because, uh, they were promoting a plant-based uh, they were promoting a plant-based uh, they were promoting a plant-based diet. Uh, but, you know, unfortunately, it's Uh, but, you know, unfortunately, it's Uh, but, you know, unfortunately, it's going to lack this and this and this. going to lack this and this and this. going to lack this and this and this. So, we need to reinforce it with So, we need to reinforce it with So, we need to reinforce it with supplements. It's all in the animalbased supplements. It's all in the animalbased supplements. It's all in the animalbased diet, but that raises cholesterol, so diet, but that raises cholesterol, so diet, but that raises cholesterol, so that's bad, but we'll have a very that's bad, but we'll have a very that's bad, but we'll have a very deficient diet and have to supplement deficient diet and have to supplement deficient diet and have to supplement it. I felt like, wouldn't it be better it. I felt like, wouldn't it be better it. I felt like, wouldn't it be better just to take the diet that has the just to take the diet that has the just to take the diet that has the nutrients in it in the first place? nutrients in it in the first place? nutrients in it in the first place? &gt;&gt; So, I see competitive bodybuilding is &gt;&gt; So, I see competitive bodybuilding is &gt;&gt; So, I see competitive bodybuilding is like the peak of an iceberg. like the peak of an iceberg. like the peak of an iceberg. &gt;&gt; You know, it's an extreme. It's right at &gt;&gt; You know, it's an extreme. It's right at &gt;&gt; You know, it's an extreme. It's right at the top. Yeah. the top. Yeah. the top. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But the basic things that we learn can &gt;&gt; But the basic things that we learn can &gt;&gt; But the basic things that we learn can apply to somebody that wants to improve apply to somebody that wants to improve apply to somebody that wants to improve their health. their health. their health. &gt;&gt; So, in an [clears throat] extreme level, &gt;&gt; So, in an [clears throat] extreme level, &gt;&gt; So, in an [clears throat] extreme level, we could say maybe it's unhealthy. But we could say maybe it's unhealthy. But we could say maybe it's unhealthy. But if you take the basic principles, it can if you take the basic principles, it can if you take the basic principles, it can be very healthy. uh having your hormones be very healthy. uh having your hormones be very healthy. uh having your hormones in the correct place, building muscle in the correct place, building muscle in the correct place, building muscle mass. The there's incredible things that mass. The there's incredible things that mass. The there's incredible things that you can do for your health, and you can do for your health, and you can do for your health, and you won't be uh needing to rely on uh won't be uh needing to rely on uh won't be uh needing to rely on uh medications to control your blood sugar medications to control your blood sugar medications to control your blood sugar and your blood pressure and uh whatever and your blood pressure and uh whatever and your blood pressure and uh whatever else your body can do it itself, else your body can do it itself, else your body can do it itself, you know. you know. you know. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration, can diminish your cognitive dehydration, can diminish your cognitive dehydration, can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. &gt;&gt; This is a perhaps a good uh moment to uh &gt;&gt; This is a perhaps a good uh moment to uh &gt;&gt; This is a perhaps a good uh moment to uh tell a brief story about our mutual tell a brief story about our mutual tell a brief story about our mutual friend Mike Menser. I'll keep it really friend Mike Menser. I'll keep it really friend Mike Menser. I'll keep it really brief. Um, I paid for an online consult brief. Um, I paid for an online consult brief. Um, I paid for an online consult with Mike. It was like a hundred bucks. with Mike. It was like a hundred bucks. with Mike. It was like a hundred bucks. I had to wire it to him, which was a I had to wire it to him, which was a I had to wire it to him, which was a fortune for me. It was like all my fortune for me. It was like all my fortune for me. It was like all my money. I was in high school, right? You money. I was in high school, right? You money. I was in high school, right? You know, I was working at this little know, I was working at this little know, I was working at this little skateboard shop when, you know, selling skateboard shop when, you know, selling skateboard shop when, you know, selling shoes. Maybe it wasn't all my money, but shoes. Maybe it wasn't all my money, but shoes. Maybe it wasn't all my money, but it was significant. I had to wire it to it was significant. I had to wire it to it was significant. I had to wire it to him. He calls and my mother was um like, him. He calls and my mother was um like, him. He calls and my mother was um like, "Why is this grown man calling?" You "Why is this grown man calling?" You "Why is this grown man calling?" You know, um, who's this grown man calling know, um, who's this grown man calling know, um, who's this grown man calling the house? the house? the house? &gt;&gt; He laid down the program. He barked when &gt;&gt; He laid down the program. He barked when &gt;&gt; He laid down the program. He barked when he spoke. I don't think people realize he spoke. I don't think people realize he spoke. I don't think people realize he literally barked when he spoke he literally barked when he spoke he literally barked when he spoke each word, each word, each word, &gt;&gt; but there was a real um &gt;&gt; but there was a real um &gt;&gt; but there was a real um &gt;&gt; kindness be way back somewhere in that &gt;&gt; kindness be way back somewhere in that &gt;&gt; kindness be way back somewhere in that bark. Um and bark. Um and bark. Um and &gt;&gt; the methods worked, but he gave me some &gt;&gt; the methods worked, but he gave me some &gt;&gt; the methods worked, but he gave me some we stayed in touch and uh for a couple we stayed in touch and uh for a couple we stayed in touch and uh for a couple reasons. First of all, he emphasized on reasons. First of all, he emphasized on reasons. First of all, he emphasized on that call, but in subsequent calls, um that call, but in subsequent calls, um that call, but in subsequent calls, um stay away from anabolics. I didn't ask, stay away from anabolics. I didn't ask, stay away from anabolics. I didn't ask, he just said it. He said, and he said, he just said it. He said, and he said, he just said it. He said, and he said, "Learn to enjoy training really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] "Learn to enjoy training really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] "Learn to enjoy training really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard." Those are hard." Those are hard." Those are &gt;&gt; yourself, man. It's a beautiful thing &gt;&gt; yourself, man. It's a beautiful thing &gt;&gt; yourself, man. It's a beautiful thing when &gt;&gt; And I was like, "All right." Like, I was &gt;&gt; And I was like, "All right." Like, I was &gt;&gt; And I was like, "All right." Like, I was coming from skateboarding. Like, I'm coming from skateboarding. Like, I'm coming from skateboarding. Like, I'm used to getting hurt, right? And I was used to getting hurt, right? And I was used to getting hurt, right? And I was like that, you know, but he's like, like that, you know, but he's like, like that, you know, but he's like, "Learn to enjoy training really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] "Learn to enjoy training really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] "Learn to enjoy training really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard." His words. And then he also hard." His words. And then he also hard." His words. And then he also encouraged me to read. He was like encouraged me to read. He was like encouraged me to read. He was like obsessed with philosophy. He was obsessed with philosophy. He was obsessed with philosophy. He was obsessed with Pan Rand objectivist obsessed with Pan Rand objectivist obsessed with Pan Rand objectivist epistemology. A lot of that stuff I epistemology. A lot of that stuff I epistemology. A lot of that stuff I found to be somewhat interesting. But I found to be somewhat interesting. But I found to be somewhat interesting. But I mean, he was super dedicated to that, mean, he was super dedicated to that, mean, he was super dedicated to that, but he also embedded in me. He said, uh, but he also embedded in me. He said, uh, but he also embedded in me. He said, uh, he said, "You seem like you like he said, "You seem like you like he said, "You seem like you like learning. Maybe you should focus on learning. Maybe you should focus on learning. Maybe you should focus on school." I was like, "All right." And at school." I was like, "All right." And at school." I was like, "All right." And at the time, I was kind of rebellious the time, I was kind of rebellious the time, I was kind of rebellious against my dad. And I took his advice. against my dad. And I took his advice. against my dad. And I took his advice. Because it was coming from him. And then Because it was coming from him. And then Because it was coming from him. And then when I got to school, we stayed in when I got to school, we stayed in when I got to school, we stayed in touch. I was in Santa Barbara. And he touch. I was in Santa Barbara. And he touch. I was in Santa Barbara. And he said, "Just remember, I'll never forget said, "Just remember, I'll never forget said, "Just remember, I'll never forget this. He said, "Just remember 90% of this. He said, "Just remember 90% of this. He said, "Just remember 90% of what you're learning is completely what you're learning is completely what you're learning is completely wrong, and the worst part is they don't wrong, and the worst part is they don't wrong, and the worst part is they don't realize they're wrong." And I said, realize they're wrong." And I said, realize they're wrong." And I said, "909%?" And he said, "90%." He said, "909%?" And he said, "90%." He said, "909%?" And he said, "90%." He said, "But the 10% that's right, "But the 10% that's right, "But the 10% that's right, &gt;&gt; those are the gems that you build off &gt;&gt; those are the gems that you build off &gt;&gt; those are the gems that you build off of." &gt;&gt; And I thought, man, and now, you know, &gt;&gt; And I thought, man, and now, you know, &gt;&gt; And I thought, man, and now, you know, 30 year more than 30 years later as a 30 year more than 30 years later as a 30 year more than 30 years later as a professional scientist and now professional scientist and now professional scientist and now podcaster, I can tell you having spent a podcaster, I can tell you having spent a podcaster, I can tell you having spent a lot of time running studies, writing lot of time running studies, writing lot of time running studies, writing grants, reviewing grant, like I've been grants, reviewing grant, like I've been grants, reviewing grant, like I've been deeply in that community. He's exactly deeply in that community. He's exactly deeply in that community. He's exactly right. Yeah. right. Yeah. right. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And so he was wrong about a great many &gt;&gt; And so he was wrong about a great many &gt;&gt; And so he was wrong about a great many things, but he had some real gems things, but he had some real gems things, but he had some real gems embedded in that like barking of a embedded in that like barking of a embedded in that like barking of a voice. Remember voice. Remember voice. Remember he'd yell at you. He'd yell at you he'd yell at you. He'd yell at you he'd yell at you. He'd yell at you basically. So anyway, I'm grateful to basically. So anyway, I'm grateful to basically. So anyway, I'm grateful to him. And then he also said, uh, you'll him. And then he also said, uh, you'll him. And then he also said, uh, you'll love this. He also said, and also you're love this. He also said, and also you're love this. He also said, and also you're not Dorian Yates, so don't try to be. He not Dorian Yates, so don't try to be. He not Dorian Yates, so don't try to be. He said, a lot of guys right now, this is said, a lot of guys right now, this is said, a lot of guys right now, this is when the grainy photos of you. We'll put when the grainy photos of you. We'll put when the grainy photos of you. We'll put a link to this. When that transformation a link to this. When that transformation a link to this. When that transformation happened, when those photos came out, I happened, when those photos came out, I happened, when those photos came out, I think people think people think people saw that and it sparked this saw that and it sparked this saw that and it sparked this aspirational thing and mil like millions aspirational thing and mil like millions aspirational thing and mil like millions of people like, "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's of people like, "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's of people like, "Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's possible." &gt;&gt; But he said, "Listen, you're not that, &gt;&gt; But he said, "Listen, you're not that, &gt;&gt; But he said, "Listen, you're not that, &gt;&gt; but it doesn't mean you shouldn't enjoy &gt;&gt; but it doesn't mean you shouldn't enjoy &gt;&gt; but it doesn't mean you shouldn't enjoy training hard. You're not that, but you training hard. You're not that, but you training hard. You're not that, but you could do could do could do &gt;&gt; this other thing. &gt;&gt; this other thing. &gt;&gt; this other thing. &gt;&gt; Take the benefits from it." &gt;&gt; Take the benefits from it." &gt;&gt; Take the benefits from it." &gt;&gt; That's a really good coach. The last &gt;&gt; That's a really good coach. The last &gt;&gt; That's a really good coach. The last thing I needed was somebody to tell me, thing I needed was somebody to tell me, thing I needed was somebody to tell me, "Hey, listen. Do this because it, you "Hey, listen. Do this because it, you "Hey, listen. Do this because it, you know, it's he needed someone around to know, it's he needed someone around to know, it's he needed someone around to talk to or something like that." Anyway, talk to or something like that." Anyway, talk to or something like that." Anyway, that's Mike. Let's talk about those that's Mike. Let's talk about those that's Mike. Let's talk about those photos cuz I think and we'll put photos cuz I think and we'll put photos cuz I think and we'll put them up. We'll put a link to them. What them up. We'll put a link to them. What them up. We'll put a link to them. What happened in that one year? happened in that one year? happened in that one year? And why do you think that sort of And why do you think that sort of And why do you think that sort of um uh kind of transformation is so much uh kind of transformation is so much uh kind of transformation is so much different than like somebody getting big different than like somebody getting big different than like somebody getting big just big or somebody getting real strong just big or somebody getting real strong just big or somebody getting real strong or somebody like something happened in or somebody like something happened in or somebody like something happened in that one year trend the before and that one year trend the before and that one year trend the before and afters that changed the way people think afters that changed the way people think afters that changed the way people think about fitness in general not just the about fitness in general not just the about fitness in general not just the sport of bodybuilding but fitness sport of bodybuilding but fitness sport of bodybuilding but fitness like what the human body can do. like what the human body can do. like what the human body can do. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was a breakthrough level. uh &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was a breakthrough level. uh &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was a breakthrough level. uh for the sport, you know, as people say, for the sport, you know, as people say, for the sport, you know, as people say, before Dorian and after Dorian, the before Dorian and after Dorian, the before Dorian and after Dorian, the sport changed. Uh and my approach was sport changed. Uh and my approach was sport changed. Uh and my approach was unique as well. And uh Joe Weider, you unique as well. And uh Joe Weider, you unique as well. And uh Joe Weider, you know, he had his way of doing things, know, he had his way of doing things, know, he had his way of doing things, right? &gt;&gt; This is the guy, by the way, folks, that &gt;&gt; This is the guy, by the way, folks, that &gt;&gt; This is the guy, by the way, folks, that ran Muscle and Fitness and a bunch of ran Muscle and Fitness and a bunch of ran Muscle and Fitness and a bunch of other magazines. He basically took the other magazines. He basically took the other magazines. He basically took the sport of bodybuilding and popularized it sport of bodybuilding and popularized it sport of bodybuilding and popularized it into what is now the health and fitness into what is now the health and fitness into what is now the health and fitness industry. He was a brilliant marketer. industry. He was a brilliant marketer. industry. He was a brilliant marketer. You know, Joe Weider training for You know, Joe Weider training for You know, Joe Weider training for Champions. He didn't know nothing about Champions. He didn't know nothing about Champions. He didn't know nothing about training, but he knew about marketing. training, but he knew about marketing. training, but he knew about marketing. Here's the thing, right? Here's the thing, right? Here's the thing, right? 1992, Mr. Olympia, and then 93. 1992, Mr. Olympia, and then 93. 1992, Mr. Olympia, and then 93. So, people think that between uh 92 and So, people think that between uh 92 and So, people think that between uh 92 and 93 on stage, 17 pounds of muscle I put 93 on stage, 17 pounds of muscle I put 93 on stage, 17 pounds of muscle I put on in one year. on in one year. on in one year. is not really true. is not really true. is not really true. In 92, In 92, In 92, six weeks out from the Mr. Olympia, I six weeks out from the Mr. Olympia, I six weeks out from the Mr. Olympia, I was probably five pounds, six pound was probably five pounds, six pound was probably five pounds, six pound less than the next year, right? less than the next year, right? less than the next year, right? But I knew Lee Haney wasn't going to be But I knew Lee Haney wasn't going to be But I knew Lee Haney wasn't going to be there. I knew that the guys I was there. I knew that the guys I was there. I knew that the guys I was competing against were smaller than me. competing against were smaller than me. competing against were smaller than me. So I said, I don't mind sacrificing some So I said, I don't mind sacrificing some So I said, I don't mind sacrificing some size to get like super shredded, like as size to get like super shredded, like as size to get like super shredded, like as shredded as the smaller guy, right? shredded as the smaller guy, right? shredded as the smaller guy, right? So I was coming down, coming down, So I was coming down, coming down, So I was coming down, coming down, coming down, thinking I'd get, you know, coming down, thinking I'd get, you know, coming down, thinking I'd get, you know, more shredded. more shredded. more shredded. Maybe I did a little bit, but I realized Maybe I did a little bit, but I realized Maybe I did a little bit, but I realized analyzing because we don't have no iPhone or because we don't have no iPhone or because we don't have no iPhone or nothing, right? But I used to take nothing, right? But I used to take nothing, right? But I used to take pictures every week, take the camera pictures every week, take the camera pictures every week, take the camera roll to the to, you know, wait for them roll to the to, you know, wait for them roll to the to, you know, wait for them to develop it and all that and then to develop it and all that and then to develop it and all that and then look, how do they look? look, how do they look? look, how do they look? &gt;&gt; Uh, and I looked at 92, &gt;&gt; Uh, and I looked at 92, &gt;&gt; Uh, and I looked at 92, 6 weeks out, I pretty much contest ready 6 weeks out, I pretty much contest ready 6 weeks out, I pretty much contest ready then, but I just kept dieting, dieting. then, but I just kept dieting, dieting. then, but I just kept dieting, dieting. So, I sacrificed a lot in ' 92 and I So, I sacrificed a lot in ' 92 and I So, I sacrificed a lot in ' 92 and I determined that I wouldn't do that in determined that I wouldn't do that in determined that I wouldn't do that in 93. I still did it a little bit because 93. I still did it a little bit because 93. I still did it a little bit because I tend to overdo things, right? [snorts] I tend to overdo things, right? [snorts] I tend to overdo things, right? [snorts] So 93, I would say I put on six or seven So 93, I would say I put on six or seven So 93, I would say I put on six or seven pounds of muscle. As a Mr. Olympia, this pounds of muscle. As a Mr. Olympia, this pounds of muscle. As a Mr. Olympia, this is outstanding, right? Because you're is outstanding, right? Because you're is outstanding, right? Because you're already at a high level. But I didn't already at a high level. But I didn't already at a high level. But I didn't sacrifice 10 pounds of muscle that I wasted the 10 pounds of muscle that I wasted the 10 pounds of muscle that I wasted the year before. So it appeared that I put year before. So it appeared that I put year before. So it appeared that I put on 17 pounds of pure muscle in a year. I on 17 pounds of pure muscle in a year. I on 17 pounds of pure muscle in a year. I didn't. I just simply didn't sacrifice didn't. I just simply didn't sacrifice didn't. I just simply didn't sacrifice as much as I did the year before. So it as much as I did the year before. So it as much as I did the year before. So it was a great year of progress and the was a great year of progress and the was a great year of progress and the pictures that were taken in 92 were pictures that were taken in 92 were pictures that were taken in 92 were taken a week after the contest. So I had taken a week after the contest. So I had taken a week after the contest. So I had lost that muscle. So if you compare that lost that muscle. So if you compare that lost that muscle. So if you compare that one to that one, it looks like wow, it's one to that one, it looks like wow, it's one to that one, it looks like wow, it's night and day. It wasn't really. I got night and day. It wasn't really. I got night and day. It wasn't really. I got pictures from 92 where I'm almost as big pictures from 92 where I'm almost as big pictures from 92 where I'm almost as big as 93. But nobody saw those pictures. as 93. But nobody saw those pictures. as 93. But nobody saw those pictures. And the pictures that I took in 93 was And the pictures that I took in 93 was And the pictures that I took in 93 was my friend with the camera. I said, "Hey, my friend with the camera. I said, "Hey, my friend with the camera. I said, "Hey, would it be good if you come up and did would it be good if you come up and did would it be good if you come up and did those pictures that we did last year in those pictures that we did last year in those pictures that we did last year in the same spot in a gym?" "Yeah, let's do the same spot in a gym?" "Yeah, let's do the same spot in a gym?" "Yeah, let's do that." And when he showed them that." And when he showed them that." And when he showed them afterwards, even I was freaked out. I afterwards, even I was freaked out. I afterwards, even I was freaked out. I was like, "What?" was like, "What?" was like, "What?" And he's like, "I'm sending these to the And he's like, "I'm sending these to the And he's like, "I'm sending these to the magazines. They were not meant to be. magazines. They were not meant to be. magazines. They were not meant to be. They were meant to be just for my They were meant to be just for my They were meant to be just for my record." And he had a better camera than record." And he had a better camera than record." And he had a better camera than me, so that's what I wanted them for. me, so that's what I wanted them for. me, so that's what I wanted them for. That's why I got my underwear on and my That's why I got my underwear on and my That's why I got my underwear on and my socks. Yeah. Because I never think these socks. Yeah. Because I never think these socks. Yeah. Because I never think these photos are going to be published, right? photos are going to be published, right? photos are going to be published, right? But he sent them to Weeda and uh the But he sent them to Weeda and uh the But he sent them to Weeda and uh the editor at the Weder magazines was Peter editor at the Weder magazines was Peter editor at the Weder magazines was Peter McGgo. He was English so we were McGgo. He was English so we were McGgo. He was English so we were friends. So he sent them to Peter McGoff friends. So he sent them to Peter McGoff friends. So he sent them to Peter McGoff and Peter said all the guys are coming and Peter said all the guys are coming and Peter said all the guys are coming to the office and they know that I'm to the office and they know that I'm to the office and they know that I'm friends with you. So they you know friends with you. So they you know friends with you. So they you know looking for something. So you know how's looking for something. So you know how's looking for something. So you know how's it going? He said oh I got these very it going? He said oh I got these very it going? He said oh I got these very casually I've got these pictures. Would casually I've got these pictures. Would casually I've got these pictures. Would you like to see them? He said I put them you like to see them? He said I put them you like to see them? He said I put them on the desk. He said they went white. on the desk. He said they went white. on the desk. He said they went white. They just went [snorts] and just stood there shaking their head and just stood there shaking their head and just stood there shaking their head like, "Okay, it's on for second then." I like, "Okay, it's on for second then." I like, "Okay, it's on for second then." I mean, six weeks out, everyone gave up mean, six weeks out, everyone gave up mean, six weeks out, everyone gave up when they saw those pictures, more or when they saw those pictures, more or when they saw those pictures, more or less. &gt;&gt; How did it feel to be at one point an &gt;&gt; How did it feel to be at one point an &gt;&gt; How did it feel to be at one point an underdog and then you're the winner? and then you're the winner? and then you're the winner? And &gt;&gt; well, hold on. &gt;&gt; well, hold on. &gt;&gt; well, hold on. &gt;&gt; Before I was a winner, [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Before I was a winner, [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Before I was a winner, [clears throat] &gt;&gt; very difficult because I had this &gt;&gt; very difficult because I had this &gt;&gt; very difficult because I had this underdog thing. I'm from the streets and underdog thing. I'm from the streets and underdog thing. I'm from the streets and nobody thinks I can do this and I'm from nobody thinks I can do this and I'm from nobody thinks I can do this and I'm from England that are all American and this England that are all American and this England that are all American and this and this and this. That's against me. and this and this. That's against me. and this and this. That's against me. Yeah, theoretically. Yeah, theoretically. Yeah, theoretically. Uh so I thrived on that, you know, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Uh so I thrived on that, you know, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Uh so I thrived on that, you know, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you motivation. As I said, I'm going to you motivation. As I said, I'm going to you motivation. As I said, I'm going to show you. So I got second to Lee Haney, show you. So I got second to Lee Haney, show you. So I got second to Lee Haney, but then he retired. So now the title's but then he retired. So now the title's but then he retired. So now the title's open and logically I'm the favorite. And open and logically I'm the favorite. And open and logically I'm the favorite. And actually I struggled with that for a for actually I struggled with that for a for actually I struggled with that for a for a while. Like a while. Like a while. Like first of all it was like I'm the first of all it was like I'm the first of all it was like I'm the favorite now. I don't have that underdog favorite now. I don't have that underdog favorite now. I don't have that underdog thing. I don't know what to do now. And thing. I don't know what to do now. And thing. I don't know what to do now. And then I was like so I'm probably going to then I was like so I'm probably going to then I was like so I'm probably going to be Mr. Olympia. This it's a real you be Mr. Olympia. This it's a real you be Mr. Olympia. This it's a real you know when I went against Haney I wanted know when I went against Haney I wanted know when I went against Haney I wanted to try to win but I was a new guy and to try to win but I was a new guy and to try to win but I was a new guy and wow. So I can be Mr. Olympia and then I just So I can be Mr. Olympia and then I just So I can be Mr. Olympia and then I just kind of turned it around in my head. kind of turned it around in my head. kind of turned it around in my head. Yeah but why not man? Somebody's got to Yeah but why not man? Somebody's got to Yeah but why not man? Somebody's got to be Mr. Olympia. And do you know anybody be Mr. Olympia. And do you know anybody be Mr. Olympia. And do you know anybody that's dedicated themselves to the craft that's dedicated themselves to the craft that's dedicated themselves to the craft the way you have? Absolutely not. So the way you have? Absolutely not. So the way you have? Absolutely not. So yeah, god damn it. I deserve it. And yeah, god damn it. I deserve it. And yeah, god damn it. I deserve it. And this took about a week to like change this took about a week to like change this took about a week to like change this whole uh point of view where I was this whole uh point of view where I was this whole uh point of view where I was comfortable going in as the favorite comfortable going in as the favorite comfortable going in as the favorite cuz yeah, I'm going to win so I should cuz yeah, I'm going to win so I should cuz yeah, I'm going to win so I should be the favorite. But it I struggled with be the favorite. But it I struggled with be the favorite. But it I struggled with it, man. Cuz the whole time I was the it, man. Cuz the whole time I was the it, man. Cuz the whole time I was the underdog. Even when I was in England, underdog. Even when I was in England, underdog. Even when I was in England, &gt;&gt; I'm not social. So, I didn't &gt;&gt; I'm not social. So, I didn't &gt;&gt; I'm not social. So, I didn't talk to the judges or socialize or do talk to the judges or socialize or do talk to the judges or socialize or do anything. It was like, you know, who is anything. It was like, you know, who is anything. It was like, you know, who is this guy? Why is it why is it like that? this guy? Why is it why is it like that? this guy? Why is it why is it like that? Just comes here and disappears. Just I Just comes here and disappears. Just I Just comes here and disappears. Just I wasn't interested in socializing or wasn't interested in socializing or wasn't interested in socializing or talking or trying to get favors and just talking or trying to get favors and just talking or trying to get favors and just doing my thing here, you know? doing my thing here, you know? doing my thing here, you know? &gt;&gt; Well, dopamine is all about the pleasure &gt;&gt; Well, dopamine is all about the pleasure &gt;&gt; Well, dopamine is all about the pleasure of pursuit, not the pursuit of pleasure. of pursuit, not the pursuit of pleasure. of pursuit, not the pursuit of pleasure. And the problem with reaching a goal And the problem with reaching a goal And the problem with reaching a goal line is for many people, they don't know line is for many people, they don't know line is for many people, they don't know what to do at that point. In fact, uh what to do at that point. In fact, uh what to do at that point. In fact, uh one of the uh coaches for the Boston one of the uh coaches for the Boston one of the uh coaches for the Boston Celtics, who used to be a former chess Celtics, who used to be a former chess Celtics, who used to be a former chess prodigy, Josh Wadskin, uh was on here prodigy, Josh Wadskin, uh was on here prodigy, Josh Wadskin, uh was on here and he said, you know, it's very and he said, you know, it's very and he said, you know, it's very different when you're defending a different when you're defending a different when you're defending a championship. You're now the defending championship. You're now the defending championship. You're now the defending champion as opposed as opposed to it's champion as opposed as opposed to it's champion as opposed as opposed to it's &gt;&gt; you've been climbing up that bastard up &gt;&gt; you've been climbing up that bastard up &gt;&gt; you've been climbing up that bastard up there. I'm going to knock him off. Oh, there. I'm going to knock him off. Oh, there. I'm going to knock him off. Oh, now you're there. Now everyone trying to now you're there. Now everyone trying to now you're there. Now everyone trying to knock you off knock you off knock you off &gt;&gt; once you hit the peak. Cuz I think this &gt;&gt; once you hit the peak. Cuz I think this &gt;&gt; once you hit the peak. Cuz I think this the reason I'm asking is I think uh this the reason I'm asking is I think uh this the reason I'm asking is I think uh this is important for many people who are on is important for many people who are on is important for many people who are on the climb, want to be on the climb, want the climb, want to be on the climb, want the climb, want to be on the climb, want the peak. Once you're at the peak, the peak. Once you're at the peak, the peak. Once you're at the peak, sounds like you did a very good job of sounds like you did a very good job of sounds like you did a very good job of rotating your mindset to no one's going rotating your mindset to no one's going rotating your mindset to no one's going to take this away from you to take this away from you to take this away from you &gt;&gt; like a bulldog. &gt;&gt; like a bulldog. &gt;&gt; like a bulldog. &gt;&gt; And don't get comfortable. &gt;&gt; And don't get comfortable. &gt;&gt; And don't get comfortable. &gt;&gt; Don't get comfortable. So how do you &gt;&gt; Don't get comfortable. So how do you &gt;&gt; Don't get comfortable. So how do you &gt;&gt; like the Rocky movie? Remember the Rocky &gt;&gt; like the Rocky movie? Remember the Rocky &gt;&gt; like the Rocky movie? Remember the Rocky movie? When he gets comfortable, he got movie? When he gets comfortable, he got movie? When he gets comfortable, he got the big house and everything. It starts the big house and everything. It starts the big house and everything. It starts getting and you get Mr. tea coming getting and you get Mr. tea coming getting and you get Mr. tea coming along, the badass from the ghetto along, the badass from the ghetto along, the badass from the ghetto kicking his ass cuz he got too kicking his ass cuz he got too kicking his ass cuz he got too comfortable. So, I always remember that comfortable. So, I always remember that comfortable. So, I always remember that like I'm just going to stay here like I'm just going to stay here like I'm just going to stay here training in the gym with the same guys I training in the gym with the same guys I training in the gym with the same guys I train with. Uh, you know, uh, they don't train with. Uh, you know, uh, they don't train with. Uh, you know, uh, they don't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] treat me like a superstar or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] treat me like a superstar or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] treat me like a superstar or nothing, you know? They know I'm the nothing, you know? They know I'm the nothing, you know? They know I'm the man, but we're friends. We've been man, but we're friends. We've been man, but we're friends. We've been friends for years. They know me. Uh, friends for years. They know me. Uh, friends for years. They know me. Uh, keep my feet on the ground. If I came keep my feet on the ground. If I came keep my feet on the ground. If I came here, I potentially could have made more here, I potentially could have made more here, I potentially could have made more income, but it probably would have income, but it probably would have income, but it probably would have lasted shorter. So in the long run I lasted shorter. So in the long run I lasted shorter. So in the long run I probably would have made less cuz just probably would have made less cuz just probably would have made less cuz just too many distractions. too many distractions. too many distractions. Uh I wanted to keep my way away from Uh I wanted to keep my way away from Uh I wanted to keep my way away from everything and it it's different days everything and it it's different days everything and it it's different days then everything is the magazines. then everything is the magazines. then everything is the magazines. So with the magazines I would come here So with the magazines I would come here So with the magazines I would come here uh do the Mr. Olympia do one week of uh do the Mr. Olympia do one week of uh do the Mr. Olympia do one week of intensive photograph sessions video the intensive photograph sessions video the intensive photograph sessions video the everything for the magazines so they everything for the magazines so they everything for the magazines so they have enough material for a year. then I have enough material for a year. then I have enough material for a year. then I simply disappear and go home and nobody simply disappear and go home and nobody simply disappear and go home and nobody would see me. There's no social media. would see me. There's no social media. would see me. There's no social media. There's not there's no you don't need to There's not there's no you don't need to There's not there's no you don't need to keep up the constant uh flow of keep up the constant uh flow of keep up the constant uh flow of attention in order to earn income. I attention in order to earn income. I attention in order to earn income. I earn my prize money. I got my contracts. earn my prize money. I got my contracts. earn my prize money. I got my contracts. I go home and start work again. And I go home and start work again. And I go home and start work again. And I loved it. You know, I loved having that loved it. You know, I loved having that loved it. You know, I loved having that mission. But I can tell you something. mission. But I can tell you something. mission. But I can tell you something. It's very difficult to find a picture of It's very difficult to find a picture of It's very difficult to find a picture of me smiling me smiling me smiling because I was so intense in this tunnel. because I was so intense in this tunnel. because I was so intense in this tunnel. Um, and at the end there was no joy in it. and at the end there was no joy in it. and at the end there was no joy in it. Like the last year 97, I remember Like the last year 97, I remember Like the last year 97, I remember getting ready for the contest. I'm like, getting ready for the contest. I'm like, getting ready for the contest. I'm like, "Wow, this feels like Groundhog Day. "Wow, this feels like Groundhog Day. "Wow, this feels like Groundhog Day. I've done this so in process so many I've done this so in process so many I've done this so in process so many times." And uh, I started to think this times." And uh, I started to think this times." And uh, I started to think this is starting to feel like a job. I mean, is starting to feel like a job. I mean, is starting to feel like a job. I mean, it was, but it was a passion more. It it was, but it was a passion more. It it was, but it was a passion more. It was a bit of both, right? But now it's was a bit of both, right? But now it's was a bit of both, right? But now it's starting to feel like a job. And I start starting to feel like a job. And I start starting to feel like a job. And I start to think about what am I going to do to think about what am I going to do to think about what am I going to do after this? because it's starting to I after this? because it's starting to I after this? because it's starting to I don't want to feel like that. You know, don't want to feel like that. You know, don't want to feel like that. You know, &gt;&gt; sounds like I'm just jocking you, but &gt;&gt; sounds like I'm just jocking you, but &gt;&gt; sounds like I'm just jocking you, but I'm telling you like that's a I'm telling you like that's a I'm telling you like that's a very wise perspective because a lot of very wise perspective because a lot of very wise perspective because a lot of people don't want to let go. people don't want to let go. people don't want to let go. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; They don't see themselves in anything &gt;&gt; They don't see themselves in anything &gt;&gt; They don't see themselves in anything else and therefore they don't know what else and therefore they don't know what else and therefore they don't know what to do. Also, when you reach a certain to do. Also, when you reach a certain to do. Also, when you reach a certain level in anything, it becomes easier to level in anything, it becomes easier to level in anything, it becomes easier to just make a little bit more money over just make a little bit more money over just make a little bit more money over here. Get a little I mean, you here. Get a little I mean, you here. Get a little I mean, you &gt;&gt; you're the king there, man. &gt;&gt; you're the king there, man. &gt;&gt; you're the king there, man. &gt;&gt; People would just pay you to be in the &gt;&gt; People would just pay you to be in the &gt;&gt; People would just pay you to be in the room. &gt;&gt; You're the king there. You're the king, &gt;&gt; You're the king there. You're the king, &gt;&gt; You're the king there. You're the king, right? Yeah. So right? Yeah. So right? Yeah. So maybe you don't want to give that up. Uh maybe you don't want to give that up. Uh maybe you don't want to give that up. Uh so yeah, it was tough and I kind of so yeah, it was tough and I kind of so yeah, it was tough and I kind of observed a lot of athletes from observed a lot of athletes from observed a lot of athletes from different sports how they really different sports how they really different sports how they really struggle. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Because yes, you can still go to the gym &gt;&gt; Because yes, you can still go to the gym &gt;&gt; Because yes, you can still go to the gym and lift weights, but why are you doing and lift weights, but why are you doing and lift weights, but why are you doing it now? That absolute tunnel that you it now? That absolute tunnel that you it now? That absolute tunnel that you put yourself in like you go to battle put yourself in like you go to battle put yourself in like you go to battle every day for this goal. every day for this goal. every day for this goal. That in itself is a high. the dopamine That in itself is a high. the dopamine That in itself is a high. the dopamine as you say as the chase I mean a as you say as the chase I mean a as you say as the chase I mean a competition is once a year right for me competition is once a year right for me competition is once a year right for me at least it was once a year so it's the at least it was once a year so it's the at least it was once a year so it's the whole year that you know aiming on whole year that you know aiming on whole year that you know aiming on that target I can see that day the whole that target I can see that day the whole that target I can see that day the whole year I'm thinking about that day like year I'm thinking about that day like year I'm thinking about that day like I'm in a tunnel I'm in a tunnel I'm in a tunnel &gt;&gt; or probably my best friend is like it's &gt;&gt; or probably my best friend is like it's &gt;&gt; or probably my best friend is like it's great to hang out with you now great to hang out with you now great to hang out with you now &gt;&gt; because you're in the room he said I'd &gt;&gt; because you're in the room he said I'd &gt;&gt; because you're in the room he said I'd be with you before but I'm well aware be with you before but I'm well aware be with you before but I'm well aware that your mind was not there like you that your mind was not there like you that your mind was not there like you know now you're like here now I'm know now you're like here now I'm know now you're like here now I'm enjoying life then I couldn't afford to enjoying life then I couldn't afford to enjoying life then I couldn't afford to really enjoy it. Like I'm on a mission really enjoy it. Like I'm on a mission really enjoy it. Like I'm on a mission here. I'm in a war or whatever I had in here. I'm in a war or whatever I had in here. I'm in a war or whatever I had in my head. Uh my head. Uh my head. Uh but it's a huge part of my life. Without but it's a huge part of my life. Without but it's a huge part of my life. Without that, I wouldn't be sitting here talking that, I wouldn't be sitting here talking that, I wouldn't be sitting here talking to you now. I wouldn't be, you know, to you now. I wouldn't be, you know, to you now. I wouldn't be, you know, would have met my wife. She's a would have met my wife. She's a would have met my wife. She's a competitor as well. So many things. So I competitor as well. So many things. So I competitor as well. So many things. So I knew I had to do it. And knew I had to do it. And knew I had to do it. And now it's obvious why. now it's obvious why. now it's obvious why. And I think I mean there I've had people I think I mean there I've had people I think I mean there I've had people coming up to me with tears in their coming up to me with tears in their coming up to me with tears in their eyes. Many people saying, "Bro, I know eyes. Many people saying, "Bro, I know eyes. Many people saying, "Bro, I know you don't know me, but you saved my you don't know me, but you saved my you don't know me, but you saved my life." You know, just something you said or you You know, just something you said or you You know, just something you said or you did or inspire me, and this is like did or inspire me, and this is like did or inspire me, and this is like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is worth more than the Mr. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is worth more than the Mr. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is worth more than the Mr. Olympia trophy. So, I did it for myself. Olympia trophy. So, I did it for myself. Olympia trophy. So, I did it for myself. It was a selfish pursuit. It's It was a selfish pursuit. It's It was a selfish pursuit. It's bodybuilding. It's all about you. Yeah. bodybuilding. It's all about you. Yeah. bodybuilding. It's all about you. Yeah. But now it's changed into something else But now it's changed into something else But now it's changed into something else where I can use my position, my where I can use my position, my where I can use my position, my influence, and at my age, my life influence, and at my age, my life influence, and at my age, my life experience to help and inspire many experience to help and inspire many experience to help and inspire many people. And maybe that's the whole point people. And maybe that's the whole point people. And maybe that's the whole point of the thing of the thing of the thing &gt;&gt; ultimately, you know, &gt;&gt; ultimately, you know, &gt;&gt; ultimately, you know, &gt;&gt; there was a there was a plan you weren't &gt;&gt; there was a there was a plan you weren't &gt;&gt; there was a there was a plan you weren't aware of. aware of. aware of. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. I just know I had to &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. I just know I had to &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. I just know I had to do it. [clears throat] Not I want to do it. [clears throat] Not I want to do it. [clears throat] Not I want to &gt;&gt; like I have to like my life depends on &gt;&gt; like I have to like my life depends on &gt;&gt; like I have to like my life depends on this. &gt;&gt; Uh that was that was my mentality. &gt;&gt; Uh that was that was my mentality. &gt;&gt; Uh that was that was my mentality. Well, I certainly get that feeling and I Well, I certainly get that feeling and I Well, I certainly get that feeling and I can say for myself and many others I can say for myself and many others I can say for myself and many others that um you have really inspired me. Uh that um you have really inspired me. Uh that um you have really inspired me. Uh I had no, as I said, no aspirations of I had no, as I said, no aspirations of I had no, as I said, no aspirations of becoming a bodybuilder, but the idea becoming a bodybuilder, but the idea becoming a bodybuilder, but the idea that I could strengthen my body and that I could strengthen my body and that I could strengthen my body and most importantly do things differently most importantly do things differently most importantly do things differently than everyone else said and it know that than everyone else said and it know that than everyone else said and it know that it works. I think that as much as the it works. I think that as much as the it works. I think that as much as the titles that you've achieved and um and titles that you've achieved and um and titles that you've achieved and um and your backstory is super impressive and your backstory is super impressive and your backstory is super impressive and all of that stands um forever, right? all of that stands um forever, right? all of that stands um forever, right? You're on the Rushmore of bodybuilding, You're on the Rushmore of bodybuilding, You're on the Rushmore of bodybuilding, that's for sure. This notion that you that's for sure. This notion that you that's for sure. This notion that you went about it differently, right? Like went about it differently, right? Like went about it differently, right? Like you said, you weren't out in California. you said, you weren't out in California. you said, you weren't out in California. Um they called you the shadow cuz you Um they called you the shadow cuz you Um they called you the shadow cuz you disappear and then come back. um the way disappear and then come back. um the way disappear and then come back. um the way you trained, the low volume, you trained, the low volume, you trained, the low volume, high-intensity training, I don't think high-intensity training, I don't think high-intensity training, I don't think people realize just how opposite that people realize just how opposite that people realize just how opposite that was to everything that was being thrown was to everything that was being thrown was to everything that was being thrown at people. And so what it what it told at people. And so what it what it told at people. And so what it what it told me was that one should trust experience. me was that one should trust experience. me was that one should trust experience. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And try things at the margins safely &gt;&gt; And try things at the margins safely &gt;&gt; And try things at the margins safely because often times there's real pearls because often times there's real pearls because often times there's real pearls there. And when there is, you have to there. And when there is, you have to there. And when there is, you have to discard of everything else you hear. And discard of everything else you hear. And discard of everything else you hear. And I hear I'm talking about fitness, but I hear I'm talking about fitness, but I hear I'm talking about fitness, but I've seen this in my science career in I've seen this in my science career in I've seen this in my science career in media and podcasting. I mean, you know, media and podcasting. I mean, you know, media and podcasting. I mean, you know, the number of people that told me like, the number of people that told me like, the number of people that told me like, "Don't do a podcast." Like, you know, "Don't do a podcast." Like, you know, "Don't do a podcast." Like, you know, they're what close family members they're what close family members they're what close family members and scientists told me like, "What are and scientists told me like, "What are and scientists told me like, "What are you doing?" And it's like, now they're you doing?" And it's like, now they're you doing?" And it's like, now they're coming to me asking, "Hey, do you have a coming to me asking, "Hey, do you have a coming to me asking, "Hey, do you have a job? Cuz I want to get out of this job? Cuz I want to get out of this job? Cuz I want to get out of this science thing." It's a it's a grind. Oh, science thing." It's a it's a grind. Oh, science thing." It's a it's a grind. Oh, no. It's it's And like you said, you no. It's it's And like you said, you no. It's it's And like you said, you get you catch so much uh friction early get you catch so much uh friction early get you catch so much uh friction early on. There must be something that pulls on. There must be something that pulls on. There must be something that pulls Iconoclass forward. It's like this. You Iconoclass forward. It's like this. You Iconoclass forward. It's like this. You said, "I have to do it despite said, "I have to do it despite said, "I have to do it despite everything else that's happening." everything else that's happening." everything else that's happening." &gt;&gt; Doesn't matter what's happening, man. I &gt;&gt; Doesn't matter what's happening, man. I &gt;&gt; Doesn't matter what's happening, man. I had to do it. And day by day I was very had to do it. And day by day I was very had to do it. And day by day I was very conscious. I need to do my best today. conscious. I need to do my best today. conscious. I need to do my best today. Every day, every day, every day. And Every day, every day, every day. And Every day, every day, every day. And in that tunnel and uh also you know in that tunnel and uh also you know in that tunnel and uh also you know postc career I talk about my experiences postc career I talk about my experiences postc career I talk about my experiences then and u depression and so on. This then and u depression and so on. This then and u depression and so on. This can affect anybody and actually affects can affect anybody and actually affects can affect anybody and actually affects a lot of athletes from that extreme. a lot of athletes from that extreme. a lot of athletes from that extreme. You're in the extreme tunnel, stress, You're in the extreme tunnel, stress, You're in the extreme tunnel, stress, goals, and then it's suddenly gone. So, goals, and then it's suddenly gone. So, goals, and then it's suddenly gone. So, you don't have this goal that was like you don't have this goal that was like you don't have this goal that was like in a way giving you a lot of dopamine. in a way giving you a lot of dopamine. in a way giving you a lot of dopamine. You can go to the gym, but there's no You can go to the gym, but there's no You can go to the gym, but there's no there's no purpose now really. there's no purpose now really. there's no purpose now really. &gt;&gt; I know someone whose uh child just went &gt;&gt; I know someone whose uh child just went &gt;&gt; I know someone whose uh child just went off to university off to university off to university &gt;&gt; and they were so committed as a single &gt;&gt; and they were so committed as a single &gt;&gt; and they were so committed as a single parent &gt;&gt; that they're in a little bit of an &gt;&gt; that they're in a little bit of an &gt;&gt; that they're in a little bit of an existential crisis, right? existential crisis, right? existential crisis, right? &gt;&gt; They don't have that uh &gt;&gt; They don't have that uh &gt;&gt; They don't have that uh &gt;&gt; who am I without that role? and they'll &gt;&gt; who am I without that role? and they'll &gt;&gt; who am I without that role? and they'll figure it out. But I think it's figure it out. But I think it's figure it out. But I think it's athletes. I think it's this identity athletes. I think it's this identity athletes. I think it's this identity thing some. So where is that boundary thing some. So where is that boundary thing some. So where is that boundary between you need to identify with between you need to identify with between you need to identify with something as it being you and you are it something as it being you and you are it something as it being you and you are it &gt;&gt; in order to really go to great heights &gt;&gt; in order to really go to great heights &gt;&gt; in order to really go to great heights in anything. But then you also have to in anything. But then you also have to in anything. But then you also have to be able to dissociate from that identity be able to dissociate from that identity be able to dissociate from that identity piece. &gt;&gt; Well, that's the question. Who am I? &gt;&gt; Well, that's the question. Who am I? &gt;&gt; Well, that's the question. Who am I? &gt;&gt; That was the question. Who am I now? &gt;&gt; That was the question. Who am I now? &gt;&gt; That was the question. Who am I now? What am I going to do with life? What am What am I going to do with life? What am What am I going to do with life? What am I supposed to do? I was only 35, I supposed to do? I was only 35, I supposed to do? I was only 35, you know, and I've retired. It's like, you know, and I've retired. It's like, you know, and I've retired. It's like, you know, when a when a guy retires at you know, when a when a guy retires at you know, when a when a guy retires at 60, even if he's just been working in a 60, even if he's just been working in a 60, even if he's just been working in a bank or whatever, it's very often that bank or whatever, it's very often that bank or whatever, it's very often that they get depressed because they don't they get depressed because they don't they get depressed because they don't have they're going to work every day and have they're going to work every day and have they're going to work every day and they don't have this uh m, you know, they don't have this uh m, you know, they don't have this uh m, you know, it's not a mission, but they don't have it's not a mission, but they don't have it's not a mission, but they don't have this routine anymore. They don't know this routine anymore. They don't know this routine anymore. They don't know what they're supposed to do with their what they're supposed to do with their what they're supposed to do with their time. Imagine the intensity of an athlete and Imagine the intensity of an athlete and Imagine the intensity of an athlete and then that's not there anymore. then that's not there anymore. then that's not there anymore. So, it took me time to change the So, it took me time to change the So, it took me time to change the mindset from, oh, look what I've lost mindset from, oh, look what I've lost mindset from, oh, look what I've lost and I don't know who I am anymore cuz I and I don't know who I am anymore cuz I and I don't know who I am anymore cuz I was the king and now I'm not or whatever was the king and now I'm not or whatever was the king and now I'm not or whatever to like, to like, to like, yeah, but there was a lot of things I yeah, but there was a lot of things I yeah, but there was a lot of things I couldn't do then. Like, my life was so couldn't do then. Like, my life was so couldn't do then. Like, my life was so restricted then. I wouldn't even go out restricted then. I wouldn't even go out restricted then. I wouldn't even go out if I going to get back after 10:30 cuz I if I going to get back after 10:30 cuz I if I going to get back after 10:30 cuz I got to be at bed at 11:00. I mean, this got to be at bed at 11:00. I mean, this got to be at bed at 11:00. I mean, this was all year. It wasn't just for was all year. It wasn't just for was all year. It wasn't just for competition. Now I'm uh you know doing fairly well Now I'm uh you know doing fairly well Now I'm uh you know doing fairly well financially. Uh I don't have to do anything that I Uh I don't have to do anything that I Uh I don't have to do anything that I don't want to do and I can go and I've don't want to do and I can go and I've don't want to do and I can go and I've always been in love with animals and always been in love with animals and always been in love with animals and wildlife. And I used to sponsor mountain wildlife. And I used to sponsor mountain wildlife. And I used to sponsor mountain gorillas in uh Rwanda and uh Uganda gorillas in uh Rwanda and uh Uganda gorillas in uh Rwanda and uh Uganda because there was like only 600 of them because there was like only 600 of them because there was like only 600 of them in the world. So I used to sponsor them. in the world. So I used to sponsor them. in the world. So I used to sponsor them. So, one of the first things I did was So, one of the first things I did was So, one of the first things I did was went on a safari out to Uganda, gorilla went on a safari out to Uganda, gorilla went on a safari out to Uganda, gorilla trekking in the mountains. And I trekking in the mountains. And I trekking in the mountains. And I couldn't do that before. I mean, maybe I couldn't do that before. I mean, maybe I couldn't do that before. I mean, maybe I could, but in my mind, I couldn't. I could, but in my mind, I couldn't. I could, but in my mind, I couldn't. I could I don't want to take the time off. could I don't want to take the time off. could I don't want to take the time off. So, it started to open up uh more So, it started to open up uh more So, it started to open up uh more possibilities slowly, but it probably possibilities slowly, but it probably possibilities slowly, but it probably took me a couple of years to start to took me a couple of years to start to took me a couple of years to start to come to terms with it. I mean, I had a come to terms with it. I mean, I had a come to terms with it. I mean, I had a business. &gt;&gt; You had kids, too, right? &gt;&gt; You had kids, too, right? &gt;&gt; You had kids, too, right? &gt;&gt; I had a son. [clears throat] Yeah. At &gt;&gt; I had a son. [clears throat] Yeah. At &gt;&gt; I had a son. [clears throat] Yeah. At that point it was coming to end of that point it was coming to end of that point it was coming to end of school age. I had a business but it's school age. I had a business but it's school age. I had a business but it's like where's you know and it's not that where's you know and it's not that where's you know and it's not that exciting. There's not that passion. Uh exciting. There's not that passion. Uh exciting. There's not that passion. Uh so I decided I can do lots of other so I decided I can do lots of other so I decided I can do lots of other things and slowly I started to get things and slowly I started to get things and slowly I started to get comfortable with it and comfortable with it and comfortable with it and I'm whatever I want to be. whatever I want to be. whatever I want to be. You know I'm not You know I'm not You know I'm not uh Mr. Olympia. you're not a uh Mr. Olympia. you're not a uh Mr. Olympia. you're not a scientist. It's what you do. It's not scientist. It's what you do. It's not scientist. It's what you do. It's not who you are, right? It's what you're who you are, right? It's what you're who you are, right? It's what you're doing at the point of time. So, it was a doing at the point of time. So, it was a doing at the point of time. So, it was a whole journey of exploration. And I've whole journey of exploration. And I've whole journey of exploration. And I've always been very good at why, always been very good at why, always been very good at why, you know, I was 21 years old. I started you know, I was 21 years old. I started you know, I was 21 years old. I started bodybuilding. Why? Why is that the best way to train? Why? Why is that the best way to train? Why? Why is that the best way to train? Just because everyone's doing it. Am I Just because everyone's doing it. Am I Just because everyone's doing it. Am I sure? Tried it out. No, it's better to sure? Tried it out. No, it's better to sure? Tried it out. No, it's better to train more briefly. I get better train more briefly. I get better train more briefly. I get better results. So fortunately, I always had results. So fortunately, I always had results. So fortunately, I always had that uh independence of thought. Even that uh independence of thought. Even that uh independence of thought. Even though other guys at the gym saying I'm though other guys at the gym saying I'm though other guys at the gym saying I'm wrong, I'm like, "Okay, you're right. wrong, I'm like, "Okay, you're right. wrong, I'm like, "Okay, you're right. Thank you." Thank you." Thank you." &gt;&gt; It's really interesting because uh you &gt;&gt; It's really interesting because uh you &gt;&gt; It's really interesting because uh you know, we've created this little know, we've created this little know, we've created this little backdrop, this kind of ghost of Mike backdrop, this kind of ghost of Mike backdrop, this kind of ghost of Mike Menser. And for those who don't know Menser. And for those who don't know Menser. And for those who don't know him, he barked when he spoke. He was a him, he barked when he spoke. He was a him, he barked when he spoke. He was a real iconic class. He carried this real iconic class. He carried this real iconic class. He carried this bitterness for never having, you know, bitterness for never having, you know, bitterness for never having, you know, become Mr. Olympia. become Mr. Olympia. become Mr. Olympia. &gt;&gt; I think Mike was too rigid &gt;&gt; I think Mike was too rigid &gt;&gt; I think Mike was too rigid &gt;&gt; in his thoughts. Mhm. &gt;&gt; in his thoughts. Mhm. &gt;&gt; in his thoughts. Mhm. &gt;&gt; You got to be uh a little bit flexible. &gt;&gt; You got to be uh a little bit flexible. &gt;&gt; You got to be uh a little bit flexible. Um yes. Uh mostly her was right, but maybe yes. Uh mostly her was right, but maybe yes. Uh mostly her was right, but maybe for this guy is you know he got to be a for this guy is you know he got to be a for this guy is you know he got to be a little bit flexible and uh I think it little bit flexible and uh I think it little bit flexible and uh I think it was a bit too extreme in the end like was a bit too extreme in the end like was a bit too extreme in the end like training once every 10 or 12 days and so training once every 10 or 12 days and so training once every 10 or 12 days and so on &gt;&gt; and he became unhealthy, right? He &gt;&gt; and he became unhealthy, right? He &gt;&gt; and he became unhealthy, right? He smoked. He was open about it. smoked. He was open about it. smoked. He was open about it. &gt;&gt; This I didn't understand use. &gt;&gt; This I didn't understand use. &gt;&gt; This I didn't understand use. &gt;&gt; I still don't understand it. I still &gt;&gt; I still don't understand it. I still &gt;&gt; I still don't understand it. I still don't understand. I understand ex don't understand. I understand ex don't understand. I understand ex bodybuilders or athletes that don't want bodybuilders or athletes that don't want bodybuilders or athletes that don't want to like, you know, maintain their peak. to like, you know, maintain their peak. to like, you know, maintain their peak. Of course, it's ridiculous. You can't as Of course, it's ridiculous. You can't as Of course, it's ridiculous. You can't as you get older. But I didn't understand you get older. But I didn't understand you get older. But I didn't understand somebody that was in somebody that was in somebody that was in health, fitness, bodybuilding that health, fitness, bodybuilding that health, fitness, bodybuilding that suddenly didn't want to exercise and got suddenly didn't want to exercise and got suddenly didn't want to exercise and got overweight and smoke cigarettes and so overweight and smoke cigarettes and so overweight and smoke cigarettes and so on. I didn't really understand that. on. I didn't really understand that. on. I didn't really understand that. That was one thing I didn't get with That was one thing I didn't get with That was one thing I didn't get with Mike. He was very like pissed off about Mike. He was very like pissed off about Mike. He was very like pissed off about the Mr. Olympia that Arnold won in 1980 the Mr. Olympia that Arnold won in 1980 the Mr. Olympia that Arnold won in 1980 and got disillusioned with the sport and got disillusioned with the sport and got disillusioned with the sport and he carried it around with him. I mean he carried it around with him. I mean he carried it around with him. I mean he one of the first conversations we had he one of the first conversations we had he one of the first conversations we had like when we first met uh he told me like when we first met uh he told me like when we first met uh he told me Arnold is not going to like me and I Arnold is not going to like me and I Arnold is not going to like me and I said not that I really care but why do said not that I really care but why do said not that I really care but why do you think that? And he's like because you think that? And he's like because you think that? And he's like because you're better than him. Well, it's, you you're better than him. Well, it's, you you're better than him. Well, it's, you know, it's debatable, but let's say know, it's debatable, but let's say know, it's debatable, but let's say if I was, why would Arnold give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if I was, why would Arnold give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if I was, why would Arnold give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if he's making movies, 20 mil a movie? I if he's making movies, 20 mil a movie? I if he's making movies, 20 mil a movie? I wouldn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if I was him. He's wouldn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if I was him. He's wouldn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if I was him. He's like, you don't understand Arnold. So, like, you don't understand Arnold. So, like, you don't understand Arnold. So, you know, he was carrying this still you know, he was carrying this still you know, he was carrying this still around with him. Watch, you know, it around with him. Watch, you know, it around with him. Watch, you know, it wasn't healthy. I guess wasn't healthy. I guess wasn't healthy. I guess &gt;&gt; I don't know and I'm not a psychologist, &gt;&gt; I don't know and I'm not a psychologist, &gt;&gt; I don't know and I'm not a psychologist, but I'm going to venture that he wanted but I'm going to venture that he wanted but I'm going to venture that he wanted uh to be a winner, the winner more than uh to be a winner, the winner more than uh to be a winner, the winner more than he probably loved the fitness piece and he probably loved the fitness piece and he probably loved the fitness piece and the and the training piece. And I say the and the training piece. And I say the and the training piece. And I say that because u you know, it sounds like that because u you know, it sounds like that because u you know, it sounds like I'm name dropping here, but I'm name dropping here, but I'm name dropping here, but I'm fortunate to be very good friends with fortunate to be very good friends with fortunate to be very good friends with the great Rick Rubin, right? And Rick the great Rick Rubin, right? And Rick the great Rick Rubin, right? And Rick has worked with so many amazing artists has worked with so many amazing artists has worked with so many amazing artists and he'll tell me stories sometimes and he'll tell me stories sometimes and he'll tell me stories sometimes about people who really didn't make about people who really didn't make about people who really didn't make music or do comedy because they loved music or do comedy because they loved music or do comedy because they loved music and comedy. They wanted to be music and comedy. They wanted to be music and comedy. They wanted to be loved. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; When they got maybe attacked about a &gt;&gt; When they got maybe attacked about a &gt;&gt; When they got maybe attacked about a song not being as good as their last song not being as good as their last song not being as good as their last song, it crushed them. And he would say, song, it crushed them. And he would say, song, it crushed them. And he would say, "Just go back and make music." "Just go back and make music." "Just go back and make music." &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And and this is one of the things that &gt;&gt; And and this is one of the things that &gt;&gt; And and this is one of the things that makes Rick so brilliant. And but then he makes Rick so brilliant. And but then he makes Rick so brilliant. And but then he eventually he would share these stories eventually he would share these stories eventually he would share these stories in private of course that some people in private of course that some people in private of course that some people aren't doing the thing for the thing. aren't doing the thing for the thing. aren't doing the thing for the thing. It's about they weren't loved as a kid It's about they weren't loved as a kid It's about they weren't loved as a kid or they need the adoration. And so or they need the adoration. And so or they need the adoration. And so it's not re maybe Mike could we're it's not re maybe Mike could we're it's not re maybe Mike could we're speculating here but could smoke speculating here but could smoke speculating here but could smoke cigarettes and let himself be out of cigarettes and let himself be out of cigarettes and let himself be out of shape because it wasn't really about shape because it wasn't really about shape because it wasn't really about bodybuilding. He just maybe needed to be bodybuilding. He just maybe needed to be bodybuilding. He just maybe needed to be a champion so he could validate a champion so he could validate a champion so he could validate something. We don't know. Right. Um, but something. We don't know. Right. Um, but something. We don't know. Right. Um, but &gt;&gt; I always got the impression with Mike &gt;&gt; I always got the impression with Mike &gt;&gt; I always got the impression with Mike that &gt;&gt; it wasn't really anything to do with &gt;&gt; it wasn't really anything to do with &gt;&gt; it wasn't really anything to do with health. I mean, it's not a competitive health. I mean, it's not a competitive health. I mean, it's not a competitive level. Let's say maybe it could be. level. Let's say maybe it could be. level. Let's say maybe it could be. &gt;&gt; But you can be healthy with it. &gt;&gt; But you can be healthy with it. &gt;&gt; But you can be healthy with it. &gt;&gt; But I love to train, man. &gt;&gt; But I love to train, man. &gt;&gt; But I love to train, man. &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I mean, it doesn't matter what it is. I &gt;&gt; I mean, it doesn't matter what it is. I &gt;&gt; I mean, it doesn't matter what it is. I you &gt;&gt; I could hike, I could ride a bike, could &gt;&gt; I could hike, I could ride a bike, could &gt;&gt; I could hike, I could ride a bike, could do Pilates, I could do yoga, do Pilates, I could do yoga, do Pilates, I could do yoga, you know, done boxing, done loads of you know, done boxing, done loads of you know, done boxing, done loads of things. Uh, but I just like to exercise things. Uh, but I just like to exercise things. Uh, but I just like to exercise and I like to feel good and it's nothing and I like to feel good and it's nothing and I like to feel good and it's nothing competitive anymore. It's like this is competitive anymore. It's like this is competitive anymore. It's like this is my vehicle that I've got to experience my vehicle that I've got to experience my vehicle that I've got to experience life in a physical reality. This is it. life in a physical reality. This is it. life in a physical reality. This is it. If this isn't working well, I'm not If this isn't working well, I'm not If this isn't working well, I'm not going to have much fun. Yeah. I'm not going to have much fun. Yeah. I'm not going to have much fun. Yeah. I'm not going to have a good quality of life. going to have a good quality of life. going to have a good quality of life. And what do I want for the next, you And what do I want for the next, you And what do I want for the next, you know, however long? I want to be know, however long? I want to be know, however long? I want to be functional. I want to be able to do functional. I want to be able to do functional. I want to be able to do these things that I love to do. And I these things that I love to do. And I these things that I love to do. And I want to be around and be healthy for my want to be around and be healthy for my want to be around and be healthy for my kids. And uh kids. And uh kids. And uh I just love to exercise, man. I do I just love to exercise, man. I do I just love to exercise, man. I do something every day, different things, something every day, different things, something every day, different things, not lifting weights. I do that maybe not lifting weights. I do that maybe not lifting weights. I do that maybe couple of times a week, moderate couple of times a week, moderate couple of times a week, moderate weights, because I don't want to I've weights, because I don't want to I've weights, because I don't want to I've got injuries. I [clears throat] got a got injuries. I [clears throat] got a got injuries. I [clears throat] got a torn bicep on this side, a torn tricep torn bicep on this side, a torn tricep torn bicep on this side, a torn tricep tendon, and some shoulder issues. I tendon, and some shoulder issues. I tendon, and some shoulder issues. I don't have any pain or anything, but don't have any pain or anything, but don't have any pain or anything, but it's just mechanically my right side is it's just mechanically my right side is it's just mechanically my right side is stronger than my left, so you look lean stronger than my left, so you look lean stronger than my left, so you look lean and strong. and strong. and strong. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm lean. I'm strong. I don't &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm lean. I'm strong. I don't &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm lean. I'm strong. I don't uh push too much with the weights. And uh push too much with the weights. And uh push too much with the weights. And you kept your height. You know, a lot of you kept your height. You know, a lot of you kept your height. You know, a lot of people who don't train. people who don't train. people who don't train. &gt;&gt; It was interesting, man. I didn't keep &gt;&gt; It was interesting, man. I didn't keep &gt;&gt; It was interesting, man. I didn't keep my height. my height. my height. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; I got taller. [laughter] &gt;&gt; I got taller. [laughter] &gt;&gt; I got taller. [laughter] &gt;&gt; No, I told I posted uh about a month &gt;&gt; No, I told I posted uh about a month &gt;&gt; No, I told I posted uh about a month ago, six weeks on my page, just teasing ago, six weeks on my page, just teasing ago, six weeks on my page, just teasing people. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Because I went to get some orthratics in &gt;&gt; Because I went to get some orthratics in &gt;&gt; Because I went to get some orthratics in my shoes, you know, to balance uh out. my shoes, you know, to balance uh out. my shoes, you know, to balance uh out. And uh the guy's got the measuring And uh the guy's got the measuring And uh the guy's got the measuring thing. So, I just stood on and said, thing. So, I just stood on and said, thing. So, I just stood on and said, "You're 183." Like 18. I've never been "You're 183." Like 18. I've never been "You're 183." Like 18. I've never been more than 18. more than 18. more than 18. &gt;&gt; Metric system, folks. &gt;&gt; Metric system, folks. &gt;&gt; Metric system, folks. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; It's like six foot, right? I was 10 510 &gt;&gt; It's like six foot, right? I was 10 510 &gt;&gt; It's like six foot, right? I was 10 510 and a half 5'11 maybe. So, did I and a half 5'11 maybe. So, did I and a half 5'11 maybe. So, did I physically grow bone? No. physically grow bone? No. physically grow bone? No. &gt;&gt; That's what I thought cuz I'm 6'1. I &gt;&gt; That's what I thought cuz I'm 6'1. I &gt;&gt; That's what I thought cuz I'm 6'1. I heard you're 510. Walked in thinking heard you're 510. Walked in thinking heard you're 510. Walked in thinking maybe people usually lose a little bit maybe people usually lose a little bit maybe people usually lose a little bit of height unless they train real hard of height unless they train real hard of height unless they train real hard and they make sure to take great care of and they make sure to take great care of and they make sure to take great care of themselves and then I walk in and you themselves and then I walk in and you themselves and then I walk in and you Yeah. You're about 6 feet. Yeah. You're about 6 feet. Yeah. You're about 6 feet. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the thing is why? &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the thing is why? &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the thing is why? Because I've been doing Pilates and Because I've been doing Pilates and Because I've been doing Pilates and functional training and resetting the functional training and resetting the functional training and resetting the shoulders back. My posture is much shoulders back. My posture is much shoulders back. My posture is much better. &gt;&gt; So, I'm standing straighter, which gives &gt;&gt; So, I'm standing straighter, which gives &gt;&gt; So, I'm standing straighter, which gives me an extra inch of height. So, I've me an extra inch of height. So, I've me an extra inch of height. So, I've actually got taller. No, I haven't taken actually got taller. No, I haven't taken actually got taller. No, I haven't taken huge amounts of growth hormone and huge amounts of growth hormone and huge amounts of growth hormone and suddenly grew when I was 60 years old. suddenly grew when I was 60 years old. suddenly grew when I was 60 years old. It's just my posture and the way I It's just my posture and the way I It's just my posture and the way I stand. There's less curvatures shoulder stand. There's less curvatures shoulder stand. There's less curvatures shoulder there. So, you lose a bit of height there. So, you lose a bit of height there. So, you lose a bit of height because when you lift and your pecs get because when you lift and your pecs get because when you lift and your pecs get bigger and your lats, your shoulders bigger and your lats, your shoulders bigger and your lats, your shoulders rotate forward. You're trying to hunch rotate forward. You're trying to hunch rotate forward. You're trying to hunch forward. So, you're sitting a little bit forward. So, you're sitting a little bit forward. So, you're sitting a little bit lower. I didn't even know. I was like lower. I didn't even know. I was like lower. I didn't even know. I was like measuring myself like wow that's just measuring myself like wow that's just measuring myself like wow that's just because I'm standing straighter and my because I'm standing straighter and my because I'm standing straighter and my shoulders are back. The lost that shoulders are back. The lost that shoulders are back. The lost that &gt;&gt; cervical arch it's more is straighter &gt;&gt; cervical arch it's more is straighter &gt;&gt; cervical arch it's more is straighter now and now and now and &gt;&gt; what we call the text neck for the kids &gt;&gt; what we call the text neck for the kids &gt;&gt; what we call the text neck for the kids forward shoulders forward you know a lot forward shoulders forward you know a lot forward shoulders forward you know a lot boxers have it because they're always boxers have it because they're always boxers have it because they're always like forward with their shoulders. like forward with their shoulders. like forward with their shoulders. &gt;&gt; So I've just got my posture really good. &gt;&gt; So I've just got my posture really good. &gt;&gt; So I've just got my posture really good. I've done yoga I've done yoga I've done yoga &gt;&gt; for like seven years. I've done &gt;&gt; for like seven years. I've done &gt;&gt; for like seven years. I've done pilateses. Do some functional training. pilateses. Do some functional training. pilateses. Do some functional training. So, it's all about getting this thing in So, it's all about getting this thing in So, it's all about getting this thing in to the best shape. I don't have any to the best shape. I don't have any to the best shape. I don't have any pain, joint pains. I had hip replacement pain, joint pains. I had hip replacement pain, joint pains. I had hip replacement like 14 months ago, which is great. like 14 months ago, which is great. like 14 months ago, which is great. &gt;&gt; And you're just [snorts] &gt;&gt; And you're just [snorts] &gt;&gt; And you're just [snorts] train for what I need. What do I need train for what I need. What do I need train for what I need. What do I need right now? I need some good cardio, right now? I need some good cardio, right now? I need some good cardio, &gt;&gt; but not excessive. So, I do some sprints &gt;&gt; but not excessive. So, I do some sprints &gt;&gt; but not excessive. So, I do some sprints and some bikes outside. I do a little and some bikes outside. I do a little and some bikes outside. I do a little weight training in order to maintain. weight training in order to maintain. weight training in order to maintain. Not trying to build nothing, just trying Not trying to build nothing, just trying Not trying to build nothing, just trying to maintain. to maintain. to maintain. &gt;&gt; What's a split? People are going to want &gt;&gt; What's a split? People are going to want &gt;&gt; What's a split? People are going to want to know. to know. to know. &gt;&gt; I don't even have a split, man. &gt;&gt; I don't even have a split, man. &gt;&gt; I don't even have a split, man. [laughter] I go in, I generally do some upper body I go in, I generally do some upper body I go in, I generally do some upper body once a week and some lower body once a once a week and some lower body once a once a week and some lower body once a week. pushing, pulling, some week. pushing, pulling, some week. pushing, pulling, some &gt;&gt; Yeah, I do, you know, things that I can &gt;&gt; Yeah, I do, you know, things that I can &gt;&gt; Yeah, I do, you know, things that I can do. Uh, with chest and shoulders is very do. Uh, with chest and shoulders is very do. Uh, with chest and shoulders is very light because of the pushing. light because of the pushing. light because of the pushing. &gt;&gt; Uh, so I do some dumbbell press. &gt;&gt; Uh, so I do some dumbbell press. &gt;&gt; Uh, so I do some dumbbell press. &gt;&gt; Any compound movements for your lower &gt;&gt; Any compound movements for your lower &gt;&gt; Any compound movements for your lower body &gt;&gt; at this point? No, because my legs are &gt;&gt; at this point? No, because my legs are &gt;&gt; at this point? No, because my legs are really big. really big. really big. &gt;&gt; Like because I didn't have any injuries &gt;&gt; Like because I didn't have any injuries &gt;&gt; Like because I didn't have any injuries on the lower body, I think I've on the lower body, I think I've on the lower body, I think I've maintained a lot more muscle mass here. maintained a lot more muscle mass here. maintained a lot more muscle mass here. &gt;&gt; Uh, &gt;&gt; Uh, &gt;&gt; Uh, so I do bike. Uh, I do some, so I do bike. Uh, I do some, so I do bike. Uh, I do some, uh, what's it called? Bulgarian squats uh, what's it called? Bulgarian squats uh, what's it called? Bulgarian squats with light weights. So, I can do one with light weights. So, I can do one with light weights. So, I can do one side at a time, side at a time, side at a time, &gt;&gt; but like heavy leg presses and things &gt;&gt; but like heavy leg presses and things &gt;&gt; but like heavy leg presses and things like that. Why? like that. Why? like that. Why? &gt;&gt; Well, &gt;&gt; Well, &gt;&gt; Well, &gt;&gt; why would I do it? It's because &gt;&gt; why would I do it? It's because &gt;&gt; why would I do it? It's because potentially &gt;&gt; uh risking an injury and yeah, you can &gt;&gt; uh risking an injury and yeah, you can &gt;&gt; uh risking an injury and yeah, you can leg press a ton of weight, but you can't leg press a ton of weight, but you can't leg press a ton of weight, but you can't touch your toes. What's the point, you touch your toes. What's the point, you touch your toes. What's the point, you know? &gt;&gt; Well, and you're also maintaining uh &gt;&gt; Well, and you're also maintaining uh &gt;&gt; Well, and you're also maintaining uh some muscle that you've laid down for some muscle that you've laid down for some muscle that you've laid down for many decades. is not going to go many decades. is not going to go many decades. is not going to go anywhere as long as it gets a little bit anywhere as long as it gets a little bit anywhere as long as it gets a little bit of stimulation. of stimulation. of stimulation. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. For to get early access to function. For to get early access to function. For people that are interested in longevity, people that are interested in longevity, people that are interested in longevity, who are maybe a little bit quote unquote who are maybe a little bit quote unquote who are maybe a little bit quote unquote lighter boned, do you think they should lighter boned, do you think they should lighter boned, do you think they should emphasize cardio more in strength less emphasize cardio more in strength less emphasize cardio more in strength less or the opposite? Whereas you are able to or the opposite? Whereas you are able to or the opposite? Whereas you are able to get away with doing quite a lot of get away with doing quite a lot of get away with doing quite a lot of cardio, pilates, and yoga, but you don't cardio, pilates, and yoga, but you don't cardio, pilates, and yoga, but you don't need much resistance training. And we need much resistance training. And we need much resistance training. And we don't talk about this anymore. It used don't talk about this anymore. It used don't talk about this anymore. It used to be endomorph, ectomorph, misomorph. to be endomorph, ectomorph, misomorph. to be endomorph, ectomorph, misomorph. Nobody talks like that anymore. Nobody talks like that anymore. Nobody talks like that anymore. &gt;&gt; I had excessive amounts of muscle mass &gt;&gt; I had excessive amounts of muscle mass &gt;&gt; I had excessive amounts of muscle mass &gt;&gt; actually. Uh I was a few years ago still &gt;&gt; actually. Uh I was a few years ago still &gt;&gt; actually. Uh I was a few years ago still at like 250, you know, just on TRT and at like 250, you know, just on TRT and at like 250, you know, just on TRT and some training and I went for a checkup. some training and I went for a checkup. some training and I went for a checkup. My blood pressure was a bit high and it My blood pressure was a bit high and it My blood pressure was a bit high and it just triggered something in me like I've just triggered something in me like I've just triggered something in me like I've been eating still like a bodybuilder, been eating still like a bodybuilder, been eating still like a bodybuilder, you know, frequent meals, chicken breast you know, frequent meals, chicken breast you know, frequent meals, chicken breast and rice. I don't know, it's just habit. and rice. I don't know, it's just habit. and rice. I don't know, it's just habit. So I kept doing it. I said, I'm going to So I kept doing it. I said, I'm going to So I kept doing it. I said, I'm going to go on a lower protein diet, uh, more go on a lower protein diet, uh, more go on a lower protein diet, uh, more plant-based, and, uh, lose some weight, right? But and, uh, lose some weight, right? But and, uh, lose some weight, right? But which weight am I going to lose? I'm not which weight am I going to lose? I'm not which weight am I going to lose? I'm not I'm not fat, so I guess I'm going to I'm not fat, so I guess I'm going to I'm not fat, so I guess I'm going to lose muscle mass. But it was interesting lose muscle mass. But it was interesting lose muscle mass. But it was interesting uh exercise in that I dedicated my whole uh exercise in that I dedicated my whole uh exercise in that I dedicated my whole life to earlier life to building muscle life to earlier life to building muscle life to earlier life to building muscle mass. Now, I'm actively trying to lose mass. Now, I'm actively trying to lose mass. Now, I'm actively trying to lose it uh for health reasons, but also I it uh for health reasons, but also I it uh for health reasons, but also I wanted to check my ego. wanted to check my ego. wanted to check my ego. You know, You know, You know, I think everyone else was more concerned I think everyone else was more concerned I think everyone else was more concerned than me about, oh, he's looking skinny than me about, oh, he's looking skinny than me about, oh, he's looking skinny now and everything. Yeah, I don't care, now and everything. Yeah, I don't care, now and everything. Yeah, I don't care, you know. I don't care. I'm just doing you know. I don't care. I'm just doing you know. I don't care. I'm just doing what I think is best for my health. I'm what I think is best for my health. I'm what I think is best for my health. I'm losing some weight because I think uh if losing some weight because I think uh if losing some weight because I think uh if you're carrying a lot of weight when you you're carrying a lot of weight when you you're carrying a lot of weight when you get older, even if it's muscle, I don't get older, even if it's muscle, I don't get older, even if it's muscle, I don't think it's ideal, right? So, I brought think it's ideal, right? So, I brought think it's ideal, right? So, I brought my weight down from 250 to 230. my weight down from 250 to 230. my weight down from 250 to 230. And uh at that point I put more protein And uh at that point I put more protein And uh at that point I put more protein and fat. So right now I eat probably and fat. So right now I eat probably and fat. So right now I eat probably twice a day in between 12 and 10 and twice a day in between 12 and 10 and twice a day in between 12 and 10 and might have a shake or something like might have a shake or something like might have a shake or something like that. So it's more higher protein and that. So it's more higher protein and that. So it's more higher protein and fats, bit less carbs, uh intermittent fats, bit less carbs, uh intermittent fats, bit less carbs, uh intermittent fasting and I feel great on it. I go in fasting and I feel great on it. I go in fasting and I feel great on it. I go in the morning, get up, do my things. And the morning, get up, do my things. And the morning, get up, do my things. And speaking about breathing, I mean I came speaking about breathing, I mean I came speaking about breathing, I mean I came a lot more conscious about that through a lot more conscious about that through a lot more conscious about that through doing yoga practices. At one point I doing yoga practices. At one point I doing yoga practices. At one point I really got into yoga and the breathing really got into yoga and the breathing really got into yoga and the breathing different breathing techniques were different breathing techniques were different breathing techniques were different thing. I mean you can do different thing. I mean you can do different thing. I mean you can do breathing to like produce DMT and like breathing to like produce DMT and like breathing to like produce DMT and like you can really shift your yourself just you can really shift your yourself just you can really shift your yourself just with breathing. It's amazing what you with breathing. It's amazing what you with breathing. It's amazing what you can do. So I went through all that and can do. So I went through all that and can do. So I went through all that and became much more conscious about became much more conscious about became much more conscious about breathing and trying to breathe through breathing and trying to breathe through breathing and trying to breathe through the nose where in the gym you [gasps] the nose where in the gym you [gasps] the nose where in the gym you [gasps] know naturally got your mouth open and know naturally got your mouth open and know naturally got your mouth open and trying to gulp in as much oxygen as I trying to gulp in as much oxygen as I trying to gulp in as much oxygen as I can. So uh breathing is definitely can. So uh breathing is definitely can. So uh breathing is definitely important. And I try to you I'm doing important. And I try to you I'm doing important. And I try to you I'm doing yoga try to breathe through the nose and yoga try to breathe through the nose and yoga try to breathe through the nose and uh become more conscious about breathing uh become more conscious about breathing uh become more conscious about breathing and uh I feel like and uh I feel like and uh I feel like I can [clears throat] I can [clears throat] I can [clears throat] speak to my whole body like anywhere I speak to my whole body like anywhere I speak to my whole body like anywhere I want to go speak to my cells uh contact want to go speak to my cells uh contact want to go speak to my cells uh contact my organs and check in with them and my organs and check in with them and my organs and check in with them and make sure everything's all right. I had make sure everything's all right. I had make sure everything's all right. I had exterior muscle consciousness but exterior muscle consciousness but exterior muscle consciousness but nothing else. Now I'm whole body nothing else. Now I'm whole body nothing else. Now I'm whole body conscious and uh conscious and uh conscious and uh health has a lot to do with the mind health has a lot to do with the mind health has a lot to do with the mind maybe more than we even realize. Uh I maybe more than we even realize. Uh I maybe more than we even realize. Uh I think unresolved traumas think unresolved traumas think unresolved traumas uh leads to a lot of disease. So it's uh leads to a lot of disease. So it's uh leads to a lot of disease. So it's good to explore yourself and your mind good to explore yourself and your mind good to explore yourself and your mind and how you look at things and maybe and how you look at things and maybe and how you look at things and maybe change the way you look at things and change the way you look at things and change the way you look at things and don't carry this weight around. Uh don't carry this weight around. Uh don't carry this weight around. Uh I have a friend that practices different I have a friend that practices different I have a friend that practices different kinds of medicines and uh he had three kinds of medicines and uh he had three kinds of medicines and uh he had three cancers and is convinced that it's uh cancers and is convinced that it's uh cancers and is convinced that it's uh traumab based. traumab based. traumab based. &gt;&gt; Well certainly there are data and there &gt;&gt; Well certainly there are data and there &gt;&gt; Well certainly there are data and there are a lot of real life examples where it are a lot of real life examples where it are a lot of real life examples where it when people hold in their pain and in when people hold in their pain and in when people hold in their pain and in particular shame. particular shame. particular shame. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It causes disease. Uh we've had a couple &gt;&gt; It causes disease. Uh we've had a couple &gt;&gt; It causes disease. Uh we've had a couple guests have talked about this. Um but guests have talked about this. Um but guests have talked about this. Um but it's kind of interesting. The original it's kind of interesting. The original it's kind of interesting. The original naming of the type A personality was all naming of the type A personality was all naming of the type A personality was all around people who were um prone to heart around people who were um prone to heart around people who were um prone to heart attack because they didn't actually let attack because they didn't actually let attack because they didn't actually let out what was going on for them. out what was going on for them. out what was going on for them. &gt;&gt; And it's been a ride for the psychology &gt;&gt; And it's been a ride for the psychology &gt;&gt; And it's been a ride for the psychology science world to try and figure this science world to try and figure this science world to try and figure this out. I think we'd be remiss if we don't out. I think we'd be remiss if we don't out. I think we'd be remiss if we don't talk a little bit about psychedelics and talk a little bit about psychedelics and talk a little bit about psychedelics and your experience with those, but I want your experience with those, but I want your experience with those, but I want to preface that with saying that my to preface that with saying that my to preface that with saying that my understanding is that right now you're understanding is that right now you're understanding is that right now you're not a psychonaut, not a psychonaut, not a psychonaut, &gt;&gt; but you did explore, which I find really &gt;&gt; but you did explore, which I find really &gt;&gt; but you did explore, which I find really interesting because people think if you interesting because people think if you interesting because people think if you start something, you got to do it start something, you got to do it start something, you got to do it forever. &gt;&gt; Uh, with the exception of maybe fitness &gt;&gt; Uh, with the exception of maybe fitness &gt;&gt; Uh, with the exception of maybe fitness and sleep and all the basic health and sleep and all the basic health and sleep and all the basic health stuff. What's so striking is it seems stuff. What's so striking is it seems stuff. What's so striking is it seems like you're able to go into something like you're able to go into something like you're able to go into something deep, get the best of it, and then get deep, get the best of it, and then get deep, get the best of it, and then get out. Yeah, that's what I did with out. Yeah, that's what I did with out. Yeah, that's what I did with psychedelics. I feel I wouldn't say I'll psychedelics. I feel I wouldn't say I'll psychedelics. I feel I wouldn't say I'll never do psychedelics again because I never do psychedelics again because I never do psychedelics again because I may be in a different space and may feel may be in a different space and may feel may be in a different space and may feel the need to do it, but I went through the need to do it, but I went through the need to do it, but I went through that whole experience and it was that whole experience and it was that whole experience and it was amazing. I mean, it gives you a totally amazing. I mean, it gives you a totally amazing. I mean, it gives you a totally different perspective on life. different perspective on life. different perspective on life. &gt;&gt; You said 97 was the last Olympia. You &gt;&gt; You said 97 was the last Olympia. You &gt;&gt; You said 97 was the last Olympia. You realize you're done. 98 through 2000. realize you're done. 98 through 2000. realize you're done. 98 through 2000. You're kind of going through a reframe. You're kind of going through a reframe. You're kind of going through a reframe. &gt;&gt; Yeah. A whole lot of things happened as &gt;&gt; Yeah. A whole lot of things happened as &gt;&gt; Yeah. A whole lot of things happened as well in my personal life. Um, well in my personal life. Um, well in my personal life. Um, my nephew passed away at 15 years old in my nephew passed away at 15 years old in my nephew passed away at 15 years old in my house and there was no explanation. my house and there was no explanation. my house and there was no explanation. &gt;&gt; Oh [snorts] man. &gt;&gt; Oh [snorts] man. &gt;&gt; Oh [snorts] man. &gt;&gt; Uh, it was very close. Um, my marriage &gt;&gt; Uh, it was very close. Um, my marriage &gt;&gt; Uh, it was very close. Um, my marriage was everything was falling apart, you was everything was falling apart, you was everything was falling apart, you know, everything was falling apart in my know, everything was falling apart in my know, everything was falling apart in my life, but maybe it had to get uh life, but maybe it had to get uh life, but maybe it had to get uh reorganized. And uh I think where I went reorganized. And uh I think where I went reorganized. And uh I think where I went through a period like I just want to through a period like I just want to through a period like I just want to have fun here and just you know I don't have fun here and just you know I don't have fun here and just you know I don't want to really go too deeply into stuff want to really go too deeply into stuff want to really go too deeply into stuff because it was I kind of get into it and because it was I kind of get into it and because it was I kind of get into it and it was too heavy. So I'm like I'm just it was too heavy. So I'm like I'm just it was too heavy. So I'm like I'm just going to have fun. And uh later on a going to have fun. And uh later on a going to have fun. And uh later on a friend of mine was like you should try friend of mine was like you should try friend of mine was like you should try DMT. He was over in California and he DMT. He was over in California and he DMT. He was over in California and he had some farmer grade stuff and I read had some farmer grade stuff and I read had some farmer grade stuff and I read &gt;&gt; only in California. &gt;&gt; only in California. &gt;&gt; only in California. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I read this book when I was living &gt;&gt; Yeah. I read this book when I was living &gt;&gt; Yeah. I read this book when I was living in Amsterdam for a couple of years. in Amsterdam for a couple of years. in Amsterdam for a couple of years. &gt;&gt; There was no internet. So, I read this &gt;&gt; There was no internet. So, I read this &gt;&gt; There was no internet. So, I read this book DMT, the spirit molecule. book DMT, the spirit molecule. book DMT, the spirit molecule. &gt;&gt; You can [clears throat] get that all &gt;&gt; You can [clears throat] get that all &gt;&gt; You can [clears throat] get that all about DMT. So, I'd heard about it. I about DMT. So, I'd heard about it. I about DMT. So, I'd heard about it. I like, "Yeah, I heard about that stuff." like, "Yeah, I heard about that stuff." like, "Yeah, I heard about that stuff." Uh, so we got the powder and I smoked it Uh, so we got the powder and I smoked it Uh, so we got the powder and I smoked it and I saw the I saw the I saw the uh behind uh behind uh behind reality if you like the construction, reality if you like the construction, reality if you like the construction, the numbers and the geometry and the numbers and the geometry and the numbers and the geometry and everything's connected. Uh and everything's connected. Uh and everything's connected. Uh and everything's one thing and we're having everything's one thing and we're having everything's one thing and we're having an experience and uh we can choose you an experience and uh we can choose you an experience and uh we can choose you know to experience good bad whatever in know to experience good bad whatever in know to experience good bad whatever in this uh in this reality and it's a this uh in this reality and it's a this uh in this reality and it's a temporary experience and everything is temporary experience and everything is temporary experience and everything is forever there's no time and all these forever there's no time and all these forever there's no time and all these things woof came in uh but DMT is a very things woof came in uh but DMT is a very things woof came in uh but DMT is a very short experience like 10 seconds or short experience like 10 seconds or short experience like 10 seconds or something so then I got invited on this something so then I got invited on this something so then I got invited on this podcast in uh in England land called podcast in uh in England land called podcast in uh in England land called London Real. London Real. London Real. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it was a very early small &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it was a very early small &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it was a very early small podcast at the time. They invited me podcast at the time. They invited me podcast at the time. They invited me down. I said, "It sounds interesting down. I said, "It sounds interesting down. I said, "It sounds interesting because I like to talk. I can talk about because I like to talk. I can talk about because I like to talk. I can talk about different subjects if you want. different subjects if you want. different subjects if you want. Whatever." So, we're back, you know, Whatever." So, we're back, you know, Whatever." So, we're back, you know, before we do the podcast. We're talking before we do the podcast. We're talking before we do the podcast. We're talking away and I don't know. It came in a away and I don't know. It came in a away and I don't know. It came in a conversation. Yeah. DMT. Oh, yeah. I've conversation. Yeah. DMT. Oh, yeah. I've conversation. Yeah. DMT. Oh, yeah. I've done that. What? You've done it? Oh, done that. What? You've done it? Oh, done that. What? You've done it? Oh, would you be willing to talk about it on would you be willing to talk about it on would you be willing to talk about it on the podcast? I says, "London real or the podcast? I says, "London real or the podcast? I says, "London real or London [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] was the name of the London [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] was the name of the London [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] was the name of the [laughter] podcast, man." [laughter] podcast, man." [laughter] podcast, man." And uh And uh And uh I talked about the psychedelics and my I talked about the psychedelics and my I talked about the psychedelics and my experience and it went absolutely huge experience and it went absolutely huge experience and it went absolutely huge because this was I think it was like because this was I think it was like because this was I think it was like 2012. &gt;&gt; That's early. &gt;&gt; That's early. &gt;&gt; That's early. &gt;&gt; But wow, people were stopping me on the &gt;&gt; But wow, people were stopping me on the &gt;&gt; But wow, people were stopping me on the street and they weren't stopping me street and they weren't stopping me street and they weren't stopping me because you're Mr. you're that guy on because you're Mr. you're that guy on because you're Mr. you're that guy on Oh, it's fascinating what you talked Oh, it's fascinating what you talked Oh, it's fascinating what you talked about. And uh [snorts] about. And uh [snorts] about. And uh [snorts] and because I was on that show and because I was on that show and because I was on that show then this uh camp from Costa Rica, they then this uh camp from Costa Rica, they then this uh camp from Costa Rica, they got in touch with me and we're in got in touch with me and we're in got in touch with me and we're in Iawaskka camp. Uh I did it once in Iawaskka camp. Uh I did it once in Iawaskka camp. Uh I did it once in Spain, Iaska. It was a great experience Spain, Iaska. It was a great experience Spain, Iaska. It was a great experience and then these guys got in touch with me and then these guys got in touch with me and then these guys got in touch with me and they said, "How do you feel about and they said, "How do you feel about and they said, "How do you feel about coming to Costa Rica and being like a coming to Costa Rica and being like a coming to Costa Rica and being like a headliner?" I said, "I don't know about headliner?" I said, "I don't know about headliner?" I said, "I don't know about that, man." It's very private. I just that, man." It's very private. I just that, man." It's very private. I just want to do my own thing. Like in Spain, want to do my own thing. Like in Spain, want to do my own thing. Like in Spain, nobody knows who I am. So, I did it once nobody knows who I am. So, I did it once nobody knows who I am. So, I did it once there and like I'm just doing my thing, there and like I'm just doing my thing, there and like I'm just doing my thing, man. I don't want to be, you know, man. I don't want to be, you know, man. I don't want to be, you know, you're diary and I'm just here for my you're diary and I'm just here for my you're diary and I'm just here for my personal experience. And they're like, personal experience. And they're like, personal experience. And they're like, well, when it's the ceremonies, that's well, when it's the ceremonies, that's well, when it's the ceremonies, that's the shaman and the facilitators and the shaman and the facilitators and the shaman and the facilitators and you're just another guy once you go in you're just another guy once you go in you're just another guy once you go in there, but during the day, can you look there, but during the day, can you look there, but during the day, can you look after the guys? after the guys? after the guys? I said, I don't know. Okay, let me give I said, I don't know. Okay, let me give I said, I don't know. Okay, let me give it a try. and people from the fitness it a try. and people from the fitness it a try. and people from the fitness industry or the gym or whatever were industry or the gym or whatever were industry or the gym or whatever were coming and I said why you're here because I was and I said why you're here because I was and I said why you're here because I was kind of interested. I was kind of kind of interested. I was kind of kind of interested. I was kind of curious but I didn't know. I didn't know curious but I didn't know. I didn't know curious but I didn't know. I didn't know if it's for me. Maybe it's a hippie if it's for me. Maybe it's a hippie if it's for me. Maybe it's a hippie thing. Maybe I don't know. But when I thing. Maybe I don't know. But when I thing. Maybe I don't know. But when I saw that you're doing it, I said it's saw that you're doing it, I said it's saw that you're doing it, I said it's cool if Dorian's doing it. Let's go. So cool if Dorian's doing it. Let's go. So cool if Dorian's doing it. Let's go. So we did three camps there with like 20 we did three camps there with like 20 we did three camps there with like 20 people ahead. people ahead. people ahead. In one week you do four sessions. In one week you do four sessions. In one week you do four sessions. So, I probably done like 20some Iawaska So, I probably done like 20some Iawaska So, I probably done like 20some Iawaska ceremonies and each time was different. Each time I and each time was different. Each time I and each time was different. Each time I learned something. learned something. learned something. Uh, but I got to the stage where I'm Uh, but I got to the stage where I'm Uh, but I got to the stage where I'm like, what more can I learn? I'm not I'm not what more can I learn? I'm not I'm not what more can I learn? I'm not I'm not coming here to be a t, you know, coming here to be a t, you know, coming here to be a t, you know, psychedelic tourist. They call them psychedelic tourist. They call them psychedelic tourist. They call them people that keep going back, keep going people that keep going back, keep going people that keep going back, keep going back. Well, if it was helping you, back. Well, if it was helping you, back. Well, if it was helping you, why don't you keep going back once why don't you keep going back once why don't you keep going back once you've learned? Uh I can't remember who you've learned? Uh I can't remember who you've learned? Uh I can't remember who it was but they said it was but they said it was but they said you know once you pick up the receiver you know once you pick up the receiver you know once you pick up the receiver and you get the message put it down and you get the message put it down and you get the message put it down right so it was over a period of time right so it was over a period of time right so it was over a period of time and I was like wow I just I don't feel and I was like wow I just I don't feel and I was like wow I just I don't feel like I need to do it anymore or I want like I need to do it anymore or I want like I need to do it anymore or I want to do it anymore it may change but I to do it anymore it may change but I to do it anymore it may change but I feel like I learn I learned what I feel like I learn I learned what I feel like I learn I learned what I needed to learn needed to learn needed to learn &gt;&gt; and uh I helped other people on their &gt;&gt; and uh I helped other people on their &gt;&gt; and uh I helped other people on their journey as well. Um, so I got the journey as well. Um, so I got the journey as well. Um, so I got the message. Uh, you know what more do I message. Uh, you know what more do I message. Uh, you know what more do I need to know? need to know? need to know? &gt;&gt; If I would have sat down with you prior &gt;&gt; If I would have sat down with you prior &gt;&gt; If I would have sat down with you prior to your psychedelic work, like right to your psychedelic work, like right to your psychedelic work, like right here, right now, um, here, right now, um, here, right now, um, &gt;&gt; would you feel different, be different, &gt;&gt; would you feel different, be different, &gt;&gt; would you feel different, be different, &gt;&gt; I believe. So, yeah. I mean, it's like &gt;&gt; I believe. So, yeah. I mean, it's like &gt;&gt; I believe. So, yeah. I mean, it's like uh [sighs] it's hard to describe the uh [sighs] it's hard to describe the uh [sighs] it's hard to describe the whole experience. whole experience. whole experience. &gt;&gt; How is it? How is it like wow? Well, &gt;&gt; How is it? How is it like wow? Well, &gt;&gt; How is it? How is it like wow? Well, it's different for everybody. But in it's different for everybody. But in it's different for everybody. But in terms of the takeaways were some related terms of the takeaways were some related terms of the takeaways were some related to uh to uh to uh &gt;&gt; the takeway the biggest takeaway &gt;&gt; the takeway the biggest takeaway &gt;&gt; the takeway the biggest takeaway &gt;&gt; is everything &gt;&gt; is everything &gt;&gt; is everything is one thing we are one thing is one thing we are one thing is one thing we are one thing we're not a drop from the ocean we're not a drop from the ocean we're not a drop from the ocean we're the ocean and a drop as roomie that's a the ocean and a drop as roomie that's a the ocean and a drop as roomie that's a roomie saying right but I roomie saying right but I roomie saying right but I [clears throat] get it I was saying that [clears throat] get it I was saying that [clears throat] get it I was saying that before I even read that I was before I even read that I was before I even read that I was telling what I said imagine an ocean telling what I said imagine an ocean telling what I said imagine an ocean yeah that's everything but there's a yeah that's everything but there's a yeah that's everything but there's a spray that's come out like a little drop spray that's come out like a little drop spray that's come out like a little drop and he thinks I'm just a little drop. and he thinks I'm just a little drop. and he thinks I'm just a little drop. Oh, poor me. I'm a little No, you're the Oh, poor me. I'm a little No, you're the Oh, poor me. I'm a little No, you're the ocean as well. You'll drop back into the ocean as well. You'll drop back into the ocean as well. You'll drop back into the ocean when you ocean when you ocean when you So everything is one thing. We're all So everything is one thing. We're all So everything is one thing. We're all connected having we're the same thing connected having we're the same thing connected having we're the same thing having separate experiences. having separate experiences. having separate experiences. That's what I got. And we're all That's what I got. And we're all That's what I got. And we're all connected. And uh the whole experience connected. And uh the whole experience connected. And uh the whole experience we're having is mental we're having is mental we're having is mental like nothing exists without observation. like nothing exists without observation. like nothing exists without observation. So this is all created by us. Everything So this is all created by us. Everything So this is all created by us. Everything it's our imagination that doesn't really it's our imagination that doesn't really it's our imagination that doesn't really exist. If that makes sense. It might not If that makes sense. It might not If that makes sense. It might not because you got to experience it. because you got to experience it. because you got to experience it. &gt;&gt; Listen, I I'm very open like as a &gt;&gt; Listen, I I'm very open like as a &gt;&gt; Listen, I I'm very open like as a neuroscientist I understand for certain neuroscientist I understand for certain neuroscientist I understand for certain that our brains are very good at that our brains are very good at that our brains are very good at extracting certain kinds of information. extracting certain kinds of information. extracting certain kinds of information. That's red, that's blue. Uh I can hear That's red, that's blue. Uh I can hear That's red, that's blue. Uh I can hear your voice. That's Dorian. I'm me. But your voice. That's Dorian. I'm me. But your voice. That's Dorian. I'm me. But that's a through a certain set of that's a through a certain set of that's a through a certain set of filters and um filters and um filters and um &gt;&gt; yeah, you're a machine with a computer &gt;&gt; yeah, you're a machine with a computer &gt;&gt; yeah, you're a machine with a computer and it's limited. and it's limited. and it's limited. &gt;&gt; Certain filters. It's like uh someone &gt;&gt; Certain filters. It's like uh someone &gt;&gt; Certain filters. It's like uh someone described it. There's a I forget who it described it. There's a I forget who it described it. There's a I forget who it was that you know if you were in a house was that you know if you were in a house was that you know if you were in a house and the windows were open out onto a and the windows were open out onto a and the windows were open out onto a yard, you would hear certain things and yard, you would hear certain things and yard, you would hear certain things and see certain things and that's your see certain things and that's your see certain things and that's your conception of a yard. But if you were conception of a yard. But if you were conception of a yard. But if you were outside in the field on the other side outside in the field on the other side outside in the field on the other side of the yard, you'd get a very of the yard, you'd get a very of the yard, you'd get a very different picture, a diff very different picture, a diff very different picture, a diff very different experience of it. experience of it. experience of it. &gt;&gt; Let me give you another analogy like &gt;&gt; Let me give you another analogy like &gt;&gt; Let me give you another analogy like that. I don't know where this one came from, I don't know where this one came from, I don't know where this one came from, but I was used it one time because but I was used it one time because but I was used it one time because there's so many different levels to a there's so many different levels to a there's so many different levels to a psychedelic experience, psychedelic experience, psychedelic experience, but I said it like this. Imagine but I said it like this. Imagine but I said it like this. Imagine you're in a room, whatever shape, square you're in a room, whatever shape, square you're in a room, whatever shape, square room, and you're in this room, and that's all and you're in this room, and that's all and you're in this room, and that's all that exists. You can see it, you can that exists. You can see it, you can that exists. You can see it, you can touch it. There's nothing more cuz touch it. There's nothing more cuz touch it. There's nothing more cuz you're not aware of it, right? you're not aware of it, right? you're not aware of it, right? How about if I bought a little How about if I bought a little How about if I bought a little trampoline in here and you bounced up on trampoline in here and you bounced up on trampoline in here and you bounced up on the trampoline and you happen to see the trampoline and you happen to see the trampoline and you happen to see over the wall and you see there's a over the wall and you see there's a over the wall and you see there's a whole [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] other world out there that whole [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] other world out there that whole [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] other world out there that you didn't know about but now you've you didn't know about but now you've you didn't know about but now you've seen it you can't forget right so you seen it you can't forget right so you seen it you can't forget right so you will come back to this room with a will come back to this room with a will come back to this room with a different perspective knowing that this different perspective knowing that this different perspective knowing that this is not this is not it really so it gives is not this is not it really so it gives is not this is not it really so it gives you a totally new perspective on life I you a totally new perspective on life I you a totally new perspective on life I think &gt;&gt; I'm totally on board um I will say uh I &gt;&gt; I'm totally on board um I will say uh I &gt;&gt; I'm totally on board um I will say uh I do think there are cert certain people do think there are cert certain people do think there are cert certain people with predisposition to psychosis that with predisposition to psychosis that with predisposition to psychosis that should be cautious about psychedelics. should be cautious about psychedelics. should be cautious about psychedelics. &gt;&gt; Oh, the camp I went to in Costa Rica &gt;&gt; Oh, the camp I went to in Costa Rica &gt;&gt; Oh, the camp I went to in Costa Rica is like they do a full review. They got is like they do a full review. They got is like they do a full review. They got doctors on board and everything like doctors on board and everything like doctors on board and everything like that. So, they do that. So, they do that. So, they do &gt;&gt; uh vet people before and get their &gt;&gt; uh vet people before and get their &gt;&gt; uh vet people before and get their medical history and all that stuff. So, medical history and all that stuff. So, medical history and all that stuff. So, uh I'm sure there's some exceptions uh I'm sure there's some exceptions uh I'm sure there's some exceptions where maybe it might not be beneficial, where maybe it might not be beneficial, where maybe it might not be beneficial, but I'm not an expert on that. But if but I'm not an expert on that. But if but I'm not an expert on that. But if it's a real camp, and there's the thing, it's a real camp, and there's the thing, it's a real camp, and there's the thing, a lot of them are not, you know, or they a lot of them are not, you know, or they a lot of them are not, you know, or they just get as many people in there to get just get as many people in there to get just get as many people in there to get as much money and they don't get the as much money and they don't get the as much money and they don't get the attention and everything like that. So, attention and everything like that. So, attention and everything like that. So, if you're going to do it, I mean, do if you're going to do it, I mean, do if you're going to do it, I mean, do your uh bit of research on who's doing your uh bit of research on who's doing your uh bit of research on who's doing it and how are they qualified and what it and how are they qualified and what it and how are they qualified and what the facilities like and everything like the facilities like and everything like the facilities like and everything like that. &gt;&gt; Uh I mean, I've done it in Spain where &gt;&gt; Uh I mean, I've done it in Spain where &gt;&gt; Uh I mean, I've done it in Spain where it's kind of wild west. They don't it's kind of wild west. They don't it's kind of wild west. They don't really tell you too much, you know. Uh really tell you too much, you know. Uh really tell you too much, you know. Uh but I can handle that. Not everyone else but I can handle that. Not everyone else but I can handle that. Not everyone else can. So, better to go to a place where can. So, better to go to a place where can. So, better to go to a place where they do it very professionally and with they do it very professionally and with they do it very professionally and with a shaman, you know, a proper like a shaman, you know, a proper like a shaman, you know, a proper like traditional, not a guy. I mean, I could traditional, not a guy. I mean, I could traditional, not a guy. I mean, I could say I'm a shaman and put camps on if but say I'm a shaman and put camps on if but say I'm a shaman and put camps on if but I'm not, you know, these guys it's I'm not, you know, these guys it's I'm not, you know, these guys it's passed down through the family and they passed down through the family and they passed down through the family and they do maybe a decade of training before do maybe a decade of training before do maybe a decade of training before they're going in there and actually they're going in there and actually they're going in there and actually administering the ceremonies. So, I administering the ceremonies. So, I administering the ceremonies. So, I think that's important. Yeah, I think that's important. Yeah, I think that's important. Yeah, I think the data on um psilocybin for the data on um psilocybin for the data on um psilocybin for depression, uh MDMA, depression, uh MDMA, depression, uh MDMA, not recreationally but therapeutically not recreationally but therapeutically not recreationally but therapeutically for PTSD, I gain for PTSD and for PTSD, I gain for PTSD and for PTSD, I gain for PTSD and for alcohol and other uh substance abuse alcohol and other uh substance abuse alcohol and other uh substance abuse disorders is very intriguing and I'm not disorders is very intriguing and I'm not disorders is very intriguing and I'm not trying to hedge here and play, you know, trying to hedge here and play, you know, trying to hedge here and play, you know, but I think it's very interesting. I but I think it's very interesting. I but I think it's very interesting. I think we're headed I think people forget think we're headed I think people forget think we're headed I think people forget this is one of these things where I this is one of these things where I this is one of these things where I almost forgot to say this. Whether or almost forgot to say this. Whether or almost forgot to say this. Whether or not it's therapy, working out, a pill, not it's therapy, working out, a pill, not it's therapy, working out, a pill, um or psychedelics, um or psychedelics, um or psychedelics, ultimately what we're after is this ultimately what we're after is this ultimately what we're after is this thing of brain plasticity, right? I thing of brain plasticity, right? I thing of brain plasticity, right? I mean, they're all aimed at the same end mean, they're all aimed at the same end mean, they're all aimed at the same end point. Yeah. Um, but the psychedelics point. Yeah. Um, but the psychedelics point. Yeah. Um, but the psychedelics are particularly interesting because the are particularly interesting because the are particularly interesting because the experience of them, not just the effects experience of them, not just the effects experience of them, not just the effects they have long term, but both the they have long term, but both the they have long term, but both the experience of being experience of being experience of being in the psychedelic journey as well as in the psychedelic journey as well as in the psychedelic journey as well as the long-term outcomes seem to create the long-term outcomes seem to create the long-term outcomes seem to create something that done correctly brings something that done correctly brings something that done correctly brings people more peace. people more peace. people more peace. &gt;&gt; Well, there's a guy in England that's &gt;&gt; Well, there's a guy in England that's &gt;&gt; Well, there's a guy in England that's now funded and has been doing the now funded and has been doing the now funded and has been doing the experiments and he got like brain experiments and he got like brain experiments and he got like brain activity before and afterwards. activity before and afterwards. activity before and afterwards. I don't know what basis it's on, but I don't know what basis it's on, but I don't know what basis it's on, but let's say the brain activity that they let's say the brain activity that they let's say the brain activity that they can see is like maybe 30% lit up can see is like maybe 30% lit up can see is like maybe 30% lit up 100%. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's activating parts of your &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's activating parts of your &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's activating parts of your brain that's uh kind of sleeping, I brain that's uh kind of sleeping, I brain that's uh kind of sleeping, I guess. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's revealing um a bunch of uh &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's revealing um a bunch of uh &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's revealing um a bunch of uh lateral connections in what we call the lateral connections in what we call the lateral connections in what we call the default mode network. Basically, more default mode network. Basically, more default mode network. Basically, more brain areas are talking to one another brain areas are talking to one another brain areas are talking to one another in the psychology in the psychology in the psychology &gt;&gt; which change your perspective. &gt;&gt; which change your perspective. &gt;&gt; which change your perspective. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; And the way you think, which changes &gt;&gt; And the way you think, which changes &gt;&gt; And the way you think, which changes your perception affects everything. your perception affects everything. your perception affects everything. &gt;&gt; That's right. There was a guy, funnily &gt;&gt; That's right. There was a guy, funnily &gt;&gt; That's right. There was a guy, funnily enough, he used to work for the enough, he used to work for the enough, he used to work for the government in UK, right? So they had him government in UK, right? So they had him government in UK, right? So they had him do a report on drugs and recreational do a report on drugs and recreational do a report on drugs and recreational drugs and what his conclusions were and drugs and what his conclusions were and drugs and what his conclusions were and he said people that take ecstasy MDMA on he said people that take ecstasy MDMA on he said people that take ecstasy MDMA on the weekend statistically they're much the weekend statistically they're much the weekend statistically they're much safer than somebody that does horse safer than somebody that does horse safer than somebody that does horse riding. I mean this is a scientific and riding. I mean this is a scientific and riding. I mean this is a scientific and they fired him and a lot of scientists they fired him and a lot of scientists they fired him and a lot of scientists that work for the UK they retired. that work for the UK they retired. that work for the UK they retired. They're like we're scient we're They're like we're scient we're They're like we're scient we're scientists. You can't dictate to us what scientists. You can't dictate to us what scientists. You can't dictate to us what the conclusion must be. We're the conclusion must be. We're the conclusion must be. We're scientists. they just look and give you scientists. they just look and give you scientists. they just look and give you the conclusion. Anyway, uh professor not the conclusion. Anyway, uh professor not the conclusion. Anyway, uh professor not now is working independently and funded now is working independently and funded now is working independently and funded and uh in London and he's doing a lot of and uh in London and he's doing a lot of and uh in London and he's doing a lot of these studies um on different these studies um on different these studies um on different psychedelics and brain activity and uh psychedelics and brain activity and uh psychedelics and brain activity and uh depression and so on. So a lot of people depression and so on. So a lot of people depression and so on. So a lot of people that came to the camps are struggling that came to the camps are struggling that came to the camps are struggling with depression and different issues uh with depression and different issues uh with depression and different issues uh and [sighs and gasps] and [sighs and gasps] and [sighs and gasps] some of the experiences might have been some of the experiences might have been some of the experiences might have been unpleasant at the time unpleasant at the time unpleasant at the time &gt;&gt; but everybody at the end of the week is &gt;&gt; but everybody at the end of the week is &gt;&gt; but everybody at the end of the week is like wow this is like wow this is like wow this is the most important thing I've done in my the most important thing I've done in my the most important thing I've done in my life. This is life-changing. I heard life. This is life-changing. I heard life. This is life-changing. I heard that so many times like literally from that so many times like literally from that so many times like literally from everybody that's done it. from everybody that's done it. from everybody that's done it. [clears throat] So [clears throat] So [clears throat] So uh it's worth looking into definitely uh it's worth looking into definitely uh it's worth looking into definitely and uh and uh and uh no beyond whatever you might feel at no beyond whatever you might feel at no beyond whatever you might feel at the time there's no side effects the time there's no side effects the time there's no side effects afterwards or anything like that and afterwards or anything like that and afterwards or anything like that and another thing after doing these camps I another thing after doing these camps I another thing after doing these camps I mean you're restricted with your diet mean you're restricted with your diet mean you're restricted with your diet and just before you go the they give you and just before you go the they give you and just before you go the they give you a specific diet and things to cut out a specific diet and things to cut out a specific diet and things to cut out like alcohol and any other kind like alcohol and any other kind like alcohol and any other kind drugs and uh and so on. Um and I feel drugs and uh and so on. Um and I feel drugs and uh and so on. Um and I feel like if my brain was a computer, if my brain was a computer, if my brain was a computer, like at the end of the week, all the like at the end of the week, all the like at the end of the week, all the junk files are gone out and it's just junk files are gone out and it's just junk files are gone out and it's just I'm having so many ideas and inspiration I'm having so many ideas and inspiration I'm having so many ideas and inspiration and ideas for business and like it's on and ideas for business and like it's on and ideas for business and like it's on fire and eventually it settles down to a fire and eventually it settles down to a fire and eventually it settles down to a more normal pace, but you feel like more normal pace, but you feel like more normal pace, but you feel like your computer's just been upgraded. your computer's just been upgraded. your computer's just been upgraded. &gt;&gt; Yeah. defragged as they say. &gt;&gt; Yeah. defragged as they say. &gt;&gt; Yeah. defragged as they say. &gt;&gt; We mentioned schizophrenia a couple &gt;&gt; We mentioned schizophrenia a couple &gt;&gt; We mentioned schizophrenia a couple minutes ago. Um, reminds me there are minutes ago. Um, reminds me there are minutes ago. Um, reminds me there are these very interesting findings. You these very interesting findings. You these very interesting findings. You know, there are a few exceptions to what know, there are a few exceptions to what know, there are a few exceptions to what I'm about to say, but I know that your I'm about to say, but I know that your I'm about to say, but I know that your wife is from Brazil. Yeah. wife is from Brazil. Yeah. wife is from Brazil. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um, and we were talking about the value &gt;&gt; Um, and we were talking about the value &gt;&gt; Um, and we were talking about the value of sunlight, you being from the UK, um, of sunlight, you being from the UK, um, of sunlight, you being from the UK, um, you know, you don't find schizophrenia you know, you don't find schizophrenia you know, you don't find schizophrenia near the equator near the equator near the equator &gt;&gt; because of the light. I'm not going to &gt;&gt; because of the light. I'm not going to &gt;&gt; because of the light. I'm not going to say schizophrenia is one thing and I'm say schizophrenia is one thing and I'm say schizophrenia is one thing and I'm not going to say it's caused by one not going to say it's caused by one not going to say it's caused by one thing, but there's some very interesting thing, but there's some very interesting thing, but there's some very interesting hypotheses about um certain types of hypotheses about um certain types of hypotheses about um certain types of winter infections winter infections winter infections uh make people more prone to them. Now, uh make people more prone to them. Now, uh make people more prone to them. Now, why would those winter infections only why would those winter infections only why would those winter infections only occur closer to the poles? Um it may be occur closer to the poles? Um it may be occur closer to the poles? Um it may be that this is a theory that some of the that this is a theory that some of the that this is a theory that some of the long wavelength light from the sun um long wavelength light from the sun um long wavelength light from the sun um the reds and orange and yellows and so the reds and orange and yellows and so the reds and orange and yellows and so forth um provide a protective function forth um provide a protective function forth um provide a protective function on the mitochondria and at certain on the mitochondria and at certain on the mitochondria and at certain stages of pregnancy um because there is stages of pregnancy um because there is stages of pregnancy um because there is a genetic component to schizophrenia. a genetic component to schizophrenia. a genetic component to schizophrenia. But there's also an environmental But there's also an environmental But there's also an environmental component. Identical twins don't always component. Identical twins don't always component. Identical twins don't always both have it. Um sunlight seems both have it. Um sunlight seems both have it. Um sunlight seems protective. the amount of sunlight seems protective. the amount of sunlight seems protective. the amount of sunlight seems protective in a in a way that is not protective in a in a way that is not protective in a in a way that is not trivial. That statistically is very trivial. That statistically is very trivial. That statistically is very impressive. So, um it's interesting, impressive. So, um it's interesting, impressive. So, um it's interesting, right? &gt;&gt; I think overall health, the sun is &gt;&gt; I think overall health, the sun is &gt;&gt; I think overall health, the sun is essential. I mean, uh I've talked about it before I mean, uh I've talked about it before I mean, uh I've talked about it before to friends and everything. I was like, to friends and everything. I was like, to friends and everything. I was like, and I mean, I was in the club, and I mean, I was in the club, and I mean, I was in the club, right? Isn't it a ridiculous joke how we've Isn't it a ridiculous joke how we've Isn't it a ridiculous joke how we've been told to be scared of the sun when been told to be scared of the sun when been told to be scared of the sun when it's the giver of all life on the it's the giver of all life on the it's the giver of all life on the planet? Somehow it can be bad for us. planet? Somehow it can be bad for us. planet? Somehow it can be bad for us. That's just ridiculous. Yeah. If you go That's just ridiculous. Yeah. If you go That's just ridiculous. Yeah. If you go in the sun and you start to get burnt, in the sun and you start to get burnt, in the sun and you start to get burnt, get out of the sun. get out of the sun. get out of the sun. &gt;&gt; Throw on a layer of clothing. Yeah. And &gt;&gt; Throw on a layer of clothing. Yeah. And &gt;&gt; Throw on a layer of clothing. Yeah. And put on a hat. Yeah. put on a hat. Yeah. put on a hat. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Listen, man. I'm as white as they come &gt;&gt; Listen, man. I'm as white as they come &gt;&gt; Listen, man. I'm as white as they come naturally. Yeah. I'm like a bottle of naturally. Yeah. I'm like a bottle of naturally. Yeah. I'm like a bottle of milk, man. milk, man. milk, man. But I went to Spain But I went to Spain But I went to Spain and my I guess my nutrition improved. and my I guess my nutrition improved. and my I guess my nutrition improved. Much better fruits and vegetables there. Much better fruits and vegetables there. Much better fruits and vegetables there. That might be something. But I slowly That might be something. But I slowly That might be something. But I slowly introduced myself to the sun and introduced myself to the sun and introduced myself to the sun and [clears throat] now I can stay out all [clears throat] now I can stay out all [clears throat] now I can stay out all day. I might get a bit reddish because day. I might get a bit reddish because day. I might get a bit reddish because I'm pale skin, but I don't get burnt or I'm pale skin, but I don't get burnt or I'm pale skin, but I don't get burnt or nothing, man. I can stay in the sun all nothing, man. I can stay in the sun all nothing, man. I can stay in the sun all day. And day. And day. And yeah, I just feel much better in the yeah, I just feel much better in the yeah, I just feel much better in the sun. Everybody does. People come from sun. Everybody does. People come from sun. Everybody does. People come from England to live in Spain because of that England to live in Spain because of that England to live in Spain because of that fact. And uh if we look between the UK fact. And uh if we look between the UK fact. And uh if we look between the UK and Spain, and Spain, and Spain, uh there's about six, seven year uh there's about six, seven year uh there's about six, seven year difference in the life expectancy. difference in the life expectancy. difference in the life expectancy. Yeah, maybe the food's a bit better, but Yeah, maybe the food's a bit better, but Yeah, maybe the food's a bit better, but the sun is the is the key. I believe the sun is the is the key. I believe the sun is the is the key. I believe &gt;&gt; I won't launch into a whole scientific &gt;&gt; I won't launch into a whole scientific &gt;&gt; I won't launch into a whole scientific lecture on this, but it's very lecture on this, but it's very lecture on this, but it's very interesting and not a coincidence at all interesting and not a coincidence at all interesting and not a coincidence at all that dopamine and the synthesis of that dopamine and the synthesis of that dopamine and the synthesis of dopamine in the body. It's elyroine, but dopamine in the body. It's elyroine, but dopamine in the body. It's elyroine, but there's a there's a enzyme called there's a there's a enzyme called there's a there's a enzyme called tyrroscenase and it's the rate limiting tyrroscenase and it's the rate limiting tyrroscenase and it's the rate limiting enzyme for dopamine production. Dopamine enzyme for dopamine production. Dopamine enzyme for dopamine production. Dopamine makes you feel good, motivated, etc. makes you feel good, motivated, etc. makes you feel good, motivated, etc. It's correlated with the sex hormones. It's correlated with the sex hormones. It's correlated with the sex hormones. We we know all this stuff certainly you We we know all this stuff certainly you We we know all this stuff certainly you do. It's also responsible for do. It's also responsible for do. It's also responsible for pigmentation of the skin which is why pigmentation of the skin which is why pigmentation of the skin which is why for instance an arctic fox which is for instance an arctic fox which is for instance an arctic fox which is white in the winter becomes brown in the white in the winter becomes brown in the white in the winter becomes brown in the in the summer through the dopamine in the summer through the dopamine in the summer through the dopamine pathway. So the feeling good in the sun pathway. So the feeling good in the sun pathway. So the feeling good in the sun is not a trivial thing. It's through the is not a trivial thing. It's through the is not a trivial thing. It's through the dopamine pathway and the melanin dopamine pathway and the melanin dopamine pathway and the melanin pathway. The other thing that's really pathway. The other thing that's really pathway. The other thing that's really interesting is that there's been a study interesting is that there's been a study interesting is that there's been a study recently where they gave people a recently where they gave people a recently where they gave people a glucose tolerance test, how well they glucose tolerance test, how well they glucose tolerance test, how well they manage blood sugar, insulin, etc. And in manage blood sugar, insulin, etc. And in manage blood sugar, insulin, etc. And in sunlight or even with some sunlight just sunlight or even with some sunlight just sunlight or even with some sunlight just landing on their back, their metabolism landing on their back, their metabolism landing on their back, their metabolism goes up by about I believe it's you know goes up by about I believe it's you know goes up by about I believe it's you know 29% and their blood glucose regulation 29% and their blood glucose regulation 29% and their blood glucose regulation is far better. And it's because the is far better. And it's because the is far better. And it's because the sunlight actually gets through the body, sunlight actually gets through the body, sunlight actually gets through the body, charges the mitochondria charges the mitochondria charges the mitochondria &gt;&gt; and naturally reaches the mitochondria &gt;&gt; and naturally reaches the mitochondria &gt;&gt; and naturally reaches the mitochondria in the cell. It actually will the long in the cell. It actually will the long in the cell. It actually will the long wavelength light will go all the way wavelength light will go all the way wavelength light will go all the way through your body and charge your through your body and charge your through your body and charge your mitochondria on the way. And this is mitochondria on the way. And this is mitochondria on the way. And this is this is not like uh hearsay. This is this is not like uh hearsay. This is this is not like uh hearsay. This is documented in beautiful studies. Glenn documented in beautiful studies. Glenn documented in beautiful studies. Glenn Jeffrey at University College London Jeffrey at University College London Jeffrey at University College London another formerly pasty pale uh Brit who another formerly pasty pale uh Brit who another formerly pasty pale uh Brit who I've known for many decades came here I've known for many decades came here I've known for many decades came here sat there and said the more time you get sat there and said the more time you get sat there and said the more time you get in the sun the longer your life. The in the sun the longer your life. The in the sun the longer your life. The more time you get in the sun the better more time you get in the sun the better more time you get in the sun the better your blood glucose regulation. The more your blood glucose regulation. The more your blood glucose regulation. The more time you get in the sun and on and on time you get in the sun and on and on time you get in the sun and on and on and on. And the opposite is also true. and on. And the opposite is also true. and on. And the opposite is also true. Too much time under just LED lights and Too much time under just LED lights and Too much time under just LED lights and not enough sunlight is damaging to not enough sunlight is damaging to not enough sunlight is damaging to mitochondria. And it's a very big mitochondria. And it's a very big mitochondria. And it's a very big effect. I think this is going to be one effect. I think this is going to be one effect. I think this is going to be one of the biggest health. of the biggest health. of the biggest health. &gt;&gt; This is beyond uh vitamin D production. &gt;&gt; This is beyond uh vitamin D production. &gt;&gt; This is beyond uh vitamin D production. &gt;&gt; It includes vitamin D production, but &gt;&gt; It includes vitamin D production, but &gt;&gt; It includes vitamin D production, but actually vitamin D comes from the UV, actually vitamin D comes from the UV, actually vitamin D comes from the UV, the stuff they say is bad. the stuff they say is bad. the stuff they say is bad. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; The UV light is what triggers vitamin D &gt;&gt; The UV light is what triggers vitamin D &gt;&gt; The UV light is what triggers vitamin D production. So look, you don't want to production. So look, you don't want to production. So look, you don't want to get a sunburn. And I'm glad you get a sunburn. And I'm glad you get a sunburn. And I'm glad you mentioned that. But we have been sold a mentioned that. But we have been sold a mentioned that. But we have been sold a bill of goods about the sun. And I think bill of goods about the sun. And I think bill of goods about the sun. And I think in the next 10 years it's going to go in the next 10 years it's going to go in the next 10 years it's going to go the same direction as lifting weights the same direction as lifting weights the same direction as lifting weights turns to fat. No one believes that turns to fat. No one believes that turns to fat. No one believes that because it's not true, but we were told because it's not true, but we were told because it's not true, but we were told that for decades. that for decades. that for decades. &gt;&gt; Oh, they used to believe it. I mean, &gt;&gt; Oh, they used to believe it. I mean, &gt;&gt; Oh, they used to believe it. I mean, even when I started back in the 80s, even when I started back in the 80s, even when I started back in the 80s, very few women wanted to lift weights very few women wanted to lift weights very few women wanted to lift weights because I was scared they would get too because I was scared they would get too because I was scared they would get too big. And yeah, it was funny like uh big. And yeah, it was funny like uh big. And yeah, it was funny like uh people come down the gym when I was people come down the gym when I was people come down the gym when I was British champion or something, you know. British champion or something, you know. British champion or something, you know. Yeah. You know, I don't want to get too Yeah. You know, I don't want to get too Yeah. You know, I don't want to get too big like something like you that would big like something like you that would big like something like you that would be great. be great. be great. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Don't worry. It's not going to happen by &gt;&gt; Don't worry. It's not going to happen by &gt;&gt; Don't worry. It's not going to happen by accident. Don't worry, you know. accident. Don't worry, you know. accident. Don't worry, you know. &gt;&gt; Yeah. As I always tell people, &gt;&gt; Yeah. As I always tell people, &gt;&gt; Yeah. As I always tell people, especially if women want to train, the especially if women want to train, the especially if women want to train, the pump you get in the gym, that's as big pump you get in the gym, that's as big pump you get in the gym, that's as big as you're ever going to get within a as you're ever going to get within a as you're ever going to get within a couple of months. So, if you ever see couple of months. So, if you ever see couple of months. So, if you ever see yourself in the mirror at the gym and yourself in the mirror at the gym and yourself in the mirror at the gym and go, "Oh my god, that's far too big." Go go, "Oh my god, that's far too big." Go go, "Oh my god, that's far too big." Go ahead, quit for two weeks, but you know, ahead, quit for two weeks, but you know, ahead, quit for two weeks, but you know, Exactly. I mean, people think they're Exactly. I mean, people think they're Exactly. I mean, people think they're going to go sleep in. going to go sleep in. going to go sleep in. &gt;&gt; It's interesting, you know, like I had &gt;&gt; It's interesting, you know, like I had &gt;&gt; It's interesting, you know, like I had we're in Spain. Yeah. we're in Spain. Yeah. we're in Spain. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And we live right by the beach, me and &gt;&gt; And we live right by the beach, me and &gt;&gt; And we live right by the beach, me and girl. &gt;&gt; A lot on the beach. We're outside a lot, &gt;&gt; A lot on the beach. We're outside a lot, &gt;&gt; A lot on the beach. We're outside a lot, right? I had my vitamin D tested and it right? I had my vitamin D tested and it right? I had my vitamin D tested and it was only 35. I thought just from the was only 35. I thought just from the was only 35. I thought just from the sun. &gt;&gt; Some people just don't convert vitamin D &gt;&gt; Some people just don't convert vitamin D &gt;&gt; Some people just don't convert vitamin D that well um and or produce vitamin D that well um and or produce vitamin D that well um and or produce vitamin D that well and need to supplement it. And that well and need to supplement it. And that well and need to supplement it. And it does seem to have some genetic it does seem to have some genetic it does seem to have some genetic component which makes sense. Speaking of component which makes sense. Speaking of component which makes sense. Speaking of which, I would be remiss if I didn't ask which, I would be remiss if I didn't ask which, I would be remiss if I didn't ask you about cannabis because I think one you about cannabis because I think one you about cannabis because I think one of our early correspondences, of our early correspondences, of our early correspondences, I did an episode about cannabis and I did an episode about cannabis and I did an episode about cannabis and I said, "Listen, I'm worried about said, "Listen, I'm worried about said, "Listen, I'm worried about psychotic risk and but I said, listen, psychotic risk and but I said, listen, psychotic risk and but I said, listen, there could be medical uses and I' I've there could be medical uses and I' I've there could be medical uses and I' I've done a couple different done a couple different done a couple different &gt;&gt; also had Peter on here, right? &gt;&gt; also had Peter on here, right? &gt;&gt; also had Peter on here, right? &gt;&gt; I had a on &gt;&gt; I had a on &gt;&gt; I had a on &gt;&gt; Yeah, I had him on my podcast, but we &gt;&gt; Yeah, I had him on my podcast, but we &gt;&gt; Yeah, I had him on my podcast, but we didn't uh you didn't touch the subject." didn't uh you didn't touch the subject." didn't uh you didn't touch the subject." &gt;&gt; Okay. No, I mean, I think that I want &gt;&gt; Okay. No, I mean, I think that I want &gt;&gt; Okay. No, I mean, I think that I want to be clear my stance is one where I've to be clear my stance is one where I've to be clear my stance is one where I've seen people benefit. I've seen data that seen people benefit. I've seen data that seen people benefit. I've seen data that for people with a predisposition to for people with a predisposition to for people with a predisposition to psychosis, the high THC can be psychosis, the high THC can be psychosis, the high THC can be problematic. This is just what I've problematic. This is just what I've problematic. This is just what I've seen. Yeah. But you sent me a note seen. Yeah. But you sent me a note seen. Yeah. But you sent me a note saying that um saying that um saying that um &gt;&gt; first of all that your experience with &gt;&gt; first of all that your experience with &gt;&gt; first of all that your experience with it has been good. So I want to give you it has been good. So I want to give you it has been good. So I want to give you the opportunity to share that and then the opportunity to share that and then the opportunity to share that and then some of the things that you speculate some of the things that you speculate some of the things that you speculate about because I'm an open book. Well, to about because I'm an open book. Well, to about because I'm an open book. Well, to give you some background, yeah, I guess give you some background, yeah, I guess give you some background, yeah, I guess cannabis is a bit like cannabis is a bit like cannabis is a bit like cultural. Uh, in Birmingham where I grew up, they Uh, in Birmingham where I grew up, they Uh, in Birmingham where I grew up, they have a lot of Jamaicans. So, I mean, have a lot of Jamaicans. So, I mean, have a lot of Jamaicans. So, I mean, Jamaicans, they smoke uh cannabis, they Jamaicans, they smoke uh cannabis, they Jamaicans, they smoke uh cannabis, they make tea. It's just a cultural thing. make tea. It's just a cultural thing. make tea. It's just a cultural thing. It's normal for them, right? Uh, so it It's normal for them, right? Uh, so it It's normal for them, right? Uh, so it was about I had a couple of friends that was about I had a couple of friends that was about I had a couple of friends that their dads were Jamaican. So, I was their dads were Jamaican. So, I was their dads were Jamaican. So, I was smoking it anyway, but I didn't wasn't smoking it anyway, but I didn't wasn't smoking it anyway, but I didn't wasn't smoking it because I thought there was smoking it because I thought there was smoking it because I thought there was any particular health benefits. I just any particular health benefits. I just any particular health benefits. I just smoking it and drinking alcohol like smoking it and drinking alcohol like smoking it and drinking alcohol like hanging out. Uh, but hanging out. Uh, but hanging out. Uh, but my friends dads who were Jamaican was my friends dads who were Jamaican was my friends dads who were Jamaican was like, "Oh, this is protects against this like, "Oh, this is protects against this like, "Oh, this is protects against this and we drink tea for this and the women and we drink tea for this and the women and we drink tea for this and the women take it for menstrual pain, PM." So, I take it for menstrual pain, PM." So, I take it for menstrual pain, PM." So, I kind of heard that, but yeah, okay, kind of heard that, but yeah, okay, kind of heard that, but yeah, okay, whatever. Uh, whatever. Uh, whatever. Uh, and I would smoke occasionally when I and I would smoke occasionally when I and I would smoke occasionally when I was training. was training. was training. And when I went to live in Amsterdam for And when I went to live in Amsterdam for And when I went to live in Amsterdam for a little bit, as I said, I did a lot of a little bit, as I said, I did a lot of a little bit, as I said, I did a lot of reading, started reading about it. I reading, started reading about it. I reading, started reading about it. I started searching for studies started searching for studies started searching for studies and uh, I found there's massive, massive and uh, I found there's massive, massive and uh, I found there's massive, massive health benefits from THC and different health benefits from THC and different health benefits from THC and different canabonoids. Uh, some of it really counterintuitive I Uh, some of it really counterintuitive I Uh, some of it really counterintuitive I guess for people. Um, you had Peter guess for people. Um, you had Peter guess for people. Um, you had Peter Atier on here, right? So, you asked Atier on here, right? So, you asked Atier on here, right? So, you asked Peter, I think, Peter, I think, Peter, I think, what about smoking cannabis? How does what about smoking cannabis? How does what about smoking cannabis? How does that affect your lungs? that affect your lungs? that affect your lungs? And I think he was pretty much said it's And I think he was pretty much said it's And I think he was pretty much said it's probably like the same as nicotine, uh, probably like the same as nicotine, uh, probably like the same as nicotine, uh, tobacco, right? I think that's what he tobacco, right? I think that's what he tobacco, right? I think that's what he said. [sighs and gasps] said. [sighs and gasps] said. [sighs and gasps] Well, he's probably not aware of a 25 Well, he's probably not aware of a 25 Well, he's probably not aware of a 25 year long uh massive study that was done year long uh massive study that was done year long uh massive study that was done at UCLA, at UCLA, at UCLA, Dr. Donald Taskin, I think his name is. So, Donald Taskin, I think his name is. So, Donald Taskin, I think his name is. So, they put these peoples in into groups, they put these peoples in into groups, they put these peoples in into groups, cigarette smokers, cannabis smokers, and cigarette smokers, cannabis smokers, and cigarette smokers, cannabis smokers, and control group that didn't smoke control group that didn't smoke control group that didn't smoke anything. Uh so, after 25 years, what did they Uh so, after 25 years, what did they Uh so, after 25 years, what did they find? Cigarette group. We already know, find? Cigarette group. We already know, find? Cigarette group. We already know, right? loss of lung function, increased loss of lung function, increased loss of lung function, increased cancers, blah blah. Yeah. In cancers, blah blah. Yeah. In cancers, blah blah. Yeah. In the cannabis group a and heavy daily the cannabis group a and heavy daily the cannabis group a and heavy daily smoking 25 years. smoking 25 years. smoking 25 years. I'll agree because I've been heavily I'll agree because I've been heavily I'll agree because I've been heavily smoking every day for 30 years, right? smoking every day for 30 years, right? smoking every day for 30 years, right? So, what was the effect on the lungs? So, what was the effect on the lungs? So, what was the effect on the lungs? Some negative. Yes. Because of the heat Some negative. Yes. Because of the heat Some negative. Yes. Because of the heat and the tar and everything like that, it and the tar and everything like that, it and the tar and everything like that, it could irritate the airways. it reduced could irritate the airways. it reduced could irritate the airways. it reduced somewhat the antioxidant layer on your somewhat the antioxidant layer on your somewhat the antioxidant layer on your airways. [snorts] So statistically you airways. [snorts] So statistically you airways. [snorts] So statistically you would be more susceptible to an would be more susceptible to an would be more susceptible to an infection maybe bronchitis or something infection maybe bronchitis or something infection maybe bronchitis or something like that. Although like that. Although like that. Although of all my friends I don't know anyone of all my friends I don't know anyone of all my friends I don't know anyone that got it but statistically you would that got it but statistically you would that got it but statistically you would be more likely to get it. be more likely to get it. be more likely to get it. Lung function interesting 25 years of Lung function interesting 25 years of Lung function interesting 25 years of cannabis smoking compared to the cannabis smoking compared to the cannabis smoking compared to the non-smokers there was a slight increase non-smokers there was a slight increase non-smokers there was a slight increase in lung capacity in the cannabis in lung capacity in the cannabis in lung capacity in the cannabis smokers. I have to check out this study. smokers. I have to check out this study. smokers. I have to check out this study. Yeah. &gt;&gt; No cancers. Other groups got cancers, &gt;&gt; No cancers. Other groups got cancers, &gt;&gt; No cancers. Other groups got cancers, but this one don't after 25 years. So, but this one don't after 25 years. So, but this one don't after 25 years. So, that's the lung cancer. So, maybe Peter that's the lung cancer. So, maybe Peter that's the lung cancer. So, maybe Peter was not privy to this information. was not privy to this information. was not privy to this information. &gt;&gt; Well, I'll check out the study. I'm not &gt;&gt; Well, I'll check out the study. I'm not &gt;&gt; Well, I'll check out the study. I'm not familiar with it, but I appreciate you familiar with it, but I appreciate you familiar with it, but I appreciate you raising it. I wonder um if it's the THC raising it. I wonder um if it's the THC raising it. I wonder um if it's the THC and whether or not edible forms of THC and whether or not edible forms of THC and whether or not edible forms of THC would have the same effect or whether or would have the same effect or whether or would have the same effect or whether or not it's the smoking of cannabis. So, not it's the smoking of cannabis. So, not it's the smoking of cannabis. So, you think it's the THC? you think it's the THC? you think it's the THC? &gt;&gt; Rick Simpson. &gt;&gt; Rick Simpson. &gt;&gt; Rick Simpson. &gt;&gt; I know of Rick Simpson. RSO, you know, &gt;&gt; I know of Rick Simpson. RSO, you know, &gt;&gt; I know of Rick Simpson. RSO, you know, the &gt;&gt; Rick Simpson anyway, he made a &gt;&gt; Rick Simpson anyway, he made a &gt;&gt; Rick Simpson anyway, he made a concentrated oil from cannabis. Now they concentrated oil from cannabis. Now they concentrated oil from cannabis. Now they sell it in all the sell it in all the sell it in all the &gt;&gt; pharmacy called RSO, although I spoke to &gt;&gt; pharmacy called RSO, although I spoke to &gt;&gt; pharmacy called RSO, although I spoke to Rick. It's nothing to do with him. He Rick. It's nothing to do with him. He Rick. It's nothing to do with him. He just because he's the guy that just because he's the guy that just because he's the guy that originally did it in Canada and he cured originally did it in Canada and he cured originally did it in Canada and he cured hundreds of people with cancers. Uh he hundreds of people with cancers. Uh he hundreds of people with cancers. Uh he made a documentary called Run from the made a documentary called Run from the made a documentary called Run from the Cure. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; So the guy was growing cannabis on his &gt;&gt; So the guy was growing cannabis on his &gt;&gt; So the guy was growing cannabis on his farm in Canada, farm in Canada, farm in Canada, making the oil from it because he making the oil from it because he making the oil from it because he discovered by mistake he had some skin discovered by mistake he had some skin discovered by mistake he had some skin cancer and he discovered by mistake that cancer and he discovered by mistake that cancer and he discovered by mistake that the oil got rid of it and he started the oil got rid of it and he started the oil got rid of it and he started anyway he was persecuted by the authorities in he was persecuted by the authorities in he was persecuted by the authorities in Canada cuz he wasn't selling it. He was Canada cuz he wasn't selling it. He was Canada cuz he wasn't selling it. He was literally putting his money into it literally putting his money into it literally putting his money into it growing plants and giving it away for growing plants and giving it away for growing plants and giving it away for free. Right. Watch the documentary. is free. Right. Watch the documentary. is free. Right. Watch the documentary. is very explains it all and he was very explains it all and he was very explains it all and he was persecuted there and he lives in Europe persecuted there and he lives in Europe persecuted there and he lives in Europe now uh and there's a lady at the University uh and there's a lady at the University uh and there's a lady at the University of Madrid Dr. Sanchez. of Madrid Dr. Sanchez. of Madrid Dr. Sanchez. She has proven in uh lab setting THC. She has proven in uh lab setting THC. She has proven in uh lab setting THC. You can even get the video, the You can even get the video, the You can even get the video, the speed it up video, literally eating the speed it up video, literally eating the speed it up video, literally eating the cancer cells. cancer cells. cancer cells. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I've seen this. I think we're &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I've seen this. I think we're &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I've seen this. I think we're finally in 2026 finally in 2026 finally in 2026 breaking into new ground where people breaking into new ground where people breaking into new ground where people are looking at psychedelics, looking at are looking at psychedelics, looking at are looking at psychedelics, looking at other compounds, nutrition, etc. I do other compounds, nutrition, etc. I do other compounds, nutrition, etc. I do think we're I'm an optimist. I like to think we're I'm an optimist. I like to think we're I'm an optimist. I like to think that in part because of think that in part because of think that in part because of discussions like this um and an discussions like this um and an discussions like this um and an open-mindedness that has not existed open-mindedness that has not existed open-mindedness that has not existed before um that we're starting to break before um that we're starting to break before um that we're starting to break new ground in at least exploring things, new ground in at least exploring things, new ground in at least exploring things, right? Being willing to explore things. right? Being willing to explore things. right? Being willing to explore things. Um you won't be shocked to hear, but Um you won't be shocked to hear, but Um you won't be shocked to hear, but many people might be shocked to hear many people might be shocked to hear many people might be shocked to hear that the initial group that was that the initial group that was that the initial group that was exploring um different types of exploring um different types of exploring um different types of breathing to achieve different brain breathing to achieve different brain breathing to achieve different brain body states, people like Stan Graph and body states, people like Stan Graph and body states, people like Stan Graph and all those people, a lot of them were run all those people, a lot of them were run all those people, a lot of them were run out of universities. They thought it was out of universities. They thought it was out of universities. They thought it was they somehow it was looked at as too they somehow it was looked at as too they somehow it was looked at as too counterculture. Now, my lab, I'm not counterculture. Now, my lab, I'm not counterculture. Now, my lab, I'm not running a lab right now, but I still running a lab right now, but I still running a lab right now, but I still teach, but my lab has published clinical teach, but my lab has published clinical teach, but my lab has published clinical studies, right? Federally, well, in that studies, right? Federally, well, in that studies, right? Federally, well, in that case, privately funded, but case, privately funded, but case, privately funded, but peer-reviewed studies on breath work for peer-reviewed studies on breath work for peer-reviewed studies on breath work for anxiety control, breath work for sleep anxiety control, breath work for sleep anxiety control, breath work for sleep augmentation, bre. And so, to us now, augmentation, bre. And so, to us now, augmentation, bre. And so, to us now, like breath work sounds like the kind of like breath work sounds like the kind of like breath work sounds like the kind of like, oh, of course, right? But 20 years like, oh, of course, right? But 20 years like, oh, of course, right? But 20 years ago, if you said breath work, people ago, if you said breath work, people ago, if you said breath work, people were like, okay, where's your magic were like, okay, where's your magic were like, okay, where's your magic carpet and there's the door and let's carpet and there's the door and let's carpet and there's the door and let's lock you out. lock you out. lock you out. &gt;&gt; You can manipulate your brain and &gt;&gt; You can manipulate your brain and &gt;&gt; You can manipulate your brain and your body with uh with breath work. your body with uh with breath work. your body with uh with breath work. Yeah, for sure. Yeah, for sure. Yeah, for sure. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you can really shift your state. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you can really shift your state. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you can really shift your state. &gt;&gt; And the thing with the cannabis, I've &gt;&gt; And the thing with the cannabis, I've &gt;&gt; And the thing with the cannabis, I've also seen it in my life. I've seen it also seen it in my life. I've seen it also seen it in my life. I've seen it with real people and there's with real people and there's with real people and there's thousands of people out on the internet thousands of people out on the internet thousands of people out on the internet if you search. if you search. if you search. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly for glaucoma, a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly for glaucoma, a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly for glaucoma, a field that I was involved in for a long field that I was involved in for a long field that I was involved in for a long time. You know, eye pressure. Cannabis time. You know, eye pressure. Cannabis time. You know, eye pressure. Cannabis is a is a well um utilized tool to is a is a well um utilized tool to is a is a well um utilized tool to relieve eye pressure and the major cause relieve eye pressure and the major cause relieve eye pressure and the major cause of blindness second to cataract only is of blindness second to cataract only is of blindness second to cataract only is glaucoma due to elevated eye pressure glaucoma due to elevated eye pressure glaucoma due to elevated eye pressure and cannabis. it reduces that's well and cannabis. it reduces that's well and cannabis. it reduces that's well established and there so in the established and there so in the established and there so in the opthomemology community they've really opthomemology community they've really opthomemology community they've really embraced it. I do have one question that embraced it. I do have one question that embraced it. I do have one question that I think is in the back of many people's I think is in the back of many people's I think is in the back of many people's minds or should be. Um, you were clearly minds or should be. Um, you were clearly minds or should be. Um, you were clearly and still are a very driven guy. and still are a very driven guy. and still are a very driven guy. Although now you have this kind of Although now you have this kind of Although now you have this kind of traditional now. traditional now. traditional now. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You have an additional you have &gt;&gt; Yeah. You have an additional you have &gt;&gt; Yeah. You have an additional you have you have an onoff switch right now. Um, you have an onoff switch right now. Um, you have an onoff switch right now. Um, maybe it was all gas pedal before. Um, maybe it was all gas pedal before. Um, maybe it was all gas pedal before. Um, &gt;&gt; many people that I know who smoked a lot &gt;&gt; many people that I know who smoked a lot &gt;&gt; many people that I know who smoked a lot of &gt;&gt; weed. Yeah. &gt;&gt; weed. Yeah. &gt;&gt; weed. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Some of them became very amotivated. &gt;&gt; Some of them became very amotivated. &gt;&gt; Some of them became very amotivated. They like They like They like &gt;&gt; I'll do it tomorrow. &gt;&gt; I'll do it tomorrow. &gt;&gt; I'll do it tomorrow. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So you're you are a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So you're you are a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So you're you are a unique specimen in the sense that like unique specimen in the sense that like unique specimen in the sense that like super driven right and so I had this you super driven right and so I had this you super driven right and so I had this you know dime store psychologist theory for know dime store psychologist theory for know dime store psychologist theory for a long time with my friends which was a long time with my friends which was a long time with my friends which was hey if you're really driven maybe you hey if you're really driven maybe you hey if you're really driven maybe you should do some things to relax maybe should do some things to relax maybe should do some things to relax maybe cannabis is right for you a little bit cannabis is right for you a little bit cannabis is right for you a little bit but if you're lazy but if you're lazy but if you're lazy &gt;&gt; I don't know if that's the right drug &gt;&gt; I don't know if that's the right drug &gt;&gt; I don't know if that's the right drug &gt;&gt; if you're lazy you're lazy right &gt;&gt; if you're lazy you're lazy right &gt;&gt; if you're lazy you're lazy right [laughter] maybe it just amplifies it um [laughter] maybe it just amplifies it um [laughter] maybe it just amplifies it um you know there's a test you can do now I you know there's a test you can do now I you know there's a test you can do now I don't know if it's here But in I did it don't know if it's here But in I did it don't know if it's here But in I did it in Spain. So we have an endockinabonoid in Spain. So we have an endockinabonoid in Spain. So we have an endockinabonoid system, right? system, right? system, right? &gt;&gt; Inside [clears throat] your body. &gt;&gt; Inside [clears throat] your body. &gt;&gt; Inside [clears throat] your body. &gt;&gt; But it varies. &gt;&gt; But it varies. &gt;&gt; But it varies. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; So there's a swab you can do and it &gt;&gt; So there's a swab you can do and it &gt;&gt; So there's a swab you can do and it gives you a report on your gives you a report on your gives you a report on your endocanabonoid system, right? endocanabonoid system, right? endocanabonoid system, right? And uh there was And uh there was And uh there was one of them is a likelihood of negative one of them is a likelihood of negative one of them is a likelihood of negative effects from 1 to 10. effects from 1 to 10. effects from 1 to 10. So the lady did my thing and I was So the lady did my thing and I was So the lady did my thing and I was kidding around with her. I said, "What kidding around with her. I said, "What kidding around with her. I said, "What does it say there? Do I need THC for does it say there? Do I need THC for does it say there? Do I need THC for life?" just messing about. She said, life?" just messing about. She said, life?" just messing about. She said, "Well, you're not far off." She said, "Well, you're not far off." She said, "Well, you're not far off." She said, "Look at this. The likelihood of you "Look at this. The likelihood of you "Look at this. The likelihood of you having negative effects from cannabis, having negative effects from cannabis, having negative effects from cannabis, you're on one out of 10." So, uh, for you're on one out of 10." So, uh, for you're on one out of 10." So, uh, for instance, my wife, we've been married instance, my wife, we've been married instance, my wife, we've been married 12, 13 years now. Sorry, girl, if I made 12, 13 years now. Sorry, girl, if I made 12, 13 years now. Sorry, girl, if I made a mistake. a mistake. a mistake. She don't go anywhere near it. She feels She don't go anywhere near it. She feels She don't go anywhere near it. She feels totally paranoid if she has a little bit totally paranoid if she has a little bit totally paranoid if she has a little bit of cannabis. So I'm well aware of uh you of cannabis. So I'm well aware of uh you of cannabis. So I'm well aware of uh you know different endockinabonoid systems know different endockinabonoid systems know different endockinabonoid systems maybe or different personalities. So for maybe or different personalities. So for maybe or different personalities. So for some people they will get a lot of some people they will get a lot of some people they will get a lot of negative effects. Uh so you have to find negative effects. Uh so you have to find negative effects. Uh so you have to find out for yourself. But it's interesting out for yourself. But it's interesting out for yourself. But it's interesting they got this test now that actually they got this test now that actually they got this test now that actually proves that your endockinabonoid system proves that your endockinabonoid system proves that your endockinabonoid system might be slightly different from mine. might be slightly different from mine. might be slightly different from mine. So I might benefit more from THC. Maybe So I might benefit more from THC. Maybe So I might benefit more from THC. Maybe you benefit more from CBD or balance. you benefit more from CBD or balance. you benefit more from CBD or balance. So, it's interesting now that we're So, it's interesting now that we're So, it's interesting now that we're &gt;&gt; uh able to get this information and uh &gt;&gt; uh able to get this information and uh &gt;&gt; uh able to get this information and uh I'm very driven and I'm very I'm very driven and I'm very I'm very driven and I'm very disciplined. Yeah. And uh yeah, my wife disciplined. Yeah. And uh yeah, my wife disciplined. Yeah. And uh yeah, my wife thinks I'm hyperactive. I'm kind of thinks I'm hyperactive. I'm kind of thinks I'm hyperactive. I'm kind of quietly I'm look very relaxed but I'm quietly I'm look very relaxed but I'm quietly I'm look very relaxed but I'm constantly thinking and moving. So, constantly thinking and moving. So, constantly thinking and moving. So, probably for me it's beneficial at this probably for me it's beneficial at this probably for me it's beneficial at this stage. And um stage. And um stage. And um having this discussion with my friend, having this discussion with my friend, having this discussion with my friend, oh it's not good. and Sony for losers. I oh it's not good. and Sony for losers. I oh it's not good. and Sony for losers. I said, "You like to watch that American said, "You like to watch that American said, "You like to watch that American football, don't you, on Saturday?" He's football, don't you, on Saturday?" He's football, don't you, on Saturday?" He's like, "Yeah." I said, "You know, they like, "Yeah." I said, "You know, they like, "Yeah." I said, "You know, they did a survey with the NFL players and did a survey with the NFL players and did a survey with the NFL players and NBA players. How many of them use NBA players. How many of them use NBA players. How many of them use cannabis on a daily basis?" In between cannabis on a daily basis?" In between cannabis on a daily basis?" In between 70 and 80%. 70 and 80%. 70 and 80%. So, we're talking about the most elite So, we're talking about the most elite So, we're talking about the most elite athletes in the world, athletes in the world, athletes in the world, highest paid athletes. They wouldn't be highest paid athletes. They wouldn't be highest paid athletes. They wouldn't be doing that if it wasn't benefiting them. doing that if it wasn't benefiting them. doing that if it wasn't benefiting them. And they're saying it's benefiting them. And they're saying it's benefiting them. And they're saying it's benefiting them. But more to the point, how about the But more to the point, how about the But more to the point, how about the owners of these clubs? If they thought owners of these clubs? If they thought owners of these clubs? If they thought this is having a negative effect on this is having a negative effect on this is having a negative effect on them, they would stamp it out right them, they would stamp it out right them, they would stamp it out right away, but they don't. away, but they don't. away, but they don't. Uh, and these are, you know, the Uh, and these are, you know, the Uh, and these are, you know, the basketball players are saying they smoke basketball players are saying they smoke basketball players are saying they smoke blunts before they go on the court and blunts before they go on the court and blunts before they go on the court and they play better and they recover better they play better and they recover better they play better and they recover better and so on. Yeah, it makes sense. and so on. Yeah, it makes sense. and so on. Yeah, it makes sense. &gt;&gt; So, I would say it it's good to hear you &gt;&gt; So, I would say it it's good to hear you &gt;&gt; So, I would say it it's good to hear you say that it probably varies by person. say that it probably varies by person. say that it probably varies by person. Your wife, it's not for her. It's Your wife, it's not for her. It's Your wife, it's not for her. It's clearly for you and um and it probably clearly for you and um and it probably clearly for you and um and it probably varies by profession and natural tend varies by profession and natural tend varies by profession and natural tend drive and but maybe other things too. I drive and but maybe other things too. I drive and but maybe other things too. I mean um I know some artists musicians mean um I know some artists musicians mean um I know some artists musicians who need to drink and smoke and others who need to drink and smoke and others who need to drink and smoke and others and others and others who don't and um and others and others who don't and um and others and others who don't and um &gt;&gt; you know now nicotine's made a big &gt;&gt; you know now nicotine's made a big &gt;&gt; you know now nicotine's made a big comeback in the oral forms of nicotine. comeback in the oral forms of nicotine. comeback in the oral forms of nicotine. You know I feel like You know I feel like You know I feel like &gt;&gt; just like with dogs there's tremendous &gt;&gt; just like with dogs there's tremendous &gt;&gt; just like with dogs there's tremendous variation in body size, temperament, variation in body size, temperament, variation in body size, temperament, &gt;&gt; even food. &gt;&gt; even food. &gt;&gt; even food. &gt;&gt; Humans are different. some food for some &gt;&gt; Humans are different. some food for some &gt;&gt; Humans are different. some food for some people they're allergic to it. It gives people they're allergic to it. It gives people they're allergic to it. It gives them a bad effect and somebody else not. them a bad effect and somebody else not. them a bad effect and somebody else not. So there's no rule that applies to So there's no rule that applies to So there's no rule that applies to everybody 100%. everybody 100%. everybody 100%. &gt;&gt; But cannabis has a very negative image &gt;&gt; But cannabis has a very negative image &gt;&gt; But cannabis has a very negative image they say because of uh 100 over 100 they say because of uh 100 over 100 they say because of uh 100 over 100 years of propaganda. Yeah, it was a years of propaganda. Yeah, it was a years of propaganda. Yeah, it was a medicine. You could get it on the medicine. You could get it on the medicine. You could get it on the shelves in America in 1900. It was for shelves in America in 1900. It was for shelves in America in 1900. It was for many things. uh Queen Victoria, the many things. uh Queen Victoria, the many things. uh Queen Victoria, the famous longest uh queen, she used to use famous longest uh queen, she used to use famous longest uh queen, she used to use cannabis for period pains and this and cannabis for period pains and this and cannabis for period pains and this and that. So, it was used as a medicine for that. So, it was used as a medicine for that. So, it was used as a medicine for a long time until the pharmaceutical a long time until the pharmaceutical a long time until the pharmaceutical industry came along and then all of a industry came along and then all of a industry came along and then all of a sudden they're making movies, you know, sudden they're making movies, you know, sudden they're making movies, you know, if a white woman smokes cannabis, she's if a white woman smokes cannabis, she's if a white woman smokes cannabis, she's going to sleep with black men and all going to sleep with black men and all going to sleep with black men and all kind of crazy stuff. There was one kind of crazy stuff. There was one kind of crazy stuff. There was one called Reefer Madness, you know, smoking called Reefer Madness, you know, smoking called Reefer Madness, you know, smoking going to send you crazy. I mean, going to send you crazy. I mean, going to send you crazy. I mean, &gt;&gt; this is in people's minds, you know, &gt;&gt; this is in people's minds, you know, &gt;&gt; this is in people's minds, you know, it's a bad thing. It's a drug. It's not. it's a bad thing. It's a drug. It's not. it's a bad thing. It's a drug. It's not. It's a plant medicine. And it grows from It's a plant medicine. And it grows from It's a plant medicine. And it grows from the ground the ground the ground &gt;&gt; like that. It's stronger now. It's &gt;&gt; like that. It's stronger now. It's &gt;&gt; like that. It's stronger now. It's higher in THC because it's been higher in THC because it's been higher in THC because it's been &gt;&gt; crossbreed and cross like a dog. You &gt;&gt; crossbreed and cross like a dog. You &gt;&gt; crossbreed and cross like a dog. You know, you want a dog with a long nose. know, you want a dog with a long nose. know, you want a dog with a long nose. It's the same thing with plants. So, It's the same thing with plants. So, It's the same thing with plants. So, &gt;&gt; people want to get more bang for their &gt;&gt; people want to get more bang for their &gt;&gt; people want to get more bang for their buck. So, the breeders are trying to buck. So, the breeders are trying to buck. So, the breeders are trying to breed more THC into it. And sometimes breed more THC into it. And sometimes breed more THC into it. And sometimes this is not good for people because the this is not good for people because the this is not good for people because the CBD is kind of calmed down and balanced CBD is kind of calmed down and balanced CBD is kind of calmed down and balanced with the THC. Now the CBD is down and with the THC. Now the CBD is down and with the THC. Now the CBD is down and the THC is up there. So that's why it's the THC is up there. So that's why it's the THC is up there. So that's why it's more likely to make you feel a little more likely to make you feel a little more likely to make you feel a little edgy now because the THC is kind of edgy now because the THC is kind of edgy now because the THC is kind of active. You know, active. You know, active. You know, &gt;&gt; I had a guest on here named Chris &gt;&gt; I had a guest on here named Chris &gt;&gt; I had a guest on here named Chris McCertie. He's a scientist out in McCertie. He's a scientist out in McCertie. He's a scientist out in Florida and um he taught me three things Florida and um he taught me three things Florida and um he taught me three things I think that you'll find interesting um I think that you'll find interesting um I think that you'll find interesting um in light of what we're talking about. in light of what we're talking about. in light of what we're talking about. one that every pharmaceutical company one that every pharmaceutical company one that every pharmaceutical company has what are called bioprosctors that has what are called bioprosctors that has what are called bioprosctors that send people quietly send people quietly send people quietly &gt;&gt; to the jungle to other places and not &gt;&gt; to the jungle to other places and not &gt;&gt; to the jungle to other places and not just the jungle to find plants that are just the jungle to find plants that are just the jungle to find plants that are used locally and then to find specific used locally and then to find specific used locally and then to find specific molecules and develop highly potent molecules and develop highly potent molecules and develop highly potent extracts to grab just one effect. The extracts to grab just one effect. The extracts to grab just one effect. The second thing is we were talking second thing is we were talking second thing is we were talking aboutratum. I think the proper aboutratum. I think the proper aboutratum. I think the proper pronunciation isratom but and he was pronunciation isratom but and he was pronunciation isratom but and he was talking about how theratom plant and talking about how theratom plant and talking about how theratom plant and even the cocoa plant um chewing on the even the cocoa plant um chewing on the even the cocoa plant um chewing on the leaves is known to give people a kind of leaves is known to give people a kind of leaves is known to give people a kind of balanced in both cases kind of stimulant balanced in both cases kind of stimulant balanced in both cases kind of stimulant uh relaxation effect. uh relaxation effect. uh relaxation effect. &gt;&gt; I did that in Peru when we went to Machu &gt;&gt; I did that in Peru when we went to Machu &gt;&gt; I did that in Peru when we went to Machu Picchu. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You feel like maybe had a coffee &gt;&gt; Yeah. You feel like maybe had a coffee &gt;&gt; Yeah. You feel like maybe had a coffee or something. That's about it. Well, or something. That's about it. Well, or something. That's about it. Well, it's interesting because what happens is it's interesting because what happens is it's interesting because what happens is people take the plant, find the molecule people take the plant, find the molecule people take the plant, find the molecule that produces like the real dopamine that produces like the real dopamine that produces like the real dopamine high in the case of cocaine orratom and high in the case of cocaine orratom and high in the case of cocaine orratom and they then develop isolates orratom like they then develop isolates orratom like they then develop isolates orratom like synthetics or THC like synthetics. And synthetics or THC like synthetics. And synthetics or THC like synthetics. And so what the especially in the United so what the especially in the United so what the especially in the United States there's this there's this States there's this there's this States there's this there's this tendency to take a plant which is very tendency to take a plant which is very tendency to take a plant which is very balanced in its chemistry balanced in its chemistry balanced in its chemistry &gt;&gt; and then to extract the thing that gives &gt;&gt; and then to extract the thing that gives &gt;&gt; and then to extract the thing that gives you an amplified effect which is most you an amplified effect which is most you an amplified effect which is most habit forming and addictive and then habit forming and addictive and then habit forming and addictive and then drive that to market but then we drive that to market but then we drive that to market but then we demonize the whole plant demonize the whole plant demonize the whole plant &gt;&gt; in its natural form &gt;&gt; in its natural form &gt;&gt; in its natural form &gt;&gt; you can't patent it &gt;&gt; you can't patent it &gt;&gt; you can't patent it &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; so you can't make a lot of money so you &gt;&gt; so you can't make a lot of money so you &gt;&gt; so you can't make a lot of money so you need to need to need to &gt;&gt; change it a little bit or extract &gt;&gt; change it a little bit or extract &gt;&gt; change it a little bit or extract something out of there cannabis grows something out of there cannabis grows something out of there cannabis grows from the ground yes it's stronger than from the ground yes it's stronger than from the ground yes it's stronger than it used to be back in the 60s cuz the it used to be back in the 60s cuz the it used to be back in the 60s cuz the growers bred it like that. But it's the growers bred it like that. But it's the growers bred it like that. But it's not synthetic. It's just a plant it's not synthetic. It's just a plant it's not synthetic. It's just a plant crusted with a plant like you know it's crusted with a plant like you know it's crusted with a plant like you know it's a it's a natural process. That's why uh a it's a natural process. That's why uh a it's a natural process. That's why uh farmers can't make money from it. They farmers can't make money from it. They farmers can't make money from it. They have to change it from its natural form have to change it from its natural form have to change it from its natural form balance but when they do that it doesn't balance but when they do that it doesn't balance but when they do that it doesn't work so well. work so well. work so well. &gt;&gt; Well the internet has caused a great &gt;&gt; Well the internet has caused a great &gt;&gt; Well the internet has caused a great many problems instant gratification and many problems instant gratification and many problems instant gratification and this kind of thing but I also think it's this kind of thing but I also think it's this kind of thing but I also think it's solved a great number of problems. And solved a great number of problems. And solved a great number of problems. And one of the things that it's solved is one of the things that it's solved is one of the things that it's solved is that the discussions about plants versus that the discussions about plants versus that the discussions about plants versus isolates, about cannabis for one person, isolates, about cannabis for one person, isolates, about cannabis for one person, maybe not for another, psychedelics, um, maybe not for another, psychedelics, um, maybe not for another, psychedelics, um, TRT versus steroids. I like to think TRT versus steroids. I like to think TRT versus steroids. I like to think that we are in a whole new era now where that we are in a whole new era now where that we are in a whole new era now where people hopefully are starting to search people hopefully are starting to search people hopefully are starting to search for information differently. It's for information differently. It's for information differently. It's &gt;&gt; you can find it now at your fingertips, &gt;&gt; you can find it now at your fingertips, &gt;&gt; you can find it now at your fingertips, man. &gt;&gt; It's great. When I first was starting to &gt;&gt; It's great. When I first was starting to &gt;&gt; It's great. When I first was starting to get into interested in psychedelics and get into interested in psychedelics and get into interested in psychedelics and cannabis, &gt;&gt; I mean I, as I said, I was in Amsterdam, &gt;&gt; I mean I, as I said, I was in Amsterdam, &gt;&gt; I mean I, as I said, I was in Amsterdam, so there's stores there with alternative so there's stores there with alternative so there's stores there with alternative with books in it that I wouldn't with books in it that I wouldn't with books in it that I wouldn't normally find even in England. So that's normally find even in England. So that's normally find even in England. So that's when I had to, you know, like when I when I had to, you know, like when I when I had to, you know, like when I started bodybuilding, I had to go out started bodybuilding, I had to go out started bodybuilding, I had to go out and buy magazines or get a book. It and buy magazines or get a book. It and buy magazines or get a book. It wasn't so easy. Uh now at the your wasn't so easy. Uh now at the your wasn't so easy. Uh now at the your fingertips, you can do everything. Don't fingertips, you can do everything. Don't fingertips, you can do everything. Don't listen to me. Go check out that study if listen to me. Go check out that study if listen to me. Go check out that study if you want. I didn't make it. But I can you want. I didn't make it. But I can you want. I didn't make it. But I can tell you after 30 years of daily tell you after 30 years of daily tell you after 30 years of daily smoking, uh, I went for a fitness smoking, uh, I went for a fitness smoking, uh, I went for a fitness evaluation when I was in Brazil a couple evaluation when I was in Brazil a couple evaluation when I was in Brazil a couple of years ago. They said the test biology of years ago. They said the test biology of years ago. They said the test biology I should be 38 I should be 38 I should be 38 &gt;&gt; and my breathing and my heart rate &gt;&gt; and my breathing and my heart rate &gt;&gt; and my breathing and my heart rate recovery from exercise is excellent. recovery from exercise is excellent. recovery from exercise is excellent. &gt;&gt; Well, no one's doubting your vigor. I &gt;&gt; Well, no one's doubting your vigor. I &gt;&gt; Well, no one's doubting your vigor. I promise you that. promise you that. promise you that. &gt;&gt; Bruce Lee, &gt;&gt; Bruce Lee, &gt;&gt; Bruce Lee, &gt;&gt; I'm similar to your wife in that is it's &gt;&gt; I'm similar to your wife in that is it's &gt;&gt; I'm similar to your wife in that is it's not for me. But but I'm, you know, not for me. But but I'm, you know, not for me. But but I'm, you know, like to each their own, right? I have like to each their own, right? I have like to each their own, right? I have the things that work for me and the things that work for me and the things that work for me and the things that don't and I'm open-minded. I things that don't and I'm open-minded. I things that don't and I'm open-minded. I have a couple more questions. One is have a couple more questions. One is have a couple more questions. One is about your wife visav training for about your wife visav training for about your wife visav training for women. Early on, we were talking about women. Early on, we were talking about women. Early on, we were talking about training and um I'll point people to training and um I'll point people to training and um I'll point people to some other references that you've put some other references that you've put some other references that you've put out there about training, but I you made out there about training, but I you made out there about training, but I you made it very clear kind of what the it very clear kind of what the it very clear kind of what the beginner versus more advanced stuff is. beginner versus more advanced stuff is. beginner versus more advanced stuff is. I want to make sure that we touch on um I want to make sure that we touch on um I want to make sure that we touch on um she's quite the athlete. Um, do you she's quite the athlete. Um, do you she's quite the athlete. Um, do you think women who want to get stronger, think women who want to get stronger, think women who want to get stronger, maybe just a bit more size here and maybe just a bit more size here and maybe just a bit more size here and there, but not overall size, do you there, but not overall size, do you there, but not overall size, do you think they should train differently? And think they should train differently? And think they should train differently? And if so, how? if so, how? if so, how? &gt;&gt; Differently from men? &gt;&gt; Differently from men? &gt;&gt; Differently from men? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; I don't think so. I mean, the same &gt;&gt; I don't think so. I mean, the same &gt;&gt; I don't think so. I mean, the same muscles in the same place, uh, same muscles in the same place, uh, same muscles in the same place, uh, same rules apply. The muscles are not going rules apply. The muscles are not going rules apply. The muscles are not going to grow unless you overload them. to grow unless you overload them. to grow unless you overload them. &gt;&gt; It's just going to be limited by the &gt;&gt; It's just going to be limited by the &gt;&gt; It's just going to be limited by the fact that you're female and you don't fact that you're female and you don't fact that you're female and you don't produce a lot of testosterone, which is produce a lot of testosterone, which is produce a lot of testosterone, which is makes it much more difficult to build makes it much more difficult to build makes it much more difficult to build muscle. So, we used to have this muscle. So, we used to have this muscle. So, we used to have this nonsense word. I said it's a nonsense word. I said it's a nonsense word. I said it's a nonsense word. No, I don't want to get bigger. I word. No, I don't want to get bigger. I word. No, I don't want to get bigger. I want to get toned. All right. But there want to get toned. All right. But there want to get toned. All right. But there is no such thing as toned. What you mean is no such thing as toned. What you mean is no such thing as toned. What you mean is you want to look firmer. Right. Yes. is you want to look firmer. Right. Yes. is you want to look firmer. Right. Yes. It's called building muscle and losing It's called building muscle and losing It's called building muscle and losing body fat. So, your arms might be the body fat. So, your arms might be the body fat. So, your arms might be the same size, but it's a different same size, but it's a different same size, but it's a different composition now. It looks leaner. It composition now. It looks leaner. It composition now. It looks leaner. It looks more shapely. looks more shapely. looks more shapely. It's the same thing. It's bodybuilding. It's the same thing. It's bodybuilding. It's the same thing. It's bodybuilding. You're building muscle and losing body You're building muscle and losing body You're building muscle and losing body fat. That's the only way you can change fat. That's the only way you can change fat. That's the only way you can change your shape. You can do yoga, you can do your shape. You can do yoga, you can do your shape. You can do yoga, you can do polite, all these things. It's great for polite, all these things. It's great for polite, all these things. It's great for your mobility, your internal your mobility, your internal your mobility, your internal musculature. But the only way to really musculature. But the only way to really musculature. But the only way to really change your physical appearance change your physical appearance change your physical appearance is resistance training, weight training, is resistance training, weight training, is resistance training, weight training, whatever you want to call it. Maybe they whatever you want to call it. Maybe they whatever you want to call it. Maybe they don't want to call it bodybuilding. Oh don't want to call it bodybuilding. Oh don't want to call it bodybuilding. Oh no, resistance [snorts] training. That no, resistance [snorts] training. That no, resistance [snorts] training. That sounds better. But it's the same bloody sounds better. But it's the same bloody sounds better. But it's the same bloody thing. You know, you need to build thing. You know, you need to build thing. You know, you need to build muscle and lose body fat. Then you'll muscle and lose body fat. Then you'll muscle and lose body fat. Then you'll look leaner. And don't worry about look leaner. And don't worry about look leaner. And don't worry about building too much muscle. Unless you're building too much muscle. Unless you're building too much muscle. Unless you're a genetic outlier that's genetically a genetic outlier that's genetically a genetic outlier that's genetically very muscular and maybe higher very muscular and maybe higher very muscular and maybe higher testosterone levels. The girls that you testosterone levels. The girls that you testosterone levels. The girls that you see in competition, they're all using see in competition, they're all using see in competition, they're all using steroids. All of them. Even the bikini steroids. All of them. Even the bikini steroids. All of them. Even the bikini competition. They had this bikini class competition. They had this bikini class competition. They had this bikini class for women that introduced years ago for women that introduced years ago for women that introduced years ago because the idea is the women are because the idea is the women are because the idea is the women are getting too big now in the other getting too big now in the other getting too big now in the other classes. So we'll make this bikini class classes. So we'll make this bikini class classes. So we'll make this bikini class which is a fit, you know, young girl which is a fit, you know, young girl which is a fit, you know, young girl that's been training a little bit bikini that's been training a little bit bikini that's been training a little bit bikini on the beach. They started doing juice on the beach. They started doing juice on the beach. They started doing juice and got bigger. And I'm like, what are and got bigger. And I'm like, what are and got bigger. And I'm like, what are they going to do next? Bikini Light. You they going to do next? Bikini Light. You they going to do next? Bikini Light. You know, [laughter] know, [laughter] know, [laughter] unfortunately, that's what, you know, unfortunately, that's what, you know, unfortunately, that's what, you know, when it gets competitive, people start when it gets competitive, people start when it gets competitive, people start using products. So, all those girls you using products. So, all those girls you using products. So, all those girls you see doing competitions, they're all see doing competitions, they're all see doing competitions, they're all using steroids. So, you're not going to using steroids. So, you're not going to using steroids. So, you're not going to get like that by mistake. Uh, you need get like that by mistake. Uh, you need get like that by mistake. Uh, you need to build some muscle mass. You change to build some muscle mass. You change to build some muscle mass. You change your appearance and be healthier. your appearance and be healthier. your appearance and be healthier. Resistance training just the same as a Resistance training just the same as a Resistance training just the same as a man. Maybe you want to do extra work on man. Maybe you want to do extra work on man. Maybe you want to do extra work on your glutes or something because that's your glutes or something because that's your glutes or something because that's a big thing for women. a big thing for women. a big thing for women. Maybe you do a bit another exercise Maybe you do a bit another exercise Maybe you do a bit another exercise there that the man doesn't do, but it's there that the man doesn't do, but it's there that the man doesn't do, but it's the same thing applies, right? the same thing applies, right? the same thing applies, right? Stress adaptation, recovery, adaptation. It's adaptation, recovery, adaptation. It's adaptation, recovery, adaptation. It's the same principle. There's the same principle. There's the same principle. There's not voodoo, there's no uh you know that not voodoo, there's no uh you know that not voodoo, there's no uh you know that there's a whole industry now, right? there's a whole industry now, right? there's a whole industry now, right? online and simple easy facts and simple easy facts and simple easy facts don't sound sexy. don't sound sexy. don't sound sexy. So that everybody tries to make So that everybody tries to make So that everybody tries to make everything very complicated in order to everything very complicated in order to everything very complicated in order to make the client perceive more value. make the client perceive more value. make the client perceive more value. Uh ah you got to change the was talking Uh ah you got to change the was talking Uh ah you got to change the was talking to a guy once who's the top trainer. I to a guy once who's the top trainer. I to a guy once who's the top trainer. I said, "Why have you got to train your said, "Why have you got to train your said, "Why have you got to train your client's routine every random four client's routine every random four client's routine every random four weeks, six weeks, whatever it is you weeks, six weeks, whatever it is you weeks, six weeks, whatever it is you do?" I said, "It's nonsense. People just do?" I said, "It's nonsense. People just do?" I said, "It's nonsense. People just do the same exercises that work, right? do the same exercises that work, right? do the same exercises that work, right? Don't keep changing it around. You can't Don't keep changing it around. You can't Don't keep changing it around. You can't even track it." Yeah, I know, but even track it." Yeah, I know, but even track it." Yeah, I know, but they want it. They like to change it they want it. They like to change it they want it. They like to change it around. I'm like, "Yeah, [clears throat] around. I'm like, "Yeah, [clears throat] around. I'm like, "Yeah, [clears throat] maybe it's a good business strategy, but maybe it's a good business strategy, but maybe it's a good business strategy, but I'm like, just tell people the truth and I'm like, just tell people the truth and I'm like, just tell people the truth and it is what it is." it is what it is." it is what it is." &gt;&gt; It's much harder to package and sell &gt;&gt; It's much harder to package and sell &gt;&gt; It's much harder to package and sell drive. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's uh hard work, sweat, push &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's uh hard work, sweat, push &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's uh hard work, sweat, push yourself. But there's a beauty in that. yourself. But there's a beauty in that. yourself. But there's a beauty in that. There's a beauty in pushing yourself. There's a beauty in pushing yourself. There's a beauty in pushing yourself. And you know, once you overcome And you know, once you overcome And you know, once you overcome something, then you feel more confident and then you feel more confident and then you feel more confident and stronger to overcome something again, stronger to overcome something again, stronger to overcome something again, right? And this bleeds into everything, right? And this bleeds into everything, right? And this bleeds into everything, right? Into your life. Like the gym is a right? Into your life. Like the gym is a right? Into your life. Like the gym is a microcosm of your life, right? If you're going to of your life, right? If you're going to of your life, right? If you're going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about in a gym and not push [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about in a gym and not push [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about in a gym and not push yourself, uh, when it gets tough, you're yourself, uh, when it gets tough, you're yourself, uh, when it gets tough, you're going to, oh, no, screw that. Put it going to, oh, no, screw that. Put it going to, oh, no, screw that. Put it down, probably going to do the same thing in probably going to do the same thing in probably going to do the same thing in life. When things come along that are life. When things come along that are life. When things come along that are tough, you know? So, it's not just a tough, you know? So, it's not just a tough, you know? So, it's not just a physical thing. It's the it's the mental physical thing. It's the it's the mental physical thing. It's the it's the mental thing that controls everything. If you thing that controls everything. If you thing that controls everything. If you become a more resilient, more confident, become a more resilient, more confident, become a more resilient, more confident, stronger person, stronger person, stronger person, that goes into everything in your life. that goes into everything in your life. that goes into everything in your life. So, there's more to bodybuilding than So, there's more to bodybuilding than So, there's more to bodybuilding than big muscles and competitions. big muscles and competitions. big muscles and competitions. &gt;&gt; And iron your shirts. &gt;&gt; And iron your shirts. &gt;&gt; And iron your shirts. &gt;&gt; Yeah, iron your shirts. Lower your &gt;&gt; Yeah, iron your shirts. Lower your &gt;&gt; Yeah, iron your shirts. Lower your cortisol. &gt;&gt; I don't even know why I was doing that. &gt;&gt; I don't even know why I was doing that. &gt;&gt; I don't even know why I was doing that. This &gt;&gt; is so cool. I'm imagining that now. I'm &gt;&gt; is so cool. I'm imagining that now. I'm &gt;&gt; is so cool. I'm imagining that now. I'm going to start ironing my own shirts. going to start ironing my own shirts. going to start ironing my own shirts. Um, tell me about DY Nutrition. I um I'm Um, tell me about DY Nutrition. I um I'm Um, tell me about DY Nutrition. I um I'm not getting paid to ask this. I'm just not getting paid to ask this. I'm just not getting paid to ask this. I'm just very curious. Uh, you know what? Where very curious. Uh, you know what? Where very curious. Uh, you know what? Where is it? What is it? is it? What is it? is it? What is it? &gt;&gt; When I was bodybuilding, I was &gt;&gt; When I was bodybuilding, I was &gt;&gt; When I was bodybuilding, I was competing. Uh I was contracted to work competing. Uh I was contracted to work competing. Uh I was contracted to work with the weeder company, you know, be with the weeder company, you know, be with the weeder company, you know, be their guy in the magazines and hold the their guy in the magazines and hold the their guy in the magazines and hold the product and everything, product and everything, product and everything, but I was interested, you know, in but I was interested, you know, in but I was interested, you know, in supplements. I was always reading supplements. I was always reading supplements. I was always reading nutrition supplements, anything to do nutrition supplements, anything to do nutrition supplements, anything to do with my craft. And I spoke to Joe Weider with my craft. And I spoke to Joe Weider with my craft. And I spoke to Joe Weider and I said, "Listen, can I work with the and I said, "Listen, can I work with the and I said, "Listen, can I work with the guys?" And uh you know, no, just guys?" And uh you know, no, just guys?" And uh you know, no, just be the guy. So be the guy. So be the guy. So I was interested in getting involved I was interested in getting involved I was interested in getting involved then because I thought the weirder then because I thought the weirder then because I thought the weirder supplements definitely could be better, supplements definitely could be better, supplements definitely could be better, right? Well, he didn't want me involved right? Well, he didn't want me involved right? Well, he didn't want me involved in that. So through various businesses in that. So through various businesses in that. So through various businesses over the years, I built DY Nutrition, over the years, I built DY Nutrition, over the years, I built DY Nutrition, which is my own brand. I was just doing which is my own brand. I was just doing which is my own brand. I was just doing it myself, me and a partner and doing it myself, me and a partner and doing it myself, me and a partner and doing it ourselves. it ourselves. it ourselves. And over the years then I found uh some And over the years then I found uh some And over the years then I found uh some good partners and we've got to the point good partners and we've got to the point good partners and we've got to the point now where we have our own pharmaceutical now where we have our own pharmaceutical now where we have our own pharmaceutical facility in Europe and uh we've been facility in Europe and uh we've been facility in Europe and uh we've been hitting the bodybuilding market all over hitting the bodybuilding market all over hitting the bodybuilding market all over Europe and Middle East and Europe and Middle East and Europe and Middle East and uh now we're shifting we're still going uh now we're shifting we're still going uh now we're shifting we're still going to maintain that but we're shifting into to maintain that but we're shifting into to maintain that but we're shifting into health wellness all the things that health wellness all the things that health wellness all the things that we're talking about and uh we're talking about and uh we're talking about and uh making some real kick-ass product for making some real kick-ass product for making some real kick-ass product for that market as well. So there's almost that market as well. So there's almost that market as well. So there's almost like two Dorians, Dorian the bodybuilder like two Dorians, Dorian the bodybuilder like two Dorians, Dorian the bodybuilder and Dorian now who's in his 60s and Dorian now who's in his 60s and Dorian now who's in his 60s and being concerned about my own health and being concerned about my own health and being concerned about my own health and longevity and quality of life and longevity and quality of life and longevity and quality of life and what supplements can you take to help in what supplements can you take to help in what supplements can you take to help in that area. So we're developing that uh that area. So we're developing that uh that area. So we're developing that uh whole kind of new area whole kind of new area whole kind of new area uh that I'm really interested and really uh that I'm really interested and really uh that I'm really interested and really involved in the development of the involved in the development of the involved in the development of the products and everything like that. products and everything like that. products and everything like that. and we are after many years of and we are after many years of and we are after many years of demand coming to the US pretty soon. So demand coming to the US pretty soon. So demand coming to the US pretty soon. So that's one of the reasons I'm over here that's one of the reasons I'm over here that's one of the reasons I'm over here uh meeting with some people and uh meeting with some people and uh meeting with some people and everything. So look out for us. We'll be everything. So look out for us. We'll be everything. So look out for us. We'll be uh we'll be in the US soon as well. uh we'll be in the US soon as well. uh we'll be in the US soon as well. &gt;&gt; Great. So I imagine it's the u quote &gt;&gt; Great. So I imagine it's the u quote &gt;&gt; Great. So I imagine it's the u quote unquote conventional stuff like whey unquote conventional stuff like whey unquote conventional stuff like whey protein, creatine, glutamine, and um uh protein, creatine, glutamine, and um uh protein, creatine, glutamine, and um uh but some additional things as well. but some additional things as well. but some additional things as well. Yeah, we got uh preworkout creatine uh Yeah, we got uh preworkout creatine uh Yeah, we got uh preworkout creatine uh pre-workouts called Blood and Guts and pre-workouts called Blood and Guts and pre-workouts called Blood and Guts and that's the first product we're going to that's the first product we're going to that's the first product we're going to be bringing here to the US. be bringing here to the US. be bringing here to the US. &gt;&gt; There'll be a lot more shouting in gyms. &gt;&gt; There'll be a lot more shouting in gyms. &gt;&gt; There'll be a lot more shouting in gyms. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we're you know I'm uh I'm working &gt;&gt; Yeah, we're you know I'm uh I'm working &gt;&gt; Yeah, we're you know I'm uh I'm working on something special. I don't want to on something special. I don't want to on something special. I don't want to say what it is yet, but something say what it is yet, but something say what it is yet, but something special with the blood and guts product. special with the blood and guts product. special with the blood and guts product. So, you get a bit more than a product So, you get a bit more than a product So, you get a bit more than a product for myself. Uh we we'll wait till that's for myself. Uh we we'll wait till that's for myself. Uh we we'll wait till that's uh ready to go. uh ready to go. uh ready to go. &gt;&gt; Cool. Yeah, let us know. &gt;&gt; Cool. Yeah, let us know. &gt;&gt; Cool. Yeah, let us know. &gt;&gt; Yeah, let us know. Final question, and &gt;&gt; Yeah, let us know. Final question, and &gt;&gt; Yeah, let us know. Final question, and it it's uh arguably a big one, but feel it it's uh arguably a big one, but feel it it's uh arguably a big one, but feel free to handle it however you want. free to handle it however you want. free to handle it however you want. You've had a very unusual life relative You've had a very unusual life relative You've had a very unusual life relative to most humans on the planet, past or to most humans on the planet, past or to most humans on the planet, past or present. Interesting. present. Interesting. present. Interesting. &gt;&gt; It's been a it's been a wild ride. And &gt;&gt; It's been a it's been a wild ride. And &gt;&gt; It's been a it's been a wild ride. And um and um and um and um &gt;&gt; again, I'm struck by your, you know, &gt;&gt; again, I'm struck by your, you know, &gt;&gt; again, I'm struck by your, you know, internal sense that you were destined internal sense that you were destined internal sense that you were destined for something different and great. for something different and great. for something different and great. you're really leaning into it in such a you're really leaning into it in such a you're really leaning into it in such a logical way and also knowing when to logical way and also knowing when to logical way and also knowing when to rack that and go to the next thing, rack that and go to the next thing, rack that and go to the next thing, keeping the best of what was and keeping the best of what was and keeping the best of what was and grabbing the best of what's next and grabbing the best of what's next and grabbing the best of what's next and so forth as well as maintaining your so forth as well as maintaining your so forth as well as maintaining your health. So, here's my question. health. So, here's my question. health. So, here's my question. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Because you did all that, you're doing &gt;&gt; Because you did all that, you're doing &gt;&gt; Because you did all that, you're doing it now. It's not over. And you also have it now. It's not over. And you also have it now. It's not over. And you also have this experience of psychedelics and this experience of psychedelics and this experience of psychedelics and consciousness and you're a thinker. consciousness and you're a thinker. consciousness and you're a thinker. you're thinking that you're thinking that you're thinking that &gt;&gt; that's one of the reasons I like to &gt;&gt; that's one of the reasons I like to &gt;&gt; that's one of the reasons I like to smoke cannabis smoke cannabis smoke cannabis &gt;&gt; because I just go into thinking it's &gt;&gt; because I just go into thinking it's &gt;&gt; because I just go into thinking it's like breaks all the boxes you know you like breaks all the boxes you know you like breaks all the boxes you know you can do that is talk about that way and can do that is talk about that way and can do that is talk about that way and for the rest of us we end up in a for the rest of us we end up in a for the rest of us we end up in a little ball scared that the lint the little ball scared that the lint the little ball scared that the lint the lint is going to put lint is going to put lint is going to put &gt;&gt; there's a lot of people that want &gt;&gt; there's a lot of people that want &gt;&gt; there's a lot of people that want [laughter] to smoke with [laughter] to smoke with [laughter] to smoke with &gt;&gt; oh man &gt;&gt; oh man &gt;&gt; oh man &gt;&gt; my wife says when they're like she's &gt;&gt; my wife says when they're like she's &gt;&gt; my wife says when they're like she's like don't do it [laughter] like don't do it [laughter] like don't do it [laughter] &gt;&gt; well I can't I can't uh I don't enter &gt;&gt; well I can't I can't uh I don't enter &gt;&gt; well I can't I can't uh I don't enter marital disputes but um so what do marital disputes but um so what do marital disputes but um so what do you think this all about, man. Um, for you think this all about, man. Um, for you think this all about, man. Um, for not just for you, but for everyone. I not just for you, but for everyone. I not just for you, but for everyone. I mean, you for like a lot of people mean, you for like a lot of people mean, you for like a lot of people &gt;&gt; look up to you. They look to your story, &gt;&gt; look up to you. They look to your story, &gt;&gt; look up to you. They look to your story, but it's your insight and your um your but it's your insight and your um your but it's your insight and your um your experience that I think is what's so experience that I think is what's so experience that I think is what's so intriguing. What do you what do you intriguing. What do you what do you intriguing. What do you what do you think this is all about? I mean, why think this is all about? I mean, why think this is all about? I mean, why are we here? are we here? are we here? &gt;&gt; We're God playing hide-and-seek with &gt;&gt; We're God playing hide-and-seek with &gt;&gt; We're God playing hide-and-seek with itself. We're consciousness having an experience We're consciousness having an experience We're consciousness having an experience being in a physical reality. being in a physical reality. being in a physical reality. And we're all the same thing. And we're all the same thing. And we're all the same thing. We appear to be different and separate We appear to be different and separate We appear to be different and separate and we are we're having an individual and we are we're having an individual and we are we're having an individual experience but ultimately we're the same experience but ultimately we're the same experience but ultimately we're the same thing having all these experiences at thing having all these experiences at thing having all these experiences at the same time if you want to call that the same time if you want to call that the same time if you want to call that God. Uh it's just everything. That's God. Uh it's just everything. That's God. Uh it's just everything. That's what I got from psychedelics. And we're what I got from psychedelics. And we're what I got from psychedelics. And we're all on our own journeys all on our own journeys all on our own journeys in this reality. maybe to learn things or maybe to maybe to learn things or maybe to maybe to learn things or maybe to explore what it's like to be in this explore what it's like to be in this explore what it's like to be in this reality because consciousness is not reality because consciousness is not reality because consciousness is not physical. It's just consciousness. And I physical. It's just consciousness. And I physical. It's just consciousness. And I believe it's in everything in the believe it's in everything in the believe it's in everything in the plants, in the animals, in us. It's all plants, in the animals, in us. It's all plants, in the animals, in us. It's all the same thing. Having kind of different the same thing. Having kind of different the same thing. Having kind of different experiences and it doesn't end, you know, it's like uh it doesn't end, you know, it's like uh it doesn't end, you know, it's like uh we got the TV on, right? TV is on there, we got the TV on, right? TV is on there, we got the TV on, right? TV is on there, we're watching it, we turn it off or the we're watching it, we turn it off or the we're watching it, we turn it off or the TV blows up or whatever, TV blows up or whatever, TV blows up or whatever, but the energy that was going into the but the energy that was going into the but the energy that was going into the TV is still there somewhere, right? So, TV is still there somewhere, right? So, TV is still there somewhere, right? So, we are still somewhere even after this we are still somewhere even after this we are still somewhere even after this experience finishes. This much I'm experience finishes. This much I'm experience finishes. This much I'm pretty sure about. Yeah, that's pretty sure about. Yeah, that's pretty sure about. Yeah, that's what I got. And what I got. And what I got. And live life to its fullest. live life to its fullest. live life to its fullest. like you're going to come here and have like you're going to come here and have like you're going to come here and have this opportunity and just stay here and this opportunity and just stay here and this opportunity and just stay here and go from here to here and do this and go from here to here and do this and go from here to here and do this and I never wanted to do that. I knew I never wanted to do that. I knew I never wanted to do that. I knew I felt there's more to life and there felt there's more to life and there felt there's more to life and there still is. I want adventure. I want still is. I want adventure. I want still is. I want adventure. I want experiences and uh it's been up and down experiences and uh it's been up and down experiences and uh it's been up and down and uh I feel like now like I'm the most and uh I feel like now like I'm the most and uh I feel like now like I'm the most balanced and uh most peaceful that I've balanced and uh most peaceful that I've balanced and uh most peaceful that I've been. I know my place and uh try to been. I know my place and uh try to been. I know my place and uh try to enjoy every day enjoy every day enjoy every day and spread love, you know, because that's spread love, you know, because that's spread love, you know, because that's where we come from that we forgotten. where we come from that we forgotten. where we come from that we forgotten. Yeah. But it's all creation is the same Yeah. But it's all creation is the same Yeah. But it's all creation is the same as love. It's the same frequency. as love. It's the same frequency. as love. It's the same frequency. Uh that's what I get from my experience Uh that's what I get from my experience Uh that's what I get from my experience and uh I look forward to every day and uh I look forward to every day and uh I look forward to every day and uh being somewhat of a mentor and a uh being somewhat of a mentor and a uh being somewhat of a mentor and a teacher I guess at this point you know I teacher I guess at this point you know I teacher I guess at this point you know I do these camps like once or twice a year do these camps like once or twice a year do these camps like once or twice a year uh just like six people or something uh just like six people or something uh just like six people or something where I take them through my training where I take them through my training where I take them through my training methods and uh in the gym and we do the methods and uh in the gym and we do the methods and uh in the gym and we do the theory and they become certified at the theory and they become certified at the theory and they become certified at the end of the week. So, we call it Dy HIT end of the week. So, we call it Dy HIT end of the week. So, we call it Dy HIT training certification. training certification. training certification. But I said to the guys, I said, I think But I said to the guys, I said, I think But I said to the guys, I said, I think I'm going to change the name of this I'm going to change the name of this I'm going to change the name of this thing to the DY experience thing to the DY experience thing to the DY experience because the training is part of it, but because the training is part of it, but because the training is part of it, but it almost becomes something else by the it almost becomes something else by the it almost becomes something else by the end of the week. Spending so much time end of the week. Spending so much time end of the week. Spending so much time together and talking and training together and talking and training together and talking and training together. And I see the people when together. And I see the people when together. And I see the people when they're under stress in the gym, I see they're under stress in the gym, I see they're under stress in the gym, I see things about them that I could maybe things about them that I could maybe things about them that I could maybe share and to be helpful. So, I feel share and to be helpful. So, I feel share and to be helpful. So, I feel all the things I've been through is all the things I've been through is all the things I've been through is giving me the experience to be able giving me the experience to be able giving me the experience to be able to do that and help and inspire other to do that and help and inspire other to do that and help and inspire other people and yeah, my own kids and anyone people and yeah, my own kids and anyone people and yeah, my own kids and anyone that's around me uh can benefit from my that's around me uh can benefit from my that's around me uh can benefit from my experiences. I think at this point experiences. I think at this point experiences. I think at this point that's probably the reason I did that's probably the reason I did that's probably the reason I did it all in the first place. You know, I it all in the first place. You know, I it all in the first place. You know, I wanted to be this guy. I wanted to be wanted to be this guy. I wanted to be wanted to be this guy. I wanted to be Mr. Olympia. I wanted to have these Mr. Olympia. I wanted to have these Mr. Olympia. I wanted to have these trophies. I wanted to make the money and trophies. I wanted to make the money and trophies. I wanted to make the money and be famous and all that stuff, I suppose. be famous and all that stuff, I suppose. be famous and all that stuff, I suppose. But what was the point of all that? I But what was the point of all that? I But what was the point of all that? I think I get it now more than more than think I get it now more than more than think I get it now more than more than ever. Yeah. So, I'm feeling in a good ever. Yeah. So, I'm feeling in a good ever. Yeah. So, I'm feeling in a good place. I feel peaceful. I feel balanced. place. I feel peaceful. I feel balanced. place. I feel peaceful. I feel balanced. Uh and that's my role now. I think, you and that's my role now. I think, you and that's my role now. I think, you know, just to inspire and help other know, just to inspire and help other know, just to inspire and help other people uh from my experiences and my uh from my experiences and my uh from my experiences and my knowledge. I think that's where I'm at knowledge. I think that's where I'm at knowledge. I think that's where I'm at now. Yeah. now. Yeah. now. Yeah. Well, you have certainly inspired me and Well, you have certainly inspired me and Well, you have certainly inspired me and millions of other people, and you're millions of other people, and you're millions of other people, and you're going to continue to by virtue of your going to continue to by virtue of your going to continue to by virtue of your accomplishments, what you've said here accomplishments, what you've said here accomplishments, what you've said here today, and everything going forward. I today, and everything going forward. I today, and everything going forward. I can't express enough gratitude to you. can't express enough gratitude to you. can't express enough gratitude to you. You've uh really uh been a leader uh You've uh really uh been a leader uh You've uh really uh been a leader uh without realizing it in domains of life without realizing it in domains of life without realizing it in domains of life that you don't realize for, you know, that you don't realize for, you know, that you don't realize for, you know, like a guy who was plugging away in the like a guy who was plugging away in the like a guy who was plugging away in the lab, who also liked working out, who lab, who also liked working out, who lab, who also liked working out, who &gt;&gt; didn't become an athlete or a &gt;&gt; didn't become an athlete or a &gt;&gt; didn't become an athlete or a bodybuilder, but really loved fitness. bodybuilder, but really loved fitness. bodybuilder, but really loved fitness. I'm just one example of millions of I'm just one example of millions of I'm just one example of millions of people who have been truly inspired by people who have been truly inspired by people who have been truly inspired by you. You've shaped and changed you. You've shaped and changed you. You've shaped and changed millions of lives. millions of lives. millions of lives. &gt;&gt; Powerful, man. And I really appreciate &gt;&gt; Powerful, man. And I really appreciate &gt;&gt; Powerful, man. And I really appreciate that come up to me. that come up to me. that come up to me. &gt;&gt; It's real. And when I you know, and when &gt;&gt; It's real. And when I you know, and when &gt;&gt; It's real. And when I you know, and when I saw that you were into some of the I saw that you were into some of the I saw that you were into some of the same music and that you uh you like same music and that you uh you like same music and that you uh you like Blondie and you know, and Bulldogs and Blondie and you know, and Bulldogs and Blondie and you know, and Bulldogs and &gt;&gt; I met her. &gt;&gt; I met her. &gt;&gt; I met her. &gt;&gt; Did you really? &gt;&gt; Did you really? &gt;&gt; Did you really? &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. You know, it was 1990 in New &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. You know, it was 1990 in New &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. You know, it was 1990 in New York. I met her in the gym there and York. I met her in the gym there and York. I met her in the gym there and man, I don't have a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] camera, man, I don't have a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] camera, man, I don't have a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] camera, &gt;&gt; man. She's amazing. I remember as a kid &gt;&gt; man. She's amazing. I remember as a kid &gt;&gt; man. She's amazing. I remember as a kid and I was like, man, you know, some guys and I was like, man, you know, some guys and I was like, man, you know, some guys like the swimsuit models. I'm like, like the swimsuit models. I'm like, like the swimsuit models. I'm like, &gt;&gt; no, she was punk. &gt;&gt; no, she was punk. &gt;&gt; no, she was punk. &gt;&gt; I'm like, I'm like, blondie is it. Um, &gt;&gt; I'm like, I'm like, blondie is it. Um, &gt;&gt; I'm like, I'm like, blondie is it. Um, and uh, so just, you know, there these and uh, so just, you know, there these and uh, so just, you know, there these points of convergence that one feels. points of convergence that one feels. points of convergence that one feels. And again, I'm saying this for me, but And again, I'm saying this for me, but And again, I'm saying this for me, but millions of people feel that. They go, millions of people feel that. They go, millions of people feel that. They go, "Oh, bulldog or blondie or whatever it "Oh, bulldog or blondie or whatever it "Oh, bulldog or blondie or whatever it is." how that you like the hack squat, is." how that you like the hack squat, is." how that you like the hack squat, not the Smith rack at a certain stage of not the Smith rack at a certain stage of not the Smith rack at a certain stage of your career. I guess you liked both, but your career. I guess you liked both, but your career. I guess you liked both, but &gt;&gt; you know, these things matter in ways &gt;&gt; you know, these things matter in ways &gt;&gt; you know, these things matter in ways that most people will never get the that most people will never get the that most people will never get the opportunity to say directly to you and opportunity to say directly to you and opportunity to say directly to you and thank you. So, on behalf of all of them, thank you. So, on behalf of all of them, thank you. So, on behalf of all of them, &gt;&gt; thanks and also just on behalf of the &gt;&gt; thanks and also just on behalf of the &gt;&gt; thanks and also just on behalf of the show, this has been awesome and I'm show, this has been awesome and I'm show, this has been awesome and I'm super uh grateful that we did it and I'm super uh grateful that we did it and I'm super uh grateful that we did it and I'm excited to train tomorrow. excited to train tomorrow. excited to train tomorrow. &gt;&gt; Oh, you're going to get your ass kicked &gt;&gt; Oh, you're going to get your ass kicked &gt;&gt; Oh, you're going to get your ass kicked tomorrow, man. tomorrow, man. tomorrow, man. &gt;&gt; Nice. Yeah, I'll admit I'm 1% scared but &gt;&gt; Nice. Yeah, I'll admit I'm 1% scared but &gt;&gt; Nice. Yeah, I'll admit I'm 1% scared but 99% fired. [snorts] 99% fired. [snorts] 99% fired. [snorts] &gt;&gt; Yeah, don't worry. He'll be alive. I &gt;&gt; Yeah, don't worry. He'll be alive. I &gt;&gt; Yeah, don't worry. He'll be alive. I still got some. still got some. still got some. &gt;&gt; I told the guy once in a They were &gt;&gt; I told the guy once in a They were &gt;&gt; I told the guy once in a They were filming me, so it came out. I was like, filming me, so it came out. I was like, filming me, so it came out. I was like, just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] get on this leg press and just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] get on this leg press and just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] get on this leg press and do this and bring it down on a control do this and bring it down on a control do this and bring it down on a control and press it up and just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do that and press it up and just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do that and press it up and just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do that till I tell you to stop. Yeah. till I tell you to stop. Yeah. till I tell you to stop. Yeah. [laughter] I said, listen, you're not [laughter] I said, listen, you're not [laughter] I said, listen, you're not going to die. But if you do, you won't going to die. But if you do, you won't going to die. But if you do, you won't know about it. So, don't worry, man. know about it. So, don't worry, man. know about it. So, don't worry, man. Let's go. [laughter] Let's go. [laughter] Let's go. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Let's go. Um, awesome. &gt;&gt; Let's go. Um, awesome. &gt;&gt; Let's go. Um, awesome. &gt;&gt; All right, man. Let's see you at &gt;&gt; All right, man. Let's see you at &gt;&gt; All right, man. Let's see you at Golds tomorrow. Golds tomorrow. Golds tomorrow. &gt;&gt; See you at Golds tomorrow. Thank you for &gt;&gt; See you at Golds tomorrow. Thank you for &gt;&gt; See you at Golds tomorrow. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with Dorian Yates. To learn more about Dorian Yates. To learn more about Dorian Yates. To learn more about Dorian and what he's doing now, please see the and what he's doing now, please see the and what he's doing now, please see the links in the show note captions. Also links in the show note captions. Also links in the show note captions. Also linked in the show notes caption is the linked in the show notes caption is the linked in the show notes caption is the video of the highintensity lowvol video of the highintensity lowvol video of the highintensity lowvol workout that Dorian took me and my workout that Dorian took me and my workout that Dorian took me and my producer Rob through at Gold's Gym producer Rob through at Gold's Gym producer Rob through at Gold's Gym Venice. We trained back. It was brutal Venice. We trained back. It was brutal Venice. We trained back. It was brutal and it was awesome. If you're learning and it was awesome. If you're learning and it was awesome. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, from and or enjoying this podcast, from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to That's a terrific zerocost way to That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can up to a five-star review. And you can up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dorian Yates. today's discussion with Dorian Yates. today's discussion with Dorian Yates. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for [music] your interest in you for [music] your interest in you for [music] your interest in science.