Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's Stanford School of Medicine. Today's Stanford School of Medicine. Today's episode is about the biology, episode is about the biology, episode is about the biology, psychology, and practices of social psychology, and practices of social psychology, and practices of social bonding. From the day we are born until bonding. From the day we are born until bonding. From the day we are born until the day we die, the quality of our the day we die, the quality of our the day we die, the quality of our social bonds dictates much of our social bonds dictates much of our social bonds dictates much of our quality of life. quality of life. quality of life. It should therefore be no surprise that It should therefore be no surprise that It should therefore be no surprise that our brain, and indeed much of our entire our brain, and indeed much of our entire our brain, and indeed much of our entire nervous system, is wired for social nervous system, is wired for social nervous system, is wired for social bonds. Today, we are going to talk about bonds. Today, we are going to talk about bonds. Today, we are going to talk about those brain and nervous system those brain and nervous system those brain and nervous system circuitries. We're also going to talk circuitries. We're also going to talk circuitries. We're also going to talk about the neurochemicals and hormones about the neurochemicals and hormones about the neurochemicals and hormones that underlie their function. And we are that underlie their function. And we are that underlie their function. And we are going to touch on a number of important going to touch on a number of important going to touch on a number of important and actionable tools that you can apply and actionable tools that you can apply and actionable tools that you can apply in everyday life, and I'm confident that in everyday life, and I'm confident that in everyday life, and I'm confident that you will come away from today's episode you will come away from today's episode you will come away from today's episode with tremendous knowledge about how you with tremendous knowledge about how you with tremendous knowledge about how you function. For instance, if you're an function. For instance, if you're an function. For instance, if you're an introvert or an extrovert, why is that? introvert or an extrovert, why is that? introvert or an extrovert, why is that? Turns out there may be a neurochemical Turns out there may be a neurochemical Turns out there may be a neurochemical basis for that. Believe it or not, basis for that. Believe it or not, basis for that. Believe it or not, there's biology around that now, and there's biology around that now, and there's biology around that now, and it's excellent peer-reviewed work. Now, it's excellent peer-reviewed work. Now, it's excellent peer-reviewed work. Now, an important feature of biology an important feature of biology an important feature of biology generally, but in particular as it generally, but in particular as it generally, but in particular as it relates to social bonding, is that relates to social bonding, is that relates to social bonding, is that the neural circuits, meaning the brain the neural circuits, meaning the brain the neural circuits, meaning the brain areas and neurons, and the hormones, areas and neurons, and the hormones, areas and neurons, and the hormones, things like oxytocin, which we'll talk things like oxytocin, which we'll talk things like oxytocin, which we'll talk about today, and the other chemicals in about today, and the other chemicals in about today, and the other chemicals in the brain and body that are responsible the brain and body that are responsible the brain and body that are responsible for the process we call social bonding, for the process we call social bonding, for the process we call social bonding, are not unique to particular social are not unique to particular social are not unique to particular social bonds. They are generic. What I mean by that is They are generic. What I mean by that is They are generic. What I mean by that is that the same brain circuits that are that the same brain circuits that are that the same brain circuits that are responsible for establishing a bond responsible for establishing a bond responsible for establishing a bond between parent and child are actually between parent and child are actually between parent and child are actually repurposed in romantic relationships. repurposed in romantic relationships. repurposed in romantic relationships. Before we talk about social bonding, I Before we talk about social bonding, I Before we talk about social bonding, I want to talk about its mirror image, want to talk about its mirror image, want to talk about its mirror image, which is lack of social bonding or which is lack of social bonding or which is lack of social bonding or social isolation. Well, many people like social isolation. Well, many people like social isolation. Well, many people like time alone. When we talk about social time alone. When we talk about social time alone. When we talk about social isolation, what we're referring to isolation, what we're referring to isolation, what we're referring to is when animals or humans are restricted when animals or humans are restricted when animals or humans are restricted from having the social contacts that from having the social contacts that from having the social contacts that they would prefer to have. they would prefer to have. they would prefer to have. And to just briefly touch on the major And to just briefly touch on the major And to just briefly touch on the major takeaways from this literature, which takeaways from this literature, which takeaways from this literature, which spans back 100 years or more, spans back 100 years or more, spans back 100 years or more, being socially isolated is stressful. being socially isolated is stressful. being socially isolated is stressful. And one of the hallmark features of And one of the hallmark features of And one of the hallmark features of social isolation is chronically elevated social isolation is chronically elevated social isolation is chronically elevated stress hormones like adrenaline, also stress hormones like adrenaline, also stress hormones like adrenaline, also called epinephrine, like cortisol, a called epinephrine, like cortisol, a called epinephrine, like cortisol, a stress hormone that at healthy levels is stress hormone that at healthy levels is stress hormone that at healthy levels is good for combating inflammation, helps good for combating inflammation, helps good for combating inflammation, helps us have energy early in the day, focus us have energy early in the day, focus us have energy early in the day, focus throughout the day, but if cortisol is throughout the day, but if cortisol is throughout the day, but if cortisol is elevated for too long, which is the elevated for too long, which is the elevated for too long, which is the consequence of social isolation, the consequence of social isolation, the consequence of social isolation, the immune system suffers, and other immune system suffers, and other immune system suffers, and other chemicals start to be released in the chemicals start to be released in the chemicals start to be released in the brain and body that are designed to brain and body that are designed to brain and body that are designed to motivate the organism, animal or human, motivate the organism, animal or human, motivate the organism, animal or human, to seek out social bonds. So, if you're to seek out social bonds. So, if you're to seek out social bonds. So, if you're somebody who's socially isolated and is somebody who's socially isolated and is somebody who's socially isolated and is craving social contact, that is a craving social contact, that is a craving social contact, that is a healthy craving. And as we'll learn healthy craving. And as we'll learn healthy craving. And as we'll learn next, the healthy craving for social next, the healthy craving for social next, the healthy craving for social contact has a very specific brain contact has a very specific brain contact has a very specific brain circuit, has a very specific circuit, has a very specific circuit, has a very specific neurochemical signature associated with neurochemical signature associated with neurochemical signature associated with it, and has some remarkable features it, and has some remarkable features it, and has some remarkable features that you can leverage in social contacts that you can leverage in social contacts that you can leverage in social contacts of all kinds. Much like hunger, much of all kinds. Much like hunger, much of all kinds. Much like hunger, much like temperature, much like thirst, we like temperature, much like thirst, we like temperature, much like thirst, we have brain circuits that are devoted to have brain circuits that are devoted to have brain circuits that are devoted to what's called a social homeostasis. what's called a social homeostasis. what's called a social homeostasis. Homeostasis is the characteristic of Homeostasis is the characteristic of Homeostasis is the characteristic of various biological circuits and even various biological circuits and even various biological circuits and even individual cells to try and maintain a individual cells to try and maintain a individual cells to try and maintain a certain level. It's most easily thought certain level. It's most easily thought certain level. It's most easily thought of in the context of hunger. If you of in the context of hunger. If you of in the context of hunger. If you don't eat for a while, your drive to don't eat for a while, your drive to don't eat for a while, your drive to pursue food and think about food and pursue food and think about food and pursue food and think about food and make food and spend money on food, and make food and spend money on food, and make food and spend money on food, and indeed to enjoy food, goes up. Whereas indeed to enjoy food, goes up. Whereas indeed to enjoy food, goes up. Whereas when you're well-fed, you don't tend to when you're well-fed, you don't tend to when you're well-fed, you don't tend to seek out food with as much vigor or as seek out food with as much vigor or as seek out food with as much vigor or as much intensity. So, that's a simple way much intensity. So, that's a simple way much intensity. So, that's a simple way of thinking about homeostasis. Every of thinking about homeostasis. Every of thinking about homeostasis. Every homeostatic circuit has three homeostatic circuit has three homeostatic circuit has three components, or at least three. One is a components, or at least three. One is a components, or at least three. One is a detector, meaning the organism or the detector, meaning the organism or the detector, meaning the organism or the thermostat on your wall has to have some thermostat on your wall has to have some thermostat on your wall has to have some way of detecting what's going on in the way of detecting what's going on in the way of detecting what's going on in the environment, all right? In the context environment, all right? In the context environment, all right? In the context of social bonding, whether or not you of social bonding, whether or not you of social bonding, whether or not you are interacting with others and whether are interacting with others and whether are interacting with others and whether or not those interactions are going or not those interactions are going or not those interactions are going well. So, that has to be detected, well. So, that has to be detected, well. So, that has to be detected, that's the first thing. Then there has that's the first thing. Then there has that's the first thing. Then there has to be a control center, that's the to be a control center, that's the to be a control center, that's the second thing. And the control center is second thing. And the control center is second thing. And the control center is the one that makes the adjustments to, the one that makes the adjustments to, the one that makes the adjustments to, in the case of social bonding, to your in the case of social bonding, to your in the case of social bonding, to your behavior and to your psychology. Now, behavior and to your psychology. Now, behavior and to your psychology. Now, the third component of this homeostatic the third component of this homeostatic the third component of this homeostatic circuit is the effector. The effector is circuit is the effector. The effector is circuit is the effector. The effector is actually what drives the behavioral actually what drives the behavioral actually what drives the behavioral response. It's what It's what leads you response. It's what It's what leads you response. It's what It's what leads you to pick up your social media and start to pick up your social media and start to pick up your social media and start scrolling. It's what leads you to text a scrolling. It's what leads you to text a scrolling. It's what leads you to text a friend. So again, those three components friend. So again, those three components friend. So again, those three components are a detector, a control center, and an are a detector, a control center, and an are a detector, a control center, and an effector. And as you'll soon learn, the effector. And as you'll soon learn, the effector. And as you'll soon learn, the neural circuit that controls this social neural circuit that controls this social neural circuit that controls this social homeostasis actually has a fourth homeostasis actually has a fourth homeostasis actually has a fourth component, and that fourth component is component, and that fourth component is component, and that fourth component is one that places subjective understanding one that places subjective understanding one that places subjective understanding as to why you are doing what you are as to why you are doing what you are as to why you are doing what you are doing, and establishes your place in a doing, and establishes your place in a doing, and establishes your place in a hierarchy. When we talk about social hierarchy. When we talk about social hierarchy. When we talk about social hierarchies in the context of human interactions, in the context of human interactions, in the context of human interactions, social hierarchies are very plastic, social hierarchies are very plastic, social hierarchies are very plastic, meaning in one setting, one person can meaning in one setting, one person can meaning in one setting, one person can be the leader. In another setting, the be the leader. In another setting, the be the leader. In another setting, the other person can be the leader. other person can be the leader. other person can be the leader. Hierarchies are very dynamic, and as a Hierarchies are very dynamic, and as a Hierarchies are very dynamic, and as a consequence, social bonding has to be consequence, social bonding has to be consequence, social bonding has to be very plastic and very fluid, so that you very plastic and very fluid, so that you very plastic and very fluid, so that you move from one environment to the next, move from one environment to the next, move from one environment to the next, even with the same people, you have to even with the same people, you have to even with the same people, you have to be able to make those adjustments. And be able to make those adjustments. And be able to make those adjustments. And in the case of the social homeostasis in the case of the social homeostasis in the case of the social homeostasis circuit, those adjustments are made by a circuit, those adjustments are made by a circuit, those adjustments are made by a particular brain structure. I've talked particular brain structure. I've talked particular brain structure. I've talked about it on this podcast before, it's about it on this podcast before, it's about it on this podcast before, it's called the prefrontal cortex. It is the called the prefrontal cortex. It is the called the prefrontal cortex. It is the seat of our higher consciousness, if you seat of our higher consciousness, if you seat of our higher consciousness, if you will. It's what allows us to place will. It's what allows us to place will. It's what allows us to place subjective labels on things, so we are subjective labels on things, so we are subjective labels on things, so we are not strictly input-output. We are not strictly input-output. We are not strictly input-output. We are not robotic. The detector that underlies robotic. The detector that underlies robotic. The detector that underlies social homeostasis social homeostasis social homeostasis involves mainly two structures. One is involves mainly two structures. One is involves mainly two structures. One is called the ACC, the anterior cingulate called the ACC, the anterior cingulate called the ACC, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the other is the BLA, cortex, and the other is the BLA, cortex, and the other is the BLA, basolateral amygdala. And when you hear basolateral amygdala. And when you hear basolateral amygdala. And when you hear the word amygdala, you're probably the word amygdala, you're probably the word amygdala, you're probably thinking fear. But today, as you'll see, thinking fear. But today, as you'll see, thinking fear. But today, as you'll see, the amygdala actually has many different the amygdala actually has many different the amygdala actually has many different subcompartments and components, and subcompartments and components, and subcompartments and components, and there's a reason why the basolateral there's a reason why the basolateral there's a reason why the basolateral amygdala, which is associated with amygdala, which is associated with amygdala, which is associated with certain aspects of aversive behaviors, certain aspects of aversive behaviors, certain aspects of aversive behaviors, meaning moving away from certain types meaning moving away from certain types meaning moving away from certain types of things or interactions, there's a of things or interactions, there's a of things or interactions, there's a reason why the BLA is such an integral reason why the BLA is such an integral reason why the BLA is such an integral part of the detector system. And that's part of the detector system. And that's part of the detector system. And that's because just as it's important to form because just as it's important to form because just as it's important to form healthy social bonds, it's vitally healthy social bonds, it's vitally healthy social bonds, it's vitally important to try and avoid unhealthy important to try and avoid unhealthy important to try and avoid unhealthy social bonds. So, we've got the ACC and social bonds. So, we've got the ACC and social bonds. So, we've got the ACC and the BLA. These are areas that are mainly the BLA. These are areas that are mainly the BLA. These are areas that are mainly involved in moving away from things, involved in moving away from things, involved in moving away from things, although also toward them. That's the although also toward them. That's the although also toward them. That's the detector. Then we've got the control detector. Then we've got the control detector. Then we've got the control center, which is in the hypothalamus. center, which is in the hypothalamus. center, which is in the hypothalamus. And then And then And then there's a very special and important there's a very special and important there's a very special and important area associated with social bonding that area associated with social bonding that area associated with social bonding that I want everyone to learn, which is the I want everyone to learn, which is the I want everyone to learn, which is the dorsal raphe nucleus, or DRN. Dorsal dorsal raphe nucleus, or DRN. Dorsal dorsal raphe nucleus, or DRN. Dorsal raphe nucleus. The dorsal raphe nucleus raphe nucleus. The dorsal raphe nucleus raphe nucleus. The dorsal raphe nucleus is a small collection of neurons in the is a small collection of neurons in the is a small collection of neurons in the midbrain, so it's deep in the brain. midbrain, so it's deep in the brain. midbrain, so it's deep in the brain. And most of the time when you hear about And most of the time when you hear about And most of the time when you hear about raphe, r a p h e, by the way, raphe raphe, r a p h e, by the way, raphe raphe, r a p h e, by the way, raphe nucleus, you're talking about serotonin. you're talking about serotonin. you're talking about serotonin. Serotonin is a neuromodulator that is Serotonin is a neuromodulator that is Serotonin is a neuromodulator that is often associated with feelings of often associated with feelings of often associated with feelings of satiety after eating, basically satiety after eating, basically satiety after eating, basically satisfaction with things that you satisfaction with things that you satisfaction with things that you already have. already have. already have. However, within this dorsal raphe However, within this dorsal raphe However, within this dorsal raphe nucleus, there's a small subset of nucleus, there's a small subset of nucleus, there's a small subset of neurons that release dopamine. neurons that release dopamine. neurons that release dopamine. Dopamine is a neuromodulator most often Dopamine is a neuromodulator most often Dopamine is a neuromodulator most often associated with movement, craving, associated with movement, craving, associated with movement, craving, motivation, and desire. This unique motivation, and desire. This unique motivation, and desire. This unique population of dopamine neurons in the population of dopamine neurons in the population of dopamine neurons in the raphe is truly unique in that it's raphe is truly unique in that it's raphe is truly unique in that it's responsible for mediating what I've been responsible for mediating what I've been responsible for mediating what I've been calling social homeostasis. It is the calling social homeostasis. It is the calling social homeostasis. It is the effector or the response that mediates effector or the response that mediates effector or the response that mediates social homeostasis. In most popular social homeostasis. In most popular social homeostasis. In most popular conversations about dopamine, and even conversations about dopamine, and even conversations about dopamine, and even in scientific circles, when you hear in scientific circles, when you hear in scientific circles, when you hear dopamine release, you think about reward dopamine release, you think about reward dopamine release, you think about reward or feeling good. However, dopamine is or feeling good. However, dopamine is or feeling good. However, dopamine is not associated with feeling good. It is not associated with feeling good. It is not associated with feeling good. It is actually the neurochemical that's actually the neurochemical that's actually the neurochemical that's responsible for movement toward things responsible for movement toward things responsible for movement toward things that feel good. So, to zoom out and that feel good. So, to zoom out and that feel good. So, to zoom out and conceptualize what we have here, we have conceptualize what we have here, we have conceptualize what we have here, we have a brain area that is a detector that a brain area that is a detector that a brain area that is a detector that either will move us toward or away from either will move us toward or away from either will move us toward or away from certain types of certain types of certain types of experiences or sensations. experiences or sensations. experiences or sensations. We have a control center that is going We have a control center that is going We have a control center that is going to release certain hormones and to release certain hormones and to release certain hormones and neuropeptides into our brain and blood, neuropeptides into our brain and blood, neuropeptides into our brain and blood, depending on the sorts of interactions depending on the sorts of interactions depending on the sorts of interactions that we happen to be having. that we happen to be having. that we happen to be having. And we have this response system, which And we have this response system, which And we have this response system, which is the dorsal raphe nucleus that is the dorsal raphe nucleus that is the dorsal raphe nucleus that contains dopamine neurons. If you're contains dopamine neurons. If you're contains dopamine neurons. If you're somebody who is accustomed to a lot of somebody who is accustomed to a lot of somebody who is accustomed to a lot of social interaction, and suddenly I take social interaction, and suddenly I take social interaction, and suddenly I take away that social interaction, you would away that social interaction, you would away that social interaction, you would feel kind of let down. You would crave a feel kind of let down. You would crave a feel kind of let down. You would crave a replacement social interaction. Okay, replacement social interaction. Okay, replacement social interaction. Okay, this is called a prosocial craving. And this is called a prosocial craving. And this is called a prosocial craving. And indeed, this is what you see in animals indeed, this is what you see in animals indeed, this is what you see in animals and humans. If you and humans. If you and humans. If you what's called acutely isolate them, what's called acutely isolate them, what's called acutely isolate them, which is just a fancy scientific word of which is just a fancy scientific word of which is just a fancy scientific word of saying deprive them of social saying deprive them of social saying deprive them of social interactions in a short-term basis, interactions in a short-term basis, interactions in a short-term basis, they start engaging in prosocial they start engaging in prosocial they start engaging in prosocial behaviors. So, the takeaway is that when behaviors. So, the takeaway is that when behaviors. So, the takeaway is that when we lack social interaction that we lack social interaction that we lack social interaction that we expect, we become prosocial. However, expect, we become prosocial. However, expect, we become prosocial. However, if we are chronically socially isolated, if we are chronically socially isolated, if we are chronically socially isolated, meaning we don't have interactions with meaning we don't have interactions with meaning we don't have interactions with people for a long time, we become people for a long time, we become people for a long time, we become actually more introverted. It's actually more introverted. It's actually more introverted. It's well-established now that in humans and well-established now that in humans and well-established now that in humans and in animals, in animals, in animals, if you don't give them enough social if you don't give them enough social if you don't give them enough social interaction, they actually become interaction, they actually become interaction, they actually become antisocial. This social homeostasis antisocial. This social homeostasis antisocial. This social homeostasis circuit works in a way such that when we circuit works in a way such that when we circuit works in a way such that when we don't have social interactions for a don't have social interactions for a don't have social interactions for a very long time, we start to lose our very long time, we start to lose our very long time, we start to lose our craving for social interactions. Let's craving for social interactions. Let's craving for social interactions. Let's look at the social homeostasis circuit look at the social homeostasis circuit look at the social homeostasis circuit through the lens of what's commonly through the lens of what's commonly through the lens of what's commonly called introversion and extraversion. called introversion and extraversion. called introversion and extraversion. Now, typically when we hear about Now, typically when we hear about Now, typically when we hear about introverts, we think about the quiet introverts, we think about the quiet introverts, we think about the quiet person at the party or the person that person at the party or the person that person at the party or the person that doesn't want to go out at all. And we doesn't want to go out at all. And we doesn't want to go out at all. And we think about an extrovert as somebody think about an extrovert as somebody think about an extrovert as somebody who's really social, the so-called who's really social, the so-called who's really social, the so-called social butterfly, who enjoys social butterfly, who enjoys social butterfly, who enjoys social interactions, is really chatty, is kind interactions, is really chatty, is kind interactions, is really chatty, is kind of life of the party type person. But of life of the party type person. But of life of the party type person. But actually, in the psychology literature, actually, in the psychology literature, actually, in the psychology literature, that's not really the way it holds up. that's not really the way it holds up. that's not really the way it holds up. If we look at introversion and If we look at introversion and If we look at introversion and extroversion through this lens of the extroversion through this lens of the extroversion through this lens of the social homeostatic set point and we social homeostatic set point and we social homeostatic set point and we think about dopamine as this molecule think about dopamine as this molecule think about dopamine as this molecule that drives motivation to seek out that drives motivation to seek out that drives motivation to seek out social interactions. social interactions. social interactions. What we can reasonably assume is that What we can reasonably assume is that What we can reasonably assume is that introverts are people that when they introverts are people that when they introverts are people that when they engage in certain forms of social engage in certain forms of social engage in certain forms of social interaction either the amount of interaction either the amount of interaction either the amount of dopamine that's released is greater than dopamine that's released is greater than dopamine that's released is greater than it is in an extrovert. That's right. I it is in an extrovert. That's right. I it is in an extrovert. That's right. I said greater than it is in an extrovert. said greater than it is in an extrovert. said greater than it is in an extrovert. And so they actually feel quite And so they actually feel quite And so they actually feel quite motivated but also satisfied by very motivated but also satisfied by very motivated but also satisfied by very brief or brief or brief or we could say uh sort of sparse social we could say uh sort of sparse social we could say uh sort of sparse social interactions. They don't need a lot of interactions. They don't need a lot of interactions. They don't need a lot of social engagement to feel sated. Whereas social engagement to feel sated. Whereas social engagement to feel sated. Whereas the extrovert the extrovert the extrovert we can reasonably assume releases less we can reasonably assume releases less we can reasonably assume releases less dopamine in response to an individual dopamine in response to an individual dopamine in response to an individual social interaction. And so they need social interaction. And so they need social interaction. And so they need much more social interaction in order to much more social interaction in order to much more social interaction in order to feel filled up by that interaction. Now feel filled up by that interaction. Now feel filled up by that interaction. Now there's the fourth component of this there's the fourth component of this there's the fourth component of this social homeostasis circuit that I social homeostasis circuit that I social homeostasis circuit that I mentioned before and that's the mentioned before and that's the mentioned before and that's the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is involved in thinking and planning and is involved in thinking and planning and is involved in thinking and planning and action and it has extensive connections action and it has extensive connections action and it has extensive connections with areas of the brain like the with areas of the brain like the with areas of the brain like the hypothalamus which is responsible for a hypothalamus which is responsible for a hypothalamus which is responsible for a lot of motivated drives. It also has lot of motivated drives. It also has lot of motivated drives. It also has connections with the various reward connections with the various reward connections with the various reward centers of the brain and it can act as centers of the brain and it can act as centers of the brain and it can act as kind of an accelerator meaning it can kind of an accelerator meaning it can kind of an accelerator meaning it can encourage more electrical activity of encourage more electrical activity of encourage more electrical activity of other brain centers or as a break on other brain centers or as a break on other brain centers or as a break on those brain centers. So while there are those brain centers. So while there are those brain centers. So while there are some predictable elements of these some predictable elements of these some predictable elements of these circuits they are not simply what we circuits they are not simply what we circuits they are not simply what we would call plug and chug. You have would call plug and chug. You have would call plug and chug. You have flexibility. You are able to say, you flexibility. You are able to say, you flexibility. You are able to say, you know, I love parties but I really don't know, I love parties but I really don't know, I love parties but I really don't want to go to that party because so and want to go to that party because so and want to go to that party because so and so is there. So now I'd like to drill a so is there. So now I'd like to drill a so is there. So now I'd like to drill a little bit deeper into this incredible little bit deeper into this incredible little bit deeper into this incredible neural structure neural structure neural structure that is the dorsal raphe nucleus and that is the dorsal raphe nucleus and that is the dorsal raphe nucleus and this small collection of neurons the this small collection of neurons the this small collection of neurons the dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe because while it's a small collection because while it's a small collection because while it's a small collection they are very powerful. And it is this they are very powerful. And it is this they are very powerful. And it is this dorsal raphe nucleus and the dopamine dorsal raphe nucleus and the dopamine dorsal raphe nucleus and the dopamine neurons in that nucleus that underlie neurons in that nucleus that underlie neurons in that nucleus that underlie the bond that is social friendship and the bond that is social friendship and the bond that is social friendship and all types of social bonds. There's a key all types of social bonds. There's a key all types of social bonds. There's a key finding in the literature. The title of finding in the literature. The title of finding in the literature. The title of this paper is dorsal raphe dopamine this paper is dorsal raphe dopamine this paper is dorsal raphe dopamine neurons represent the experience of neurons represent the experience of neurons represent the experience of social isolation. This is a paper from social isolation. This is a paper from social isolation. This is a paper from Kay Tye's lab. What they did is they Kay Tye's lab. What they did is they Kay Tye's lab. What they did is they were able to selectively activate the were able to selectively activate the were able to selectively activate the dopamine neurons in the dorsal raphe dopamine neurons in the dorsal raphe dopamine neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus. And when they did that they nucleus. And when they did that they nucleus. And when they did that they induced a loneliness-like state. Now how induced a loneliness-like state. Now how induced a loneliness-like state. Now how did they know it was a loneliness-like did they know it was a loneliness-like did they know it was a loneliness-like state? They knew because it motivated state? They knew because it motivated state? They knew because it motivated the seeking out of social connections. the seeking out of social connections. the seeking out of social connections. This is the kind of social hunger that I This is the kind of social hunger that I This is the kind of social hunger that I was referring to before. Whereas when was referring to before. Whereas when was referring to before. Whereas when the dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe the dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe the dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe are inhibited meaning their activity is are inhibited meaning their activity is are inhibited meaning their activity is quieted that suppressed a loneliness state. So that's suppressed a loneliness state. So that's suppressed a loneliness state. So that's a little counterintuitive, right? It's a little counterintuitive, right? It's a little counterintuitive, right? It's a group of neurons that when activated group of neurons that when activated group of neurons that when activated makes you feel lonely and when this makes you feel lonely and when this makes you feel lonely and when this brain area is not activated it brain area is not activated it brain area is not activated it suppresses loneliness. But if you think suppresses loneliness. But if you think suppresses loneliness. But if you think about it that's exactly the kind of about it that's exactly the kind of about it that's exactly the kind of circuit that you would want in order to circuit that you would want in order to circuit that you would want in order to drive social behavior. When you're drive social behavior. When you're drive social behavior. When you're feeling lonely dopamine is released and feeling lonely dopamine is released and feeling lonely dopamine is released and it causes you to go out and seek social it causes you to go out and seek social it causes you to go out and seek social interactions. So what we think of as interactions. So what we think of as interactions. So what we think of as loneliness as this big kind of dark loneliness as this big kind of dark loneliness as this big kind of dark cloud or you know, fog in our cloud or you know, fog in our cloud or you know, fog in our psychological landscape boils down to a psychological landscape boils down to a psychological landscape boils down to a very small set of neurons releasing a very small set of neurons releasing a very small set of neurons releasing a specific neurochemical for motivation. specific neurochemical for motivation. specific neurochemical for motivation. So just a couple of key points and So just a couple of key points and So just a couple of key points and actionable takeaways based on the actionable takeaways based on the actionable takeaways based on the information I've offered up until now. information I've offered up until now. information I've offered up until now. If you think of yourself as an introvert If you think of yourself as an introvert If you think of yourself as an introvert it's very likely that you get a lot of it's very likely that you get a lot of it's very likely that you get a lot of dopamine from a few or minimal social dopamine from a few or minimal social dopamine from a few or minimal social interactions. Whereas if you're an interactions. Whereas if you're an interactions. Whereas if you're an extrovert contrary to what you might extrovert contrary to what you might extrovert contrary to what you might think social interactions are not going think social interactions are not going think social interactions are not going to flood your system with dopamine. They to flood your system with dopamine. They to flood your system with dopamine. They actually are going to lead to less actually are going to lead to less actually are going to lead to less dopamine release than it would for an dopamine release than it would for an dopamine release than it would for an introvert and therefore you're going to introvert and therefore you're going to introvert and therefore you're going to need a lot more social interactions in need a lot more social interactions in need a lot more social interactions in order to feel filled up by those order to feel filled up by those order to feel filled up by those interactions. Now I'd like to shift interactions. Now I'd like to shift interactions. Now I'd like to shift gears a bit gears a bit gears a bit and focus on what are some things that and focus on what are some things that and focus on what are some things that we can do to encourage the formation of we can do to encourage the formation of we can do to encourage the formation of healthy bonds? healthy bonds? healthy bonds? There's a beautiful study that was There's a beautiful study that was There's a beautiful study that was published in Cell Reports Cell Press published in Cell Reports Cell Press published in Cell Reports Cell Press Journal excellent journal. The title of Journal excellent journal. The title of Journal excellent journal. The title of this paper is conscious processing of this paper is conscious processing of this paper is conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronizes heart narrative stimuli synchronizes heart narrative stimuli synchronizes heart rate between individuals. Now rate between individuals. Now rate between individuals. Now the study involved a very simple type of the study involved a very simple type of the study involved a very simple type of experiment. They had people listen to a experiment. They had people listen to a experiment. They had people listen to a story. Everybody in the study listened story. Everybody in the study listened story. Everybody in the study listened to the same story but they listened to the same story but they listened to the same story but they listened to that story at different times and indeed that story at different times and indeed that story at different times and indeed in different locations. So in different locations. So in different locations. So different people same story and they different people same story and they different people same story and they measured things like heart rate. They measured things like heart rate. They measured things like heart rate. They measured breathing etc. Now what was the measured breathing etc. Now what was the measured breathing etc. Now what was the motivation for doing this? Well, there's motivation for doing this? Well, there's motivation for doing this? Well, there's a long-standing literature showing that a long-standing literature showing that a long-standing literature showing that our physiology things like our heart our physiology things like our heart our physiology things like our heart rate, our breathing, our skin rate, our breathing, our skin rate, our breathing, our skin conductance meaning the amount of conductance meaning the amount of conductance meaning the amount of sweating can be synchronized between individuals. can be synchronized between individuals. can be synchronized between individuals. And that synchronization can occur And that synchronization can occur And that synchronization can occur according to a variety of different according to a variety of different according to a variety of different things. What this study found was that things. What this study found was that things. What this study found was that when people listen to the same story but when people listen to the same story but when people listen to the same story but at different times their heart rates at different times their heart rates at different times their heart rates start to synchronize. Now we also know start to synchronize. Now we also know start to synchronize. Now we also know from an extensive literature that the from an extensive literature that the from an extensive literature that the quality and perceived depth of a social quality and perceived depth of a social quality and perceived depth of a social bond correlates very strongly with how much correlates very strongly with how much correlates very strongly with how much physiological synchronization there is physiological synchronization there is physiological synchronization there is between individuals. between individuals. between individuals. In other words, when your bodies feel In other words, when your bodies feel In other words, when your bodies feel the same the same the same you tend to feel more bonded to somebody you tend to feel more bonded to somebody you tend to feel more bonded to somebody else. And so this whole thing is a else. And so this whole thing is a else. And so this whole thing is a rather circular argument. When you feel rather circular argument. When you feel rather circular argument. When you feel closer to somebody else your physiology closer to somebody else your physiology closer to somebody else your physiology synchronize. And the reverse is true as synchronize. And the reverse is true as synchronize. And the reverse is true as well. When your physiologies are well. When your physiologies are well. When your physiologies are synchronized you feel closer to other synchronized you feel closer to other synchronized you feel closer to other people. This really points to the fact people. This really points to the fact people. This really points to the fact that the body and the brain are that the body and the brain are that the body and the brain are reciprocally connected. Yes indeed, what reciprocally connected. Yes indeed, what reciprocally connected. Yes indeed, what we think, what we hear, what we feel we think, what we hear, what we feel we think, what we hear, what we feel drives our physiology, our heartbeat, drives our physiology, our heartbeat, drives our physiology, our heartbeat, our respiration etc. But our heartbeat our respiration etc. But our heartbeat our respiration etc. But our heartbeat and respiration also are influencing our and respiration also are influencing our and respiration also are influencing our state of mind. And in this case it's state of mind. And in this case it's state of mind. And in this case it's encouraging certain types of social encouraging certain types of social encouraging certain types of social bonds when our heart rates are bonds when our heart rates are bonds when our heart rates are synchronized. How can you leverage this? synchronized. How can you leverage this? synchronized. How can you leverage this? Well many people when they interact with many people when they interact with many people when they interact with others expect that the mere interaction others expect that the mere interaction others expect that the mere interaction with the other person is going to create with the other person is going to create with the other person is going to create the sense of bonding. But in many types the sense of bonding. But in many types the sense of bonding. But in many types of social interactions of social interactions of social interactions it's not the direct interaction with it's not the direct interaction with it's not the direct interaction with that person that makes us feel close to that person that makes us feel close to that person that makes us feel close to them but rather it's shared experience. them but rather it's shared experience. them but rather it's shared experience. And shared experience is shared And shared experience is shared And shared experience is shared physiology. This is actually at the seat physiology. This is actually at the seat physiology. This is actually at the seat of what we come away from a social of what we come away from a social of what we come away from a social interaction with as feeling wow, that interaction with as feeling wow, that interaction with as feeling wow, that was a really wonderful time. Often a was a really wonderful time. Often a was a really wonderful time. Often a really wonderful time can be by virtue really wonderful time can be by virtue really wonderful time can be by virtue of the specific things that were said or of the specific things that were said or of the specific things that were said or the specific things that one engaged in the specific things that one engaged in the specific things that one engaged in but more often than not the final common but more often than not the final common but more often than not the final common pathway we should say of great pathway we should say of great pathway we should say of great experiences was a great physiological experiences was a great physiological experiences was a great physiological experience and a shared physiological experience and a shared physiological experience and a shared physiological experience. Up until now we've been experience. Up until now we've been experience. Up until now we've been talking about social bonding through the talking about social bonding through the talking about social bonding through the lens of neural circuits that are already lens of neural circuits that are already lens of neural circuits that are already established. However, these very neural established. However, these very neural established. However, these very neural circuits that are responsible for social circuits that are responsible for social circuits that are responsible for social bonding in adult forms of attachment be bonding in adult forms of attachment be bonding in adult forms of attachment be it romantic or friendship or otherwise it romantic or friendship or otherwise it romantic or friendship or otherwise are actually established during are actually established during are actually established during development. One of the more important and I think One of the more important and I think One of the more important and I think exciting areas of early attachment as it exciting areas of early attachment as it exciting areas of early attachment as it relates to adult attachment comes to us relates to adult attachment comes to us relates to adult attachment comes to us from the work of Allan Schore. from the work of Allan Schore. from the work of Allan Schore. Allan Schore spelled A L A N Schore S Allan Schore spelled A L A N Schore S Allan Schore spelled A L A N Schore S C H O R E is a psychoanalyst who also C H O R E is a psychoanalyst who also C H O R E is a psychoanalyst who also has deep understanding of neurobiology has deep understanding of neurobiology has deep understanding of neurobiology of attachment of attachment of attachment both in childhood and in adulthood. And both in childhood and in adulthood. And both in childhood and in adulthood. And he's focused a lot on differences he's focused a lot on differences he's focused a lot on differences between right brain and left brain forms between right brain and left brain forms between right brain and left brain forms of attachment. Now in a early episode of attachment. Now in a early episode of attachment. Now in a early episode of the Huberman Lab podcast I touched into the Huberman Lab podcast I touched into the Huberman Lab podcast I touched into the fact that most of what's discussed the fact that most of what's discussed the fact that most of what's discussed in the general public in sort of pop in the general public in sort of pop in the general public in sort of pop psychology and even in some neurobiology psychology and even in some neurobiology psychology and even in some neurobiology courses about right brain versus left courses about right brain versus left courses about right brain versus left brain and one side of the brain being brain and one side of the brain being brain and one side of the brain being more emotional and the other side being more emotional and the other side being more emotional and the other side being more rational is completely wrong. more rational is completely wrong. more rational is completely wrong. However, the work of Allan Schore points However, the work of Allan Schore points However, the work of Allan Schore points to some very concrete neural circuits to some very concrete neural circuits to some very concrete neural circuits that do have a lateralization bias that do have a lateralization bias that do have a lateralization bias meaning they are more right brain than meaning they are more right brain than meaning they are more right brain than left brain or more left brain than right left brain or more left brain than right left brain or more left brain than right brain that underlie certain forms of brain that underlie certain forms of brain that underlie certain forms of attachment between child and parent in attachment between child and parent in attachment between child and parent in particular child and mother and that particular child and mother and that particular child and mother and that these right brain-isms if you will and these right brain-isms if you will and these right brain-isms if you will and left brain-isms for attachment get left brain-isms for attachment get left brain-isms for attachment get played out again and again in our forms played out again and again in our forms played out again and again in our forms of attachment as adults. So within the of attachment as adults. So within the of attachment as adults. So within the field of psychoanalysis there's been a field of psychoanalysis there's been a field of psychoanalysis there's been a long-standing discussion of course about long-standing discussion of course about long-standing discussion of course about the so-called unconscious or the so-called unconscious or the so-called unconscious or subconscious. The things that we are not subconscious. The things that we are not subconscious. The things that we are not aware of. And I think there's growing aware of. And I think there's growing aware of. And I think there's growing evidence pointing to the fact that at evidence pointing to the fact that at evidence pointing to the fact that at least one major component of the least one major component of the least one major component of the subconscious or the unconscious is the subconscious or the unconscious is the subconscious or the unconscious is the so-called autonomic nervous system. The so-called autonomic nervous system. The so-called autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is the portion autonomic nervous system is the portion autonomic nervous system is the portion of our nervous system that controls our of our nervous system that controls our of our nervous system that controls our reflexive breathing, our heart rate, our reflexive breathing, our heart rate, our reflexive breathing, our heart rate, our skin conductance meaning our sweating, skin conductance meaning our sweating, skin conductance meaning our sweating, pupil size. It's the aspect of our pupil size. It's the aspect of our pupil size. It's the aspect of our nervous system that makes us more alert nervous system that makes us more alert nervous system that makes us more alert or more calm. It's the so-called or more calm. It's the so-called or more calm. It's the so-called sympathetic meaning for alertness or sympathetic meaning for alertness or sympathetic meaning for alertness or parasympathetic branch of the autonomic parasympathetic branch of the autonomic parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system. Parasympathetic for more nervous system. Parasympathetic for more nervous system. Parasympathetic for more calming responses. Now what Dr. Schore's calming responses. Now what Dr. Schore's calming responses. Now what Dr. Schore's work and the work of others is now work and the work of others is now work and the work of others is now showing is that early infant parent in showing is that early infant parent in showing is that early infant parent in particular infant mother attachment particular infant mother attachment particular infant mother attachment involves a coordination or a involves a coordination or a involves a coordination or a synchronization of these right brain synchronization of these right brain synchronization of these right brain circuits and these left brain circuits and these left brain circuits and these left brain circuits as they relate excuse me to the as they relate excuse me to the as they relate excuse me to the autonomic nervous system. autonomic nervous system. autonomic nervous system. How does this play out? Well, it plays How does this play out? Well, it plays How does this play out? Well, it plays out where early on as an infant when out where early on as an infant when out where early on as an infant when you're born you're truly helpless. You you're born you're truly helpless. You you're born you're truly helpless. You can't feed yourself. You can't warm can't feed yourself. You can't warm can't feed yourself. You can't warm yourself. You can't change yourself and yourself. You can't change yourself and yourself. You can't change yourself and you certainly can't ambulate walk you certainly can't ambulate walk you certainly can't ambulate walk anywhere to get the things that you anywhere to get the things that you anywhere to get the things that you need. All of those functions all of those All of those functions all of those All of those functions all of those needs rather are met by your primary needs rather are met by your primary needs rather are met by your primary caretaker. Typically that's the mother. caretaker. Typically that's the mother. caretaker. Typically that's the mother. I realize there are exceptions, but I realize there are exceptions, but I realize there are exceptions, but that's the general rule. There are now that's the general rule. There are now that's the general rule. There are now brain imaging studies examining the brain imaging studies examining the brain imaging studies examining the brains of infants and the brains of brains of infants and the brains of brains of infants and the brains of mothers as they interact and showing mothers as they interact and showing mothers as they interact and showing that the physical contact between the that the physical contact between the that the physical contact between the two, the breathing of the mother and two, the breathing of the mother and two, the breathing of the mother and child, the heart rate of the mother and child, the heart rate of the mother and child, the heart rate of the mother and child, and indeed the pupil size of the child, and indeed the pupil size of the child, and indeed the pupil size of the mother and child are actually actively mother and child are actually actively mother and child are actually actively getting coordinated. In other words, getting coordinated. In other words, getting coordinated. In other words, the mother is regulating the infant's the mother is regulating the infant's the mother is regulating the infant's autonomic nervous system primarily, and autonomic nervous system primarily, and autonomic nervous system primarily, and the infant is also regulating the infant is also regulating the infant is also regulating the mother's autonomic nervous system. A mother's autonomic nervous system. A mother's autonomic nervous system. A small coo from a baby or a cry, which is small coo from a baby or a cry, which is small coo from a baby or a cry, which is a stress cry from a baby, will a stress cry from a baby, will a stress cry from a baby, will definitely regulate the autonomic definitely regulate the autonomic definitely regulate the autonomic nervous system of the mother. nervous system of the mother. nervous system of the mother. Now, as we get older, there's another Now, as we get older, there's another Now, as we get older, there's another system that starts to come into play in system that starts to come into play in system that starts to come into play in parent child interactions, and this also comes child interactions, and this also comes child interactions, and this also comes into play in sibling interactions and so into play in sibling interactions and so into play in sibling interactions and so forth. And that's the left brain system forth. And that's the left brain system forth. And that's the left brain system as described by Allan Schore. Now, as described by Allan Schore. Now, as described by Allan Schore. Now, again, this isn't about emotion versus again, this isn't about emotion versus again, this isn't about emotion versus rationality. This is about autonomic rationality. This is about autonomic rationality. This is about autonomic versus more conscious forms of bonding. versus more conscious forms of bonding. versus more conscious forms of bonding. So, on the left brain side of things, So, on the left brain side of things, So, on the left brain side of things, there is a processing more of narratives there is a processing more of narratives there is a processing more of narratives that are very concrete, logical that are very concrete, logical that are very concrete, logical narratives, okay? And again, I have to narratives, okay? And again, I have to narratives, okay? And again, I have to zoom out and just really tamp down zoom out and just really tamp down zoom out and just really tamp down the idea that it's not that one side of the idea that it's not that one side of the idea that it's not that one side of the brain is emotional and the other the brain is emotional and the other the brain is emotional and the other side is rational, but rather there's a side is rational, but rather there's a side is rational, but rather there's a bit of a dominance for the left brain bit of a dominance for the left brain bit of a dominance for the left brain circuitry to be involved in the kinds of circuitry to be involved in the kinds of circuitry to be involved in the kinds of bonding that are associated with bonding that are associated with bonding that are associated with prediction and reward. The idea is that prediction and reward. The idea is that prediction and reward. The idea is that there are two parallel circuits that are there are two parallel circuits that are there are two parallel circuits that are important for establishing bonds, and important for establishing bonds, and important for establishing bonds, and that this is set up very early on in that this is set up very early on in that this is set up very early on in childhood, and that it's neither childhood, and that it's neither childhood, and that it's neither emotional nor rational, but both. What's emotional nor rational, but both. What's emotional nor rational, but both. What's becoming clear from the neurobiological becoming clear from the neurobiological becoming clear from the neurobiological imaging studies is that imaging studies is that imaging studies is that as people start to as people start to as people start to advance into adolescence and adulthood advance into adolescence and adulthood advance into adolescence and adulthood and well into their elderly years, and well into their elderly years, and well into their elderly years, the same circuits that were active and the same circuits that were active and the same circuits that were active and established in childhood are repurposed established in childhood are repurposed established in childhood are repurposed for other forms of attachment, and that for other forms of attachment, and that for other forms of attachment, and that to have truly complete bonds with other to have truly complete bonds with other to have truly complete bonds with other individuals, but in particular with individuals, but in particular with individuals, but in particular with romantic partners, it's important that romantic partners, it's important that romantic partners, it's important that there be both synchronization of there be both synchronization of there be both synchronization of physiology and synchronization of these physiology and synchronization of these physiology and synchronization of these more, I guess we could call them more more, I guess we could call them more more, I guess we could call them more rational or predictive type circuits. rational or predictive type circuits. rational or predictive type circuits. So, we can leverage this information. In So, we can leverage this information. In So, we can leverage this information. In the clinical psychology and in the clinical psychology and in the clinical psychology and in the neurobiological literature now, neurobiological literature now, neurobiological literature now, it's understood that there is both it's understood that there is both it's understood that there is both emotional empathy, like actually feeling emotional empathy, like actually feeling emotional empathy, like actually feeling what somebody is feeling, and what is what somebody is feeling, and what is what somebody is feeling, and what is now called cognitive empathy. Cognitive now called cognitive empathy. Cognitive now called cognitive empathy. Cognitive empathy is this idea that we both see empathy is this idea that we both see empathy is this idea that we both see and experience something the same way at and experience something the same way at and experience something the same way at a mental level. Emotional empathy is a mental level. Emotional empathy is a mental level. Emotional empathy is this idea that, yes, I can feel what you this idea that, yes, I can feel what you this idea that, yes, I can feel what you feel at a visceral, somatic, or feel at a visceral, somatic, or feel at a visceral, somatic, or autonomic level. And it's absolutely autonomic level. And it's absolutely autonomic level. And it's absolutely clear that strong social bonds between clear that strong social bonds between clear that strong social bonds between children and caretaker children and caretaker children and caretaker involve both emotional empathy, this involve both emotional empathy, this involve both emotional empathy, this autonomic function, and cognitive autonomic function, and cognitive autonomic function, and cognitive empathy, that there's a mutual empathy, that there's a mutual empathy, that there's a mutual understanding of how the other person understanding of how the other person understanding of how the other person feels and how the other person thinks in feels and how the other person thinks in feels and how the other person thinks in order to be able to make predictions order to be able to make predictions order to be able to make predictions about what they're going to do. Now, about what they're going to do. Now, about what they're going to do. Now, it's also very clear, based on the it's also very clear, based on the it's also very clear, based on the emerging literature, that romantic emerging literature, that romantic emerging literature, that romantic relationships and to some extent relationships and to some extent relationships and to some extent friendships, although friendships have friendships, although friendships have friendships, although friendships have been explored a bit less in the been explored a bit less in the been explored a bit less in the literature, that emotional empathy and literature, that emotional empathy and literature, that emotional empathy and cognitive empathy are both required in cognitive empathy are both required in cognitive empathy are both required in order to establish what we call a order to establish what we call a order to establish what we call a trusting social bond. So, for those of trusting social bond. So, for those of trusting social bond. So, for those of you that are seeking to establish deeper you that are seeking to establish deeper you that are seeking to establish deeper bonds or bonds of any kind, it's bonds or bonds of any kind, it's bonds or bonds of any kind, it's important that you think about important that you think about important that you think about synchronization of bodily states, we synchronization of bodily states, we synchronization of bodily states, we talked about that earlier, and talked about that earlier, and talked about that earlier, and synchronization of cognitive states. synchronization of cognitive states. synchronization of cognitive states. Now, that doesn't mean you have to agree Now, that doesn't mean you have to agree Now, that doesn't mean you have to agree on everything. In fact, often times on everything. In fact, often times on everything. In fact, often times people who feel very close to one people who feel very close to one people who feel very close to one another cognitively and emotionally another cognitively and emotionally another cognitively and emotionally argue about all sorts of things and argue about all sorts of things and argue about all sorts of things and disagree about a lot of things. But the disagree about a lot of things. But the disagree about a lot of things. But the point isn't that there be total point isn't that there be total point isn't that there be total convergence of opinion or stance, but convergence of opinion or stance, but convergence of opinion or stance, but rather that we understand how the other rather that we understand how the other rather that we understand how the other feels and we believe that they feels and we believe that they feels and we believe that they understand how we feel, that we understand how we feel, that we understand how we feel, that we understand how the other person thinks, understand how the other person thinks, understand how the other person thinks, and that they think that we understand and that they think that we understand and that they think that we understand how they think. So, it's a reciprocal how they think. So, it's a reciprocal how they think. So, it's a reciprocal loop between two people that involves loop between two people that involves loop between two people that involves this cognition and involves emotion, and this cognition and involves emotion, and this cognition and involves emotion, and it's grounded, as Dr. Schore has pointed it's grounded, as Dr. Schore has pointed it's grounded, as Dr. Schore has pointed out, in our earliest forms of out, in our earliest forms of out, in our earliest forms of attachment, and that makes perfect sense attachment, and that makes perfect sense attachment, and that makes perfect sense because the same sorts of circuits that because the same sorts of circuits that because the same sorts of circuits that are responsible for social homeostasis, are responsible for social homeostasis, are responsible for social homeostasis, the kind of right brain and left brain the kind of right brain and left brain the kind of right brain and left brain circuits that are responsible for circuits that are responsible for circuits that are responsible for infant-mother attachment and then later infant-mother attachment and then later infant-mother attachment and then later for in- more intellectual or predictive for in- more intellectual or predictive for in- more intellectual or predictive type attachments between child and type attachments between child and type attachments between child and caregiver, are the exact same circuits caregiver, are the exact same circuits caregiver, are the exact same circuits that we superimpose into all other types that we superimpose into all other types that we superimpose into all other types of relationships throughout the rest of relationships throughout the rest of relationships throughout the rest of our life. And I should just mention that our life. And I should just mention that our life. And I should just mention that for those of you that might be thinking for those of you that might be thinking for those of you that might be thinking that you had a less than satisfactory you had a less than satisfactory you had a less than satisfactory infant-caretaker interaction or form of infant-caretaker interaction or form of infant-caretaker interaction or form of attachment, you are not alone, and in attachment, you are not alone, and in attachment, you are not alone, and in fact much of the work that Dr. Schore fact much of the work that Dr. Schore fact much of the work that Dr. Schore focuses on is about how those early focuses on is about how those early focuses on is about how those early circumstances can be understood and circumstances can be understood and circumstances can be understood and rewired toward the development of rewired toward the development of rewired toward the development of healthy adult attachment. One of the key healthy adult attachment. One of the key healthy adult attachment. One of the key themes to understand about biological themes to understand about biological themes to understand about biological processes is that they often work on processes is that they often work on processes is that they often work on short time scales and longer time short time scales and longer time short time scales and longer time scales. And up until now, we've mainly scales. And up until now, we've mainly scales. And up until now, we've mainly been talking about the stuff that been talking about the stuff that been talking about the stuff that happens on short time scales. So, the happens on short time scales. So, the happens on short time scales. So, the kind of synchronization of heart rate or kind of synchronization of heart rate or kind of synchronization of heart rate or activation of a given set of neurons activation of a given set of neurons activation of a given set of neurons that dump some dopamine and causes us to that dump some dopamine and causes us to that dump some dopamine and causes us to seek out more social interaction or seek out more social interaction or seek out more social interaction or less, for instance. But every biological less, for instance. But every biological less, for instance. But every biological circuit and function needs to have circuit and function needs to have circuit and function needs to have long-standing effects as well. And long-standing effects as well. And long-standing effects as well. And typically, when you're thinking about typically, when you're thinking about typically, when you're thinking about long-standing effects in the brain and long-standing effects in the brain and long-standing effects in the brain and body, you start looking towards the body, you start looking towards the body, you start looking towards the hormone system. So, if ever there was a hormone system. So, if ever there was a hormone system. So, if ever there was a hormone or hormone-like molecule that's hormone or hormone-like molecule that's hormone or hormone-like molecule that's associated with social bonding, it's associated with social bonding, it's associated with social bonding, it's oxytocin. Oxytocin is involved in social oxytocin. Oxytocin is involved in social oxytocin. Oxytocin is involved in social recognition. That's right. When you see recognition. That's right. When you see recognition. That's right. When you see people that you consider your people, people that you consider your people, people that you consider your people, your team, your group, your friends, your team, your group, your friends, your team, your group, your friends, oxytocin is released, even if you don't oxytocin is released, even if you don't oxytocin is released, even if you don't come into physical contact with them. come into physical contact with them. come into physical contact with them. Oxytocin is also associated with pair Oxytocin is also associated with pair Oxytocin is also associated with pair bonding, the feeling that they are your bonding, the feeling that they are your bonding, the feeling that they are your person and that you are their person. person and that you are their person. person and that you are their person. It's a common language people use. It's a common language people use. It's a common language people use. It's also associated with honesty. Believe it also associated with honesty. Believe it also associated with honesty. Believe it or not, there are experiments that show or not, there are experiments that show or not, there are experiments that show that if people receive uh oxytocin that if people receive uh oxytocin that if people receive uh oxytocin through an inhalation spray, that they through an inhalation spray, that they through an inhalation spray, that they will be more honest and forthcoming will be more honest and forthcoming will be more honest and forthcoming about certain things. The main types of about certain things. The main types of about certain things. The main types of interactions that release oxytocin at interactions that release oxytocin at interactions that release oxytocin at high levels are, first of all, that the high levels are, first of all, that the high levels are, first of all, that the interaction be between individuals that interaction be between individuals that interaction be between individuals that see each other as very closely see each other as very closely see each other as very closely associated, right? Often times they're associated, right? Often times they're associated, right? Often times they're in close contact, often times they are in close contact, often times they are in close contact, often times they are from the very body of the other. And so, from the very body of the other. And so, from the very body of the other. And so, the amount or the amplitude of oxytocin the amount or the amplitude of oxytocin the amount or the amplitude of oxytocin release tends to scale with how closely release tends to scale with how closely release tends to scale with how closely associated individuals are. Just the associated individuals are. Just the associated individuals are. Just the sight of one's baby or smell of one's sight of one's baby or smell of one's sight of one's baby or smell of one's baby can evoke oxytocin release and vice baby can evoke oxytocin release and vice baby can evoke oxytocin release and vice versa from the mother. versa from the mother. versa from the mother. Physical contact even more so. In Physical contact even more so. In Physical contact even more so. In romantic partners, romantic partners, romantic partners, physical contact, even the sight of a physical contact, even the sight of a physical contact, even the sight of a picture of a partner can evoke oxytocin picture of a partner can evoke oxytocin picture of a partner can evoke oxytocin release, and sexual desire, also trust. release, and sexual desire, also trust. release, and sexual desire, also trust. And it's important to point out that And it's important to point out that And it's important to point out that feeling of connection is of the that feeling of connection is of the that feeling of connection is of the autonomic type that I was referring to autonomic type that I was referring to autonomic type that I was referring to earlier, ala Allan Schore's work. That earlier, ala Allan Schore's work. That earlier, ala Allan Schore's work. That it's not of the, oh, we think about it's not of the, oh, we think about it's not of the, oh, we think about things the exact same way, we agree on things the exact same way, we agree on things the exact same way, we agree on everything. Now, it's more of that their everything. Now, it's more of that their everything. Now, it's more of that their physiologies are synchronized. physiologies are synchronized. physiologies are synchronized. But the point here is that there's But the point here is that there's But the point here is that there's actually a hormonal glue between actually a hormonal glue between actually a hormonal glue between individuals, okay? Infant and mother, individuals, okay? Infant and mother, individuals, okay? Infant and mother, friends, teammates, romantic partners, friends, teammates, romantic partners, friends, teammates, romantic partners, and so on. And that hormonal glue is and so on. And that hormonal glue is and so on. And that hormonal glue is oxytocin. So, we've covered a lot about oxytocin. So, we've covered a lot about oxytocin. So, we've covered a lot about the biology and indeed the neural the biology and indeed the neural the biology and indeed the neural circuitry and neurochemistry and circuitry and neurochemistry and circuitry and neurochemistry and neuroendocrinology of social bonding. of social bonding. of social bonding. I want to make sure that I highlight the I want to make sure that I highlight the I want to make sure that I highlight the key features that go into any and all of key features that go into any and all of key features that go into any and all of your social bonds. First of all, all your social bonds. First of all, all your social bonds. First of all, all social bonds have the potential to social bonds have the potential to social bonds have the potential to include both what we called emotional include both what we called emotional include both what we called emotional empathy and cognitive empathy. And so, empathy and cognitive empathy. And so, empathy and cognitive empathy. And so, if you are interested in establishing if you are interested in establishing if you are interested in establishing and deepening social bonds of any kind, and deepening social bonds of any kind, and deepening social bonds of any kind, it's important that you put some effort it's important that you put some effort it's important that you put some effort toward this thing that we call emotional toward this thing that we call emotional toward this thing that we call emotional empathy, which is really about sharing empathy, which is really about sharing empathy, which is really about sharing autonomic experience. Emotional empathy autonomic experience. Emotional empathy autonomic experience. Emotional empathy and the synchronization of autonomic and the synchronization of autonomic and the synchronization of autonomic function, heart rate, breathing, et function, heart rate, breathing, et function, heart rate, breathing, et cetera, can be best accomplished by paying can be best accomplished by paying can be best accomplished by paying attention to external events, in attention to external events, in attention to external events, in particular narrative, story, music, particular narrative, story, music, particular narrative, story, music, perhaps sports or other types of perhaps sports or other types of perhaps sports or other types of experience as an external stimulus to experience as an external stimulus to experience as an external stimulus to drive synchrony of those internal drive synchrony of those internal drive synchrony of those internal states. The other aspect of forming deep bonds The other aspect of forming deep bonds The other aspect of forming deep bonds is cognitive empathy. is cognitive empathy. is cognitive empathy. Again, cognitive empathy is not about Again, cognitive empathy is not about Again, cognitive empathy is not about agreeing on things or viewing things the agreeing on things or viewing things the agreeing on things or viewing things the exact same way. It's about really exact same way. It's about really exact same way. It's about really gaining understanding of how somebody gaining understanding of how somebody gaining understanding of how somebody else thinks about something, really else thinks about something, really else thinks about something, really paying attention to that, and then paying attention to that, and then paying attention to that, and then paying attention to how you think about paying attention to how you think about paying attention to how you think about and feel about something. Now, we also and feel about something. Now, we also and feel about something. Now, we also talked about introversion and talked about introversion and talked about introversion and extroversion, and I'd like to try and extroversion, and I'd like to try and extroversion, and I'd like to try and dismantle the common misperceptions dismantle the common misperceptions dismantle the common misperceptions about introversion and extroversion about introversion and extroversion about introversion and extroversion because when we look at the neural because when we look at the neural because when we look at the neural circuitry, as you recall, circuitry, as you recall, circuitry, as you recall, introverts are not people that don't introverts are not people that don't introverts are not people that don't like social interaction. It's just that like social interaction. It's just that like social interaction. It's just that they feel filled up or sated by less they feel filled up or sated by less they feel filled up or sated by less social interaction than would be an social interaction than would be an social interaction than would be an extrovert, and that's because, at least extrovert, and that's because, at least extrovert, and that's because, at least according to the social homeostasis according to the social homeostasis according to the social homeostasis circuit model, they actually get more circuit model, they actually get more circuit model, they actually get more dopamine from less social interaction. dopamine from less social interaction. dopamine from less social interaction. Whereas, extroverts get less dopamine Whereas, extroverts get less dopamine Whereas, extroverts get less dopamine release from an equivalent amount of release from an equivalent amount of release from an equivalent amount of social interaction. social interaction. social interaction. So, for those of you that feel as if So, for those of you that feel as if So, for those of you that feel as if you're an introvert or extrovert or that you're an introvert or extrovert or that you're an introvert or extrovert or that know introverts and extroverts, it's not know introverts and extroverts, it's not know introverts and extroverts, it's not about how verbal people are, it's not about how verbal people are, it's not about how verbal people are, it's not about how much they seek out social about how much they seek out social about how much they seek out social interactions per se, it's about how much interactions per se, it's about how much interactions per se, it's about how much social interaction is enough for the social interaction is enough for the social interaction is enough for the given person. Now, the whole reason for given person. Now, the whole reason for given person. Now, the whole reason for providing this framework, this providing this framework, this providing this framework, this biological circuitry, et cetera, is not biological circuitry, et cetera, is not biological circuitry, et cetera, is not to simply put a reductionist view on to simply put a reductionist view on to simply put a reductionist view on things that you already realized and things that you already realized and things that you already realized and knew, but rather to give you some knew, but rather to give you some knew, but rather to give you some leverage points to understand how is it leverage points to understand how is it leverage points to understand how is it that you form social bonds, how is it that you form social bonds, how is it that you form social bonds, how is it that you might be challenged in forming that you might be challenged in forming that you might be challenged in forming certain types of social bonds? And to certain types of social bonds? And to certain types of social bonds? And to think about entry points to both think about entry points to both think about entry points to both establishing and reinforcing social establishing and reinforcing social establishing and reinforcing social bonds of different kinds. bonds of different kinds. bonds of different kinds. Hopefully, it will also give you insight Hopefully, it will also give you insight Hopefully, it will also give you insight into why breakups, whether it be between into why breakups, whether it be between into why breakups, whether it be between friendships or romantic partners, can be friendships or romantic partners, can be friendships or romantic partners, can be so painful. so painful. so painful. A breakup of any kind involves both a A breakup of any kind involves both a A breakup of any kind involves both a breaking of that emotional empathy and breaking of that emotional empathy and breaking of that emotional empathy and that cognitive empathy. And indeed, it that cognitive empathy. And indeed, it that cognitive empathy. And indeed, it has a neurobiological and hormonal has a neurobiological and hormonal has a neurobiological and hormonal underpinning, right? If one of our major underpinning, right? If one of our major underpinning, right? If one of our major sources of oxytocin or one of our major sources of oxytocin or one of our major sources of oxytocin or one of our major of dopamine suddenly is not around, that of dopamine suddenly is not around, that of dopamine suddenly is not around, that is incredibly devastating to a nervous is incredibly devastating to a nervous is incredibly devastating to a nervous system. And to borrow from the great system. And to borrow from the great system. And to borrow from the great psychologist and neurobiologist Lisa psychologist and neurobiologist Lisa psychologist and neurobiologist Lisa Feldman Barrett, who says you know, we Feldman Barrett, who says you know, we Feldman Barrett, who says you know, we are not just individuals, we are nervous are not just individuals, we are nervous are not just individuals, we are nervous systems influencing other nervous systems influencing other nervous systems influencing other nervous systems and their nervous systems are systems and their nervous systems are systems and their nervous systems are influencing us. I think that's the right influencing us. I think that's the right influencing us. I think that's the right way to think about it. So, it should way to think about it. So, it should way to think about it. So, it should come as no surprise that breakups of come as no surprise that breakups of come as no surprise that breakups of various kinds are very challenging, various kinds are very challenging, various kinds are very challenging, regardless of what um regardless of what um regardless of what um underlaid that breakup, whether or not underlaid that breakup, whether or not underlaid that breakup, whether or not somebody moving or an actual decision of somebody moving or an actual decision of somebody moving or an actual decision of one person to leave the relationship or one person to leave the relationship or one person to leave the relationship or both, etc. Social bonds are vitally both, etc. Social bonds are vitally both, etc. Social bonds are vitally important to us as a species, whether or important to us as a species, whether or important to us as a species, whether or not they are at a distance over social not they are at a distance over social not they are at a distance over social media, whether or not they are in close media, whether or not they are in close media, whether or not they are in close proximity, actual physical contact. proximity, actual physical contact. proximity, actual physical contact. Today, what I've really tried to Today, what I've really tried to Today, what I've really tried to illustrate is that there are common set illustrate is that there are common set illustrate is that there are common set of biological, neurochemical, and of biological, neurochemical, and of biological, neurochemical, and hormonal underpinnings to what we call hormonal underpinnings to what we call hormonal underpinnings to what we call social bonding. And so, while it is social bonding. And so, while it is social bonding. And so, while it is complex and it is subjective, it complex and it is subjective, it complex and it is subjective, it involves the hierarchies, it involves the hierarchies, it involves the hierarchies, it involves previous upbringing, it involves our previous upbringing, it involves our previous upbringing, it involves our goals, etc. goals, etc. goals, etc. It is not infinitely complex. And in It is not infinitely complex. And in It is not infinitely complex. And in that sense, it is tractable. Hopefully, that sense, it is tractable. Hopefully, that sense, it is tractable. Hopefully, I've offered you some leave levers or I've offered you some leave levers or I've offered you some leave levers or some entry points under which you can some entry points under which you can some entry points under which you can both understand and move towards social both understand and move towards social both understand and move towards social bonds that would be more satisfying and bonds that would be more satisfying and bonds that would be more satisfying and more gratifying for you. That's more gratifying for you. That's more gratifying for you. That's certainly one of the goals. The other certainly one of the goals. The other certainly one of the goals. The other one is that hopefully, if you're a one is that hopefully, if you're a one is that hopefully, if you're a clinician or simply the friend that clinician or simply the friend that clinician or simply the friend that people go to or the family member that people go to or the family member that people go to or the family member that people go to when they are challenged people go to when they are challenged people go to when they are challenged through various challenges in social through various challenges in social through various challenges in social bonds, that you can start to perhaps bonds, that you can start to perhaps bonds, that you can start to perhaps pass along some of the information as a pass along some of the information as a pass along some of the information as a way of people understanding what they're way of people understanding what they're way of people understanding what they're going through as they are breaking up, going through as they are breaking up, going through as they are breaking up, but also as they are falling in love, as but also as they are falling in love, as but also as they are falling in love, as they are forming attachments and as they are forming attachments and as they are forming attachments and as they are being challenged with attachments. are being challenged with attachments. are being challenged with attachments. That's my hope, and especially as you That's my hope, and especially as you That's my hope, and especially as you head into the holidays and end of year, head into the holidays and end of year, head into the holidays and end of year, I would hope that you would take this I would hope that you would take this I would hope that you would take this knowledge and apply it in any of the knowledge and apply it in any of the knowledge and apply it in any of the ways that you feel are meaningful and ways that you feel are meaningful and ways that you feel are meaningful and adaptive for you. [Music]