Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing microplastics. are discussing microplastics. are discussing microplastics. Microplastics are an extremely Microplastics are an extremely Microplastics are an extremely interesting and important topic that interesting and important topic that interesting and important topic that everyone should know about. And the everyone should know about. And the everyone should know about. And the reason is microplastics are indeed reason is microplastics are indeed reason is microplastics are indeed everywhere. They are in the air. They everywhere. They are in the air. They everywhere. They are in the air. They are in beverages we consume. They are in beverages we consume. They are in beverages we consume. They are lining the inside of soup cans. They are lining the inside of soup cans. They are lining the inside of soup cans. They are lining the inside of paper cups made to lining the inside of paper cups made to lining the inside of paper cups made to hold hot water, coffee, and tea. hold hot water, coffee, and tea. hold hot water, coffee, and tea. And there are a lot of animal data and And there are a lot of animal data and And there are a lot of animal data and indeed some human data indeed some human data indeed some human data showing that microplastics, which showing that microplastics, which showing that microplastics, which consist of particles of different sizes, consist of particles of different sizes, consist of particles of different sizes, can be very detrimental to our health. can be very detrimental to our health. can be very detrimental to our health. At the same time, it's important to At the same time, it's important to At the same time, it's important to realize that as of now, we don't have realize that as of now, we don't have realize that as of now, we don't have any causal data linking microplastics to any causal data linking microplastics to any causal data linking microplastics to specific human diseases. That said, specific human diseases. That said, specific human diseases. That said, there's a lot of correlative data and there's a lot of correlative data and there's a lot of correlative data and today we are going to review those today we are going to review those today we are going to review those correlative data and most importantly we correlative data and most importantly we correlative data and most importantly we are going to discuss the various things are going to discuss the various things are going to discuss the various things that we can each and all do to limit our that we can each and all do to limit our that we can each and all do to limit our exposure to microplastics or at least to exposure to microplastics or at least to exposure to microplastics or at least to facilitate the removal of microplastics facilitate the removal of microplastics facilitate the removal of microplastics from our body. Because, as we'll soon from our body. Because, as we'll soon from our body. Because, as we'll soon discuss, you have microplastics in essentially you have microplastics in essentially you have microplastics in essentially every organ and tissue of your body every organ and tissue of your body every organ and tissue of your body right now and you are constantly being right now and you are constantly being right now and you are constantly being bombarded with microplastics. So, the bombarded with microplastics. So, the bombarded with microplastics. So, the challenge for me, and indeed for you as challenge for me, and indeed for you as challenge for me, and indeed for you as well, is to frame this topic of well, is to frame this topic of well, is to frame this topic of microplastics accurately. microplastics accurately. microplastics accurately. It's important that we understand they It's important that we understand they It's important that we understand they are out there, they are in us, and are out there, they are in us, and are out there, they are in us, and indeed they can cause serious issues for indeed they can cause serious issues for indeed they can cause serious issues for our health. However, we also need to our health. However, we also need to our health. However, we also need to take agency. We need to understand how take agency. We need to understand how take agency. We need to understand how we can limit what's called the we can limit what's called the we can limit what's called the bioaccumulation of microplastics in our bioaccumulation of microplastics in our bioaccumulation of microplastics in our organs and tissues and I don't want to organs and tissues and I don't want to organs and tissues and I don't want to be alarmist. Today's episode is not be alarmist. Today's episode is not be alarmist. Today's episode is not about getting you to be petrified or about getting you to be petrified or about getting you to be petrified or about developing some sort of about developing some sort of about developing some sort of hypochondriasis about microplastics. hypochondriasis about microplastics. hypochondriasis about microplastics. It's designed to inform you about what It's designed to inform you about what It's designed to inform you about what they are, where they exist, where they are, where they exist, where they are, where they exist, where they exist in particularly high amounts, and exist in particularly high amounts, and exist in particularly high amounts, and the things that you can do to limit the things that you can do to limit the things that you can do to limit their impact on your biology. Because I their impact on your biology. Because I their impact on your biology. Because I think it's fair to say that we are not think it's fair to say that we are not think it's fair to say that we are not going to rid the earth of microplastics. going to rid the earth of microplastics. going to rid the earth of microplastics. They are just too pervasive. Now, the They are just too pervasive. Now, the They are just too pervasive. Now, the one caveat is that there are certain one caveat is that there are certain one caveat is that there are certain populations of people, in particular populations of people, in particular populations of people, in particular people that are pregnant, or people that people that are pregnant, or people that people that are pregnant, or people that have young children, and those young have young children, and those young have young children, and those young children themselves, that should really children themselves, that should really children themselves, that should really strive to limit their exposure to strive to limit their exposure to strive to limit their exposure to microplastics. So, by the end of today's microplastics. So, by the end of today's microplastics. So, by the end of today's episode, you can be confident that episode, you can be confident that episode, you can be confident that you'll understand a lot about what you'll understand a lot about what you'll understand a lot about what microplastics are, the impact that they microplastics are, the impact that they microplastics are, the impact that they are currently having, some of the are currently having, some of the are currently having, some of the potential impact that people are potential impact that people are potential impact that people are starting to investigate, and ways that starting to investigate, and ways that starting to investigate, and ways that you can limit their negative impact on you can limit their negative impact on you can limit their negative impact on your brain and bodily health. Before you your brain and bodily health. Before you your brain and bodily health. Before you begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost consumer information bring zero-cost consumer information bring zero-cost consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Element. Element is an sponsor is Element. Element is an sponsor is Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Now, I and others ratios, but no sugar. Now, I and others ratios, but no sugar. Now, I and others on the podcast have talked a lot about on the podcast have talked a lot about on the podcast have talked a lot about the critical importance of hydration for the critical importance of hydration for the critical importance of hydration for proper brain and bodily function. proper brain and bodily function. proper brain and bodily function. Research shows that even a slight degree Research shows that even a slight degree Research shows that even a slight degree of dehydration can really diminish and of dehydration can really diminish and of dehydration can really diminish and physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes in order for your body and electrolytes in order for your body and electrolytes in order for your body and brain to function at their best. The brain to function at their best. The brain to function at their best. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are critical for the potassium are critical for the potassium are critical for the functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or nerve body, especially your neurons or nerve body, especially your neurons or nerve cells. To make sure that I'm getting cells. To make sure that I'm getting cells. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and proper amounts of hydration and proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of Element in about 16 to 32 oz of water Element in about 16 to 32 oz of water Element in about 16 to 32 oz of water when I wake up in the morning, and I when I wake up in the morning, and I when I wake up in the morning, and I drink that basically first thing in the drink that basically first thing in the drink that basically first thing in the morning. I also drink Element dissolved morning. I also drink Element dissolved morning. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical in water during any kind of physical in water during any kind of physical exercise I'm doing, especially on hot exercise I'm doing, especially on hot exercise I'm doing, especially on hot days if I'm sweating a lot and losing days if I'm sweating a lot and losing days if I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a water and electrolytes. Element has a water and electrolytes. Element has a lot of different great tasting flavors lot of different great tasting flavors lot of different great tasting flavors of element. My favorite is the of element. My favorite is the of element. My favorite is the watermelon, although I also confess I watermelon, although I also confess I watermelon, although I also confess I like the raspberry and the citrus. like the raspberry and the citrus. like the raspberry and the citrus. Basically, I like all the flavors of Basically, I like all the flavors of Basically, I like all the flavors of element. If you'd like to try element, element. If you'd like to try element, element. If you'd like to try element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman spelled drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix. the purchase of any element drink mix. the purchase of any element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's claim a free sample pack. Today's claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. Now, I've been doing weekly therapy for Now, I've been doing weekly therapy for Now, I've been doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of have a choice. It was a condition of have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in high school, being allowed to stay in high school, being allowed to stay in high school, but pretty soon I realized that therapy but pretty soon I realized that therapy but pretty soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to is an extremely important component to is an extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I consider overall health. In fact, I consider overall health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as important doing regular therapy just as important doing regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise including as getting regular exercise including as getting regular exercise including cardiovascular exercise and resistance cardiovascular exercise and resistance cardiovascular exercise and resistance training exercise, which of course I training exercise, which of course I training exercise, which of course I also do every week. Now, there are also do every week. Now, there are also do every week. Now, there are essentially three things that great essentially three things that great essentially three things that great therapy provides. First, it provides a therapy provides. First, it provides a therapy provides. First, it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can good rapport with somebody that you can good rapport with somebody that you can really trust and talk to about any and really trust and talk to about any and really trust and talk to about any and all issues that concern you. Second of all issues that concern you. Second of all issues that concern you. Second of all, great therapy provides support in all, great therapy provides support in all, great therapy provides support in the form of emotional support, but also the form of emotional support, but also the form of emotional support, but also directed guidance, the do's and the not directed guidance, the do's and the not directed guidance, the do's and the not to do's. And third, expert therapy can to do's. And third, expert therapy can to do's. And third, expert therapy can help you arrive at useful insights that help you arrive at useful insights that help you arrive at useful insights that you would not have arrived at otherwise. you would not have arrived at otherwise. you would not have arrived at otherwise. Insights that allow you to do better, Insights that allow you to do better, Insights that allow you to do better, not just in your emotional life, in your not just in your emotional life, in your not just in your emotional life, in your relationship life, but also the relationship life, but also the relationship life, but also the relationship to yourself and your relationship to yourself and your relationship to yourself and your professional life and all sorts of professional life and all sorts of professional life and all sorts of career goals. With BetterHelp, they make career goals. With BetterHelp, they make career goals. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert therapist it very easy to find an expert therapist it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you can really resonate with whom you can really resonate with whom you can really resonate with and provide you with these three and provide you with these three and provide you with these three benefits that I described. If you'd like benefits that I described. If you'd like benefits that I described. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Okay, let's talk about microplastics. Okay, let's talk about microplastics. Okay, let's talk about microplastics. What are microplastics? Microplastics, What are microplastics? Microplastics, What are microplastics? Microplastics, as the name suggests, are little as the name suggests, are little as the name suggests, are little itty-bitty bits of plastic. How itty-bitty bits of plastic. How itty-bitty bits of plastic. How itty-bitty? Well, microplastics range in itty-bitty? Well, microplastics range in itty-bitty? Well, microplastics range in size from 1 micron, which is 1/1000th size from 1 micron, which is 1/1000th size from 1 micron, which is 1/1000th of a millimeter, all the way up to 5 mm of a millimeter, all the way up to 5 mm of a millimeter, all the way up to 5 mm in diameter. Okay, so anything in that in diameter. Okay, so anything in that in diameter. Okay, so anything in that size range is considered a microplastic. size range is considered a microplastic. size range is considered a microplastic. Anything smaller than that, so anything Anything smaller than that, so anything Anything smaller than that, so anything smaller than 1 micron in diameter, smaller than 1 micron in diameter, smaller than 1 micron in diameter, 1/1000th of a millimeter in diameter, is 1/1000th of a millimeter in diameter, is 1/1000th of a millimeter in diameter, is considered a nanoplastic. considered a nanoplastic. considered a nanoplastic. And indeed, there are lots of And indeed, there are lots of And indeed, there are lots of microplastics floating around in the microplastics floating around in the microplastics floating around in the air. There are lots of nanoplastics air. There are lots of nanoplastics air. There are lots of nanoplastics floating around in the air. There's lots floating around in the air. There's lots floating around in the air. There's lots of both of those things in the ocean. of both of those things in the ocean. of both of those things in the ocean. There are a lot of those things in food, There are a lot of those things in food, There are a lot of those things in food, especially packaged food. There are a especially packaged food. There are a especially packaged food. There are a lot of those things lining cups. There lot of those things lining cups. There lot of those things lining cups. There are a lot of those things in everything are a lot of those things in everything are a lot of those things in everything that we consume, essentially. So, what that we consume, essentially. So, what that we consume, essentially. So, what does it mean to have all these does it mean to have all these does it mean to have all these microplastics and nanoplastics floating microplastics and nanoplastics floating microplastics and nanoplastics floating around in our environment and going into around in our environment and going into around in our environment and going into our body through fluids and foods, et our body through fluids and foods, et our body through fluids and foods, et cetera? Well, cetera? Well, cetera? Well, there is some serious concern because there is some serious concern because there is some serious concern because these microplastics potentially can these microplastics potentially can these microplastics potentially can disrupt cellular health, organ health, disrupt cellular health, organ health, disrupt cellular health, organ health, and could potentially lead to certain and could potentially lead to certain and could potentially lead to certain forms of disease. We'll talk about the forms of disease. We'll talk about the forms of disease. We'll talk about the ways they could potentially do that. ways they could potentially do that. ways they could potentially do that. However, I want to also emphasize that However, I want to also emphasize that However, I want to also emphasize that your body is incredibly good at dealing your body is incredibly good at dealing your body is incredibly good at dealing with foreign invaders. It's very good at with foreign invaders. It's very good at with foreign invaders. It's very good at getting rid of stuff that isn't good for getting rid of stuff that isn't good for getting rid of stuff that isn't good for it. However, microplastics and it. However, microplastics and it. However, microplastics and nanoplastics have been shown to lodge nanoplastics have been shown to lodge nanoplastics have been shown to lodge within specific tissues and stay there within specific tissues and stay there within specific tissues and stay there for long periods of time. So, you'll for long periods of time. So, you'll for long periods of time. So, you'll notice during today's episode I'm going notice during today's episode I'm going notice during today's episode I'm going to go back and forth between the stuff to go back and forth between the stuff to go back and forth between the stuff that's really scary and then reassuring that's really scary and then reassuring that's really scary and then reassuring you that we're not sure whether or not you that we're not sure whether or not you that we're not sure whether or not we need to be that scared about these we need to be that scared about these we need to be that scared about these microplastics and nanoplastics yet. microplastics and nanoplastics yet. microplastics and nanoplastics yet. Okay, what I want to do is give you the Okay, what I want to do is give you the Okay, what I want to do is give you the evidence so you can decide how much evidence so you can decide how much evidence so you can decide how much effort you put into limiting your effort you put into limiting your effort you put into limiting your exposure to these microplastics and exposure to these microplastics and exposure to these microplastics and nanoplastics and how much effort you put nanoplastics and how much effort you put nanoplastics and how much effort you put into trying to rid your body of them. into trying to rid your body of them. into trying to rid your body of them. Okay, I'm not here to paint the picture Okay, I'm not here to paint the picture Okay, I'm not here to paint the picture one way or the other because frankly, one way or the other because frankly, one way or the other because frankly, the data just don't line up with one the data just don't line up with one the data just don't line up with one argument or the other, that they're argument or the other, that they're argument or the other, that they're extremely dangerous or that they're extremely dangerous or that they're extremely dangerous or that they're nothing to worry about. Let me give you nothing to worry about. Let me give you nothing to worry about. Let me give you an example of something that you might an example of something that you might an example of something that you might have heard in the media and on recent have heard in the media and on recent have heard in the media and on recent podcasts out there podcasts out there podcasts out there that's very scary. The argument, based on what very scary. The argument, based on what very scary. The argument, based on what seemed to be a pretty high-quality seemed to be a pretty high-quality seemed to be a pretty high-quality publication, that you may have heard, is publication, that you may have heard, is publication, that you may have heard, is that every single week that every single week that every single week we ingest up to a credit card's worth of we ingest up to a credit card's worth of we ingest up to a credit card's worth of microplastics and nanoplastics. Okay, microplastics and nanoplastics. Okay, microplastics and nanoplastics. Okay, you might have seen that in headlines you might have seen that in headlines you might have seen that in headlines and in other podcasts. And indeed, there and in other podcasts. And indeed, there and in other podcasts. And indeed, there was a paper arguing that. However, a was a paper arguing that. However, a was a paper arguing that. However, a more recent paper looked at the more recent paper looked at the more recent paper looked at the quantitative analysis that used a quantitative analysis that used a quantitative analysis that used a different quantitative analysis and different quantitative analysis and different quantitative analysis and claimed that they vastly overestimated claimed that they vastly overestimated claimed that they vastly overestimated the amount of plastic that we ingest the amount of plastic that we ingest the amount of plastic that we ingest every week. What do I mean by vastly every week. What do I mean by vastly every week. What do I mean by vastly overestimated? This newer analysis of overestimated? This newer analysis of overestimated? This newer analysis of the same data claims that the credit the same data claims that the credit the same data claims that the credit card's worth of plastic that it was card's worth of plastic that it was card's worth of plastic that it was argued we consume every week, well, that argued we consume every week, well, that argued we consume every week, well, that was an overestimate by a millionfold. was an overestimate by a millionfold. was an overestimate by a millionfold. And in fact, it would take 23,000 years And in fact, it would take 23,000 years And in fact, it would take 23,000 years to consume enough plastic to consume enough plastic to consume enough plastic to lead to that credit card's worth of to lead to that credit card's worth of to lead to that credit card's worth of plastic in our bodies. Okay, so now we plastic in our bodies. Okay, so now we plastic in our bodies. Okay, so now we have very discrepant data, or rather, we have very discrepant data, or rather, we have very discrepant data, or rather, we have very discrepant analyses of the have very discrepant analyses of the have very discrepant analyses of the same data. So, you're starting to get a same data. So, you're starting to get a same data. So, you're starting to get a picture of just how confusing this whole picture of just how confusing this whole picture of just how confusing this whole field is, but we're going to parse it a field is, but we're going to parse it a field is, but we're going to parse it a little bit further by saying that it's little bit further by saying that it's little bit further by saying that it's also very clear also very clear also very clear that microplastics and nanoplastics are that microplastics and nanoplastics are that microplastics and nanoplastics are everywhere. Okay, they're just everywhere. Okay, they're just everywhere. Okay, they're just everywhere you look. In fact, if I were everywhere you look. In fact, if I were everywhere you look. In fact, if I were a PhD advisor for somebody in toxicology a PhD advisor for somebody in toxicology a PhD advisor for somebody in toxicology or a PhD advisor for somebody in or a PhD advisor for somebody in or a PhD advisor for somebody in environmental science, and they needed environmental science, and they needed environmental science, and they needed to have a surefire to have a surefire to have a surefire publication, I'd probably suggest that publication, I'd probably suggest that publication, I'd probably suggest that they work on microplastics and go out they work on microplastics and go out they work on microplastics and go out there and try and find yet another there and try and find yet another there and try and find yet another source of microplastics and use a better source of microplastics and use a better source of microplastics and use a better analysis, for instance, okay? Doing a analysis, for instance, okay? Doing a analysis, for instance, okay? Doing a graduate thesis isn't just about getting graduate thesis isn't just about getting graduate thesis isn't just about getting a publication, but what I'm trying to a publication, but what I'm trying to a publication, but what I'm trying to refer to here is that wherever people refer to here is that wherever people refer to here is that wherever people look for microplastics, they find them. look for microplastics, they find them. look for microplastics, they find them. This is true in our environment, and This is true in our environment, and This is true in our environment, and this is true in food, this is true in this is true in food, this is true in this is true in food, this is true in water, and And is also true for our water, and And is also true for our water, and And is also true for our tissues. So, in the last couple of years tissues. So, in the last couple of years tissues. So, in the last couple of years there's been an explosion in the number there's been an explosion in the number there's been an explosion in the number of scientific studies exploring which of scientific studies exploring which of scientific studies exploring which tissues of the human body, so not just tissues of the human body, so not just tissues of the human body, so not just animal models, but the human body animal models, but the human body animal models, but the human body contain microplastics and nanoplastics. contain microplastics and nanoplastics. contain microplastics and nanoplastics. Okay, so by examining postmortem Okay, so by examining postmortem Okay, so by examining postmortem tissues, that is tissues from people who tissues, that is tissues from people who tissues, that is tissues from people who are deceased, it's been discovered that are deceased, it's been discovered that are deceased, it's been discovered that there are microplastics and nanoplastics there are microplastics and nanoplastics there are microplastics and nanoplastics lodged in the brain. lodged in the brain. lodged in the brain. So, if you take the brain of a deceased So, if you take the brain of a deceased So, if you take the brain of a deceased adult human, adult human, adult human, what you find is that they have about what you find is that they have about what you find is that they have about 0.5% of the total weight of the brain 0.5% of the total weight of the brain 0.5% of the total weight of the brain from microplastics. So, this is about a from microplastics. So, this is about a from microplastics. So, this is about a teaspoon of salt or sugars worth of teaspoon of salt or sugars worth of teaspoon of salt or sugars worth of microplastics. Might not seem like much, microplastics. Might not seem like much, microplastics. Might not seem like much, but if you think about how little but if you think about how little but if you think about how little neurons are, um a typical neuron will neurons are, um a typical neuron will neurons are, um a typical neuron will have a cell body. This is the area that have a cell body. This is the area that have a cell body. This is the area that contains the nucleus with all the DNA contains the nucleus with all the DNA contains the nucleus with all the DNA and so forth. Uh the cell bodies of and so forth. Uh the cell bodies of and so forth. Uh the cell bodies of neurons vary in size tremendously. They neurons vary in size tremendously. They neurons vary in size tremendously. They can be as small as, you know, 5 to 8 can be as small as, you know, 5 to 8 can be as small as, you know, 5 to 8 microns across, microns across, microns across, to as much as, gosh, I've seen some to as much as, gosh, I've seen some to as much as, gosh, I've seen some neurons down the microscope that are, um neurons down the microscope that are, um neurons down the microscope that are, um you know, 50 microns. I've seen some you know, 50 microns. I've seen some you know, 50 microns. I've seen some that are 100 microns across. It depends that are 100 microns across. It depends that are 100 microns across. It depends where you look in the nervous system. where you look in the nervous system. where you look in the nervous system. Okay, so if you start to think about a Okay, so if you start to think about a Okay, so if you start to think about a half teaspoon of powder of microplastics half teaspoon of powder of microplastics half teaspoon of powder of microplastics and nanoplastics, and nanoplastics, and nanoplastics, that's a lot of microplastics and that's a lot of microplastics and that's a lot of microplastics and nanoplastics that could be distributed nanoplastics that could be distributed nanoplastics that could be distributed in lots of different places in the in lots of different places in the in lots of different places in the brain. And a little bit later we'll talk brain. And a little bit later we'll talk brain. And a little bit later we'll talk about what the potential impact is of about what the potential impact is of about what the potential impact is of these microplastics and nanoplastics on these microplastics and nanoplastics on these microplastics and nanoplastics on the function of particular types of the function of particular types of the function of particular types of neurons that may impact things like neurons that may impact things like neurons that may impact things like neurodevelopmental trajectories. Okay, neurodevelopmental trajectories. Okay, neurodevelopmental trajectories. Okay, the argument has been made. I'm not the argument has been made. I'm not the argument has been made. I'm not making this argument, but the argument making this argument, but the argument making this argument, but the argument has been made that microplastics and has been made that microplastics and has been made that microplastics and nanoplastics may correlate with things nanoplastics may correlate with things nanoplastics may correlate with things like autism, may correlate with things like autism, may correlate with things like autism, may correlate with things like attention deficit hyperactivity like attention deficit hyperactivity like attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. I don't actually believe that disorder. I don't actually believe that disorder. I don't actually believe that the data there are strong enough to make the data there are strong enough to make the data there are strong enough to make those arguments at all. However, I will those arguments at all. However, I will those arguments at all. However, I will tell you that the presence of tell you that the presence of tell you that the presence of microplastics and nanoplastics in the microplastics and nanoplastics in the microplastics and nanoplastics in the brains, that is postmortem tissue, Okay, brains, that is postmortem tissue, Okay, brains, that is postmortem tissue, Okay, so deceased people taking the brain, so deceased people taking the brain, so deceased people taking the brain, chopping up the brain, looking at it chopping up the brain, looking at it chopping up the brain, looking at it down the microscope and seeing down the microscope and seeing down the microscope and seeing microplastics and then quantifying the microplastics and then quantifying the microplastics and then quantifying the amount of microplastics in different amount of microplastics in different amount of microplastics in different compartments of the brain and compartments of the brain and compartments of the brain and distributed across the brain. distributed across the brain. distributed across the brain. That is concerning to me in the sense That is concerning to me in the sense That is concerning to me in the sense that there's enough of it in there and that there's enough of it in there and that there's enough of it in there and the function of neurons and the nervous the function of neurons and the nervous the function of neurons and the nervous system is precise enough that you could system is precise enough that you could system is precise enough that you could imagine given that these microplastics and given that these microplastics and given that these microplastics and nanoplastics are lodged in particular nanoplastics are lodged in particular nanoplastics are lodged in particular categories of neurons that do in fact categories of neurons that do in fact categories of neurons that do in fact impact things like impact things like impact things like reward and motivation, things like reward and motivation, things like reward and motivation, things like movement, etc. That they could be movement, etc. That they could be movement, etc. That they could be impacting the function of the nervous impacting the function of the nervous impacting the function of the nervous system, but there's no direct causal system, but there's no direct causal system, but there's no direct causal relationship, at least not in humans. relationship, at least not in humans. relationship, at least not in humans. There's some interesting data in animal There's some interesting data in animal There's some interesting data in animal models. We'll get back to that a little models. We'll get back to that a little models. We'll get back to that a little bit later. So there's microplastics and bit later. So there's microplastics and bit later. So there's microplastics and nanoplastics in brain. nanoplastics in brain. nanoplastics in brain. You'll find microplastics and You'll find microplastics and You'll find microplastics and nanoplastics in other tissues that have nanoplastics in other tissues that have nanoplastics in other tissues that have a blood organ barrier. a blood organ barrier. a blood organ barrier. What do I mean by that? Well, the brain What do I mean by that? Well, the brain What do I mean by that? Well, the brain is encapsulated in the so-called BBB, is encapsulated in the so-called BBB, is encapsulated in the so-called BBB, the blood-brain barrier. And that's the blood-brain barrier. And that's the blood-brain barrier. And that's because your brain tissue, because it because your brain tissue, because it because your brain tissue, because it doesn't turn over across the lifespan, doesn't turn over across the lifespan, doesn't turn over across the lifespan, you don't produce many new neurons. you don't produce many new neurons. you don't produce many new neurons. There are a few places you produce new There are a few places you produce new There are a few places you produce new neurons like the olfactory bulb, the neurons like the olfactory bulb, the neurons like the olfactory bulb, the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, a few dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, a few dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, a few places, but these are far and few places, but these are far and few places, but these are far and few between. Most of your brain tissue that between. Most of your brain tissue that between. Most of your brain tissue that you're born with is the brain tissue you're born with is the brain tissue you're born with is the brain tissue that you're going to die with provided that you're going to die with provided that you're going to die with provided you don't lose that brain tissue through you don't lose that brain tissue through you don't lose that brain tissue through the course of your lifespan through a the course of your lifespan through a the course of your lifespan through a head injury or something like that. The head injury or something like that. The head injury or something like that. The neurons you have when you are born neurons you have when you are born neurons you have when you are born actually are far more numerous than the actually are far more numerous than the actually are far more numerous than the neurons you have at the time when you neurons you have at the time when you neurons you have at the time when you die. This is important and it's one of die. This is important and it's one of die. This is important and it's one of the reasons we have a blood-brain the reasons we have a blood-brain the reasons we have a blood-brain barrier. Nature is very smart. It barrier. Nature is very smart. It barrier. Nature is very smart. It designed a barrier so that molecules designed a barrier so that molecules designed a barrier so that molecules that might be dangerous to the brain that might be dangerous to the brain that might be dangerous to the brain can't enter the brain and that's what can't enter the brain and that's what can't enter the brain and that's what the BBB is for. Microplastics and the BBB is for. Microplastics and the BBB is for. Microplastics and nanoplastics are making it from the nanoplastics are making it from the nanoplastics are making it from the bloodstream into the brain. Okay, this bloodstream into the brain. Okay, this bloodstream into the brain. Okay, this is what I mean when I say they can cross is what I mean when I say they can cross is what I mean when I say they can cross the blood-brain barrier. Then if we take the blood-brain barrier. Then if we take the blood-brain barrier. Then if we take a step back and we ask ourselves, what a step back and we ask ourselves, what a step back and we ask ourselves, what are some other tissues in the body that are some other tissues in the body that are some other tissues in the body that have a very robust barrier from the have a very robust barrier from the have a very robust barrier from the blood? Cuz a lot of things get into the blood? Cuz a lot of things get into the blood? Cuz a lot of things get into the blood and that's not necessarily good, blood and that's not necessarily good, blood and that's not necessarily good, but it's not necessarily bad if you can but it's not necessarily bad if you can but it's not necessarily bad if you can excrete those things, right? We have a excrete those things, right? We have a excrete those things, right? We have a lot of detoxification mechanisms that lot of detoxification mechanisms that lot of detoxification mechanisms that include our liver detoxification, etc. include our liver detoxification, etc. include our liver detoxification, etc. But, if these particles are getting from the if these particles are getting from the if these particles are getting from the blood into the brain, what are some blood into the brain, what are some blood into the brain, what are some other tissues that they're getting into other tissues that they're getting into other tissues that they're getting into that have these thick barriers or these that have these thick barriers or these that have these thick barriers or these very stringent barriers? very stringent barriers? very stringent barriers? As you can imagine, two other tissues As you can imagine, two other tissues As you can imagine, two other tissues that have very stringent blood-to-organ that have very stringent blood-to-organ that have very stringent blood-to-organ barriers are the blood-testicular barriers are the blood-testicular barriers are the blood-testicular barrier. Why would that be? Okay, why barrier. Why would that be? Okay, why barrier. Why would that be? Okay, why would you protect brain? Well, they would you protect brain? Well, they would you protect brain? Well, they can't renew. You don't want those can't renew. You don't want those can't renew. You don't want those neurons to get contaminated with things, neurons to get contaminated with things, neurons to get contaminated with things, so you put a BBB in, a blood-brain so you put a BBB in, a blood-brain so you put a BBB in, a blood-brain barrier. You also put a blood-testicular barrier. You also put a blood-testicular barrier. You also put a blood-testicular barrier in males. Why? Well, that's barrier in males. Why? Well, that's barrier in males. Why? Well, that's where the DNA are. That's where the where the DNA are. That's where the where the DNA are. That's where the so-called germ cells are. So, you don't so-called germ cells are. So, you don't so-called germ cells are. So, you don't want things getting into the testicle want things getting into the testicle want things getting into the testicle and mutating the DNA there because then and mutating the DNA there because then and mutating the DNA there because then those mutated DNA could be passed on to those mutated DNA could be passed on to those mutated DNA could be passed on to offspring. Guess what? Microplastics and Guess what? Microplastics and Guess what? Microplastics and nanoplastics can cross the nanoplastics can cross the nanoplastics can cross the blood-testicular barrier. And in fact, blood-testicular barrier. And in fact, blood-testicular barrier. And in fact, there was a lot of press this last year there was a lot of press this last year there was a lot of press this last year about microplastics and nanoplastics about microplastics and nanoplastics about microplastics and nanoplastics being present in every human testicle being present in every human testicle being present in every human testicle that was analyzed in or I should say that was analyzed in or I should say that was analyzed in or I should say from postmortem tissue. Likewise, from postmortem tissue. Likewise, from postmortem tissue. Likewise, there's a blood-follicle barrier in there's a blood-follicle barrier in there's a blood-follicle barrier in females. Okay, this is where the eggs females. Okay, this is where the eggs females. Okay, this is where the eggs come from. And microplastics and come from. And microplastics and come from. And microplastics and nanoplastics can cross the nanoplastics can cross the nanoplastics can cross the blood-follicular barrier. So, this is blood-follicular barrier. So, this is blood-follicular barrier. So, this is why people are starting to get why people are starting to get why people are starting to get concerned, right? I suppose we shouldn't concerned, right? I suppose we shouldn't concerned, right? I suppose we shouldn't be so surprised that we're inhaling be so surprised that we're inhaling be so surprised that we're inhaling microplastics given that they are microplastics given that they are microplastics given that they are everywhere. I should mention that, you everywhere. I should mention that, you everywhere. I should mention that, you know, there wasn't much plastic around know, there wasn't much plastic around know, there wasn't much plastic around or in use prior to the 1950s. If any of or in use prior to the 1950s. If any of or in use prior to the 1950s. If any of you have ever seen the movie The you have ever seen the movie The you have ever seen the movie The Graduate with Dustin Hoffman, Graduate with Dustin Hoffman, Graduate with Dustin Hoffman, this is the only time you'll see this is the only time you'll see this is the only time you'll see somebody driving eastward across the Bay somebody driving eastward across the Bay somebody driving eastward across the Bay Bridge, all right, toward from San Bridge, all right, toward from San Bridge, all right, toward from San Francisco toward Berkeley on the top Francisco toward Berkeley on the top Francisco toward Berkeley on the top deck. It actually runs in the other deck. It actually runs in the other deck. It actually runs in the other direction. They shut down the Bay direction. They shut down the Bay direction. They shut down the Bay Bridge. That's in The Graduate. And the Bridge. That's in The Graduate. And the Bridge. That's in The Graduate. And the other thing that's in The Graduate is other thing that's in The Graduate is other thing that's in The Graduate is this famous scene, if you're old enough this famous scene, if you're old enough this famous scene, if you're old enough like me to remember the movie The like me to remember the movie The like me to remember the movie The Graduate, Dustin Hoffman's lying in the Graduate, Dustin Hoffman's lying in the Graduate, Dustin Hoffman's lying in the pool. It's after his graduation. He's pool. It's after his graduation. He's pool. It's after his graduation. He's lying in the pool. He doesn't really lying in the pool. He doesn't really lying in the pool. He doesn't really know what he's going to do with his know what he's going to do with his know what he's going to do with his life. This this comes up to him and he life. This this comes up to him and he life. This this comes up to him and he says, "You know, the future is says, "You know, the future is says, "You know, the future is plastics." And it became this kind of plastics." And it became this kind of plastics." And it became this kind of famous line or pseudo famous line. famous line or pseudo famous line. famous line or pseudo famous line. Now, that movie takes place at a time Now, that movie takes place at a time Now, that movie takes place at a time when plastics were really booming as an when plastics were really booming as an when plastics were really booming as an industry. And indeed, polyethylene, industry. And indeed, polyethylene, industry. And indeed, polyethylene, polyurethane, these plastic materials polyurethane, these plastic materials polyurethane, these plastic materials were developed because they were very were developed because they were very were developed because they were very durable. They were long-lasting. In durable. They were long-lasting. In durable. They were long-lasting. In fact, they are not biodegradable. fact, they are not biodegradable. fact, they are not biodegradable. They're not broken down very easily if They're not broken down very easily if They're not broken down very easily if at all, and certainly not within at all, and certainly not within at all, and certainly not within biological tissues. biological tissues. biological tissues. These plastics went from essentially These plastics went from essentially These plastics went from essentially non-existent in the 1940s and prior to non-existent in the 1940s and prior to non-existent in the 1940s and prior to in pretty much everything involved in pretty much everything involved in pretty much everything involved in manufacturing, okay? Even in different manufacturing, okay? Even in different manufacturing, okay? Even in different aspects of surgical implants and things aspects of surgical implants and things aspects of surgical implants and things of that sort. So, plastics are indeed of that sort. So, plastics are indeed of that sort. So, plastics are indeed everywhere, and that started in the everywhere, and that started in the everywhere, and that started in the 1950s, hence that line from The 1950s, hence that line from The 1950s, hence that line from The Graduate. So, it's not surprising that Graduate. So, it's not surprising that Graduate. So, it's not surprising that microplastics and nanoplastics would get microplastics and nanoplastics would get microplastics and nanoplastics would get into our body, right? If they're into our body, right? If they're into our body, right? If they're everywhere in our environment and we're everywhere in our environment and we're everywhere in our environment and we're inhaling them all day, inhaling them all day, inhaling them all day, then of course they'll get into our then of course they'll get into our then of course they'll get into our lungs, and then they're small enough lungs, and then they're small enough lungs, and then they're small enough they can get into our bloodstream. But they can get into our bloodstream. But they can get into our bloodstream. But as I mentioned, the body has these as I mentioned, the body has these as I mentioned, the body has these cleansing systems, these detoxification cleansing systems, these detoxification cleansing systems, these detoxification systems to remove things, but systems to remove things, but systems to remove things, but they're not removing the microplastics, they're not removing the microplastics, they're not removing the microplastics, or at least not all of them, from brain, or at least not all of them, from brain, or at least not all of them, from brain, testicle, and follicle. And I should testicle, and follicle. And I should testicle, and follicle. And I should point out that point out that point out that microplastics and nanoplastics are also microplastics and nanoplastics are also microplastics and nanoplastics are also found in all the other tissues of the found in all the other tissues of the found in all the other tissues of the body. In fact, I don't think there's a body. In fact, I don't think there's a body. In fact, I don't think there's a single investigation of human tissue or single investigation of human tissue or single investigation of human tissue or animal tissue for microplastics or animal tissue for microplastics or animal tissue for microplastics or nanoplastics where they didn't get a nanoplastics where they didn't get a nanoplastics where they didn't get a positive result, meaning where they positive result, meaning where they positive result, meaning where they didn't find them in the tissue. You can didn't find them in the tissue. You can didn't find them in the tissue. You can find them in not just the upper lungs, find them in not just the upper lungs, find them in not just the upper lungs, but in the lower lungs. So, they could but in the lower lungs. So, they could but in the lower lungs. So, they could get deposited in the lower lungs. You get deposited in the lower lungs. You get deposited in the lower lungs. You can find them in the bloodstream from a can find them in the bloodstream from a can find them in the bloodstream from a from a blood draw. You can find them in from a blood draw. You can find them in from a blood draw. You can find them in human placenta. And you can find them in human placenta. And you can find them in human placenta. And you can find them in what's called the meconium, which is the what's called the meconium, which is the what's called the meconium, which is the first stool that a baby takes. This is first stool that a baby takes. This is first stool that a baby takes. This is typically taken within the or the stool typically taken within the or the stool typically taken within the or the stool is given, taken. It's taken by is given, taken. It's taken by is given, taken. It's taken by the doctor. It's actually analyzed for the doctor. It's actually analyzed for the doctor. It's actually analyzed for various things. It contains bile and a various things. It contains bile and a various things. It contains bile and a bunch of other things. It's actually an bunch of other things. It's actually an bunch of other things. It's actually an important indicator of the health of the important indicator of the health of the important indicator of the health of the child. Um child. Um child. Um it turns out that this first stool it turns out that this first stool it turns out that this first stool that happens in the first 24 hours or so that happens in the first 24 hours or so that happens in the first 24 hours or so after birth. When that's been analyzed after birth. When that's been analyzed after birth. When that's been analyzed for microplastics, for microplastics, for microplastics, there too you find microplastics and there too you find microplastics and there too you find microplastics and nanoplastics. And that's really got nanoplastics. And that's really got nanoplastics. And that's really got people concerned because what this means people concerned because what this means people concerned because what this means is that microplastics and nanoplastics is that microplastics and nanoplastics is that microplastics and nanoplastics that mothers are ingesting or that they that mothers are ingesting or that they that mothers are ingesting or that they somehow have lodged in their bodies are somehow have lodged in their bodies are somehow have lodged in their bodies are making their way to the fetus. making their way to the fetus. making their way to the fetus. Now, you could say, "Well, is it really Now, you could say, "Well, is it really Now, you could say, "Well, is it really a problem?" Well, a few years ago as it a problem?" Well, a few years ago as it a problem?" Well, a few years ago as it was at least concerning enough that was at least concerning enough that was at least concerning enough that BPAs, and we'll talk more about BPAs, and we'll talk more about BPAs, and we'll talk more about BPAs, bisphenol A, which is a component of bisphenol A, which is a component of bisphenol A, which is a component of microplastics. This is a known endocrine microplastics. This is a known endocrine microplastics. This is a known endocrine disruptor. It disrupts certain disruptor. It disrupts certain disruptor. It disrupts certain estrogen-like pathways. We'll get into estrogen-like pathways. We'll get into estrogen-like pathways. We'll get into this in a few minutes. this in a few minutes. this in a few minutes. Bisphenol A and BPAs were banned from Bisphenol A and BPAs were banned from Bisphenol A and BPAs were banned from sippy cups in kids and from any food sippy cups in kids and from any food sippy cups in kids and from any food containers for young kids. So, the FDA containers for young kids. So, the FDA containers for young kids. So, the FDA in the United States and their European in the United States and their European in the United States and their European countries as well countries as well countries as well had enough data on this or enough had enough data on this or enough had enough data on this or enough concern about this to say, "Listen, we concern about this to say, "Listen, we concern about this to say, "Listen, we are going to make it illegal to have are going to make it illegal to have are going to make it illegal to have BPA-lined sippy cups or food containers BPA-lined sippy cups or food containers BPA-lined sippy cups or food containers for young kids." for young kids." for young kids." In part because the BPA is correlated In part because the BPA is correlated In part because the BPA is correlated with microplastics and nanoplastics. with microplastics and nanoplastics. with microplastics and nanoplastics. So, what I'm saying here is that So, what I'm saying here is that So, what I'm saying here is that the government has taken pretty avid the government has taken pretty avid the government has taken pretty avid measures to restrict the amount of BPA measures to restrict the amount of BPA measures to restrict the amount of BPA exposure through microplastics and nanoplastics through microplastics and nanoplastics through microplastics and nanoplastics to young kids. And yet, the fetus to young kids. And yet, the fetus to young kids. And yet, the fetus clearly is being exposed to clearly is being exposed to clearly is being exposed to microplastics and nanoplastics. microplastics and nanoplastics. microplastics and nanoplastics. This is why at the beginning I mentioned This is why at the beginning I mentioned This is why at the beginning I mentioned if you are pregnant or if you have young if you are pregnant or if you have young if you are pregnant or if you have young kids or if you are a young kid, you want kids or if you are a young kid, you want kids or if you are a young kid, you want to go out of your way to limit your to go out of your way to limit your to go out of your way to limit your exposure to these microplastics and exposure to these microplastics and exposure to these microplastics and nanoplastics. But, if you're an older nanoplastics. But, if you're an older nanoplastics. But, if you're an older adult, you probably want to do the same adult, you probably want to do the same adult, you probably want to do the same and we'll talk about ways that you can and we'll talk about ways that you can and we'll talk about ways that you can do that. do that. do that. So, I could go on and on about the So, I could go on and on about the So, I could go on and on about the various tissues besides placenta, in various tissues besides placenta, in various tissues besides placenta, in your bloodstream, brain, testes, your bloodstream, brain, testes, your bloodstream, brain, testes, follicle, lower lungs. follicle, lower lungs. follicle, lower lungs. You can find nanoplastics in the liver. You can find nanoplastics in the liver. You can find nanoplastics in the liver. You can find microplastics and You can find microplastics and You can find microplastics and nanoplastics in pretty much every tissue nanoplastics in pretty much every tissue nanoplastics in pretty much every tissue that you look for them. The real that you look for them. The real that you look for them. The real question is how detrimental are these question is how detrimental are these question is how detrimental are these microplastics and nanoplastics? And then microplastics and nanoplastics? And then microplastics and nanoplastics? And then of course we can talk about where of course we can talk about where of course we can talk about where they're coming from specifically in ways they're coming from specifically in ways they're coming from specifically in ways that you can control and limit. And when that you can control and limit. And when that you can control and limit. And when I say control and limit, what we're I say control and limit, what we're I say control and limit, what we're really talking about here is yes, trying really talking about here is yes, trying really talking about here is yes, trying to limit your exposure to these things. to limit your exposure to these things. to limit your exposure to these things. If I were to rattle off the different If I were to rattle off the different If I were to rattle off the different sources of microplastics and sources of microplastics and sources of microplastics and nanoplastics, you would go wide-eyed and nanoplastics, you would go wide-eyed and nanoplastics, you would go wide-eyed and you would probably also just say, "Okay, you would probably also just say, "Okay, you would probably also just say, "Okay, I surrender. They're truly everywhere." I surrender. They're truly everywhere." I surrender. They're truly everywhere." In fact, I'll do that, okay? I can't In fact, I'll do that, okay? I can't In fact, I'll do that, okay? I can't help but do that. But keep in mind, you help but do that. But keep in mind, you help but do that. But keep in mind, you do have some control uh in terms of the do have some control uh in terms of the do have some control uh in terms of the end result of these microplastics and end result of these microplastics and end result of these microplastics and nanoplastics on your health. So, here I nanoplastics on your health. So, here I nanoplastics on your health. So, here I go. Plastic bags, storage containers, go. Plastic bags, storage containers, go. Plastic bags, storage containers, bottle caps, rope gear, strapping, bottle caps, rope gear, strapping, bottle caps, rope gear, strapping, utensils, cups, floats, coolers, utensils, cups, floats, coolers, utensils, cups, floats, coolers, containers, rope, fishing nets, containers, rope, fishing nets, containers, rope, fishing nets, textiles. Sorry, I'm not laughing textiles. Sorry, I'm not laughing textiles. Sorry, I'm not laughing because it's funny. I'm laughing because it's funny. I'm laughing because it's funny. I'm laughing because it's just a pretty much everywhere. it's just a pretty much everywhere. it's just a pretty much everywhere. Latex paint, coatings, medical devices, Latex paint, coatings, medical devices, Latex paint, coatings, medical devices, automotive parts, tires on the road automotive parts, tires on the road automotive parts, tires on the road degrading, giving off little degrading, giving off little degrading, giving off little microplastics into the air. microplastics into the air. microplastics into the air. Microplastics raining down from the sky, Microplastics raining down from the sky, Microplastics raining down from the sky, literally. Pipe, film, containers, laminated safety Pipe, film, containers, laminated safety Pipe, film, containers, laminated safety glass, car windshield. Oh, great. Even glass, car windshield. Oh, great. Even glass, car windshield. Oh, great. Even the car windshield. Drinking bottles, the car windshield. Drinking bottles, the car windshield. Drinking bottles, textile fibers, resins, paints, textile fibers, resins, paints, textile fibers, resins, paints, varnish, construction, automotive parts. varnish, construction, automotive parts. varnish, construction, automotive parts. Okay, so basically everywhere, right? Okay, so basically everywhere, right? Okay, so basically everywhere, right? These things are everywhere. Huh. So, These things are everywhere. Huh. So, These things are everywhere. Huh. So, what are we to do? Well, what are we to do? Well, what are we to do? Well, what we are to do is to limit what we are to do is to limit what we are to do is to limit the long-term accumulation of the long-term accumulation of the long-term accumulation of microplastics and nanoplastics in our microplastics and nanoplastics in our microplastics and nanoplastics in our system. There are ways that we can limit system. There are ways that we can limit system. There are ways that we can limit their introduction to our system, but as their introduction to our system, but as their introduction to our system, but as long as you're breathing, as long as long as you're breathing, as long as long as you're breathing, as long as you're walking around, as long as you're walking around, as long as you're walking around, as long as you're near a road, you are exposed to near a road, you are exposed to near a road, you are exposed to microplastics. So, until there's a huge microplastics. So, until there's a huge microplastics. So, until there's a huge movement to make better tires that don't movement to make better tires that don't movement to make better tires that don't degrade as quickly degrade as quickly degrade as quickly or to create filters in our home or to create filters in our home or to create filters in our home environments that remove the environments that remove the environments that remove the microplastics, which frankly I think microplastics, which frankly I think microplastics, which frankly I think both of those things are not reasonable both of those things are not reasonable both of those things are not reasonable expectations, at least not in this expectations, at least not in this expectations, at least not in this lifetime, well, until then what you can do is you well, until then what you can do is you well, until then what you can do is you can try and limit their entry and can try and limit their entry and can try and limit their entry and accumulation into your body. So, rather accumulation into your body. So, rather accumulation into your body. So, rather than list off all the ways that you can than list off all the ways that you can than list off all the ways that you can limit so-called bioaccumulation of limit so-called bioaccumulation of limit so-called bioaccumulation of microplastics and nanoplastics at the microplastics and nanoplastics at the microplastics and nanoplastics at the beginning or at the end of today's beginning or at the end of today's beginning or at the end of today's episode, I'm going to intersperse them episode, I'm going to intersperse them episode, I'm going to intersperse them at times that are relevant to what I at times that are relevant to what I at times that are relevant to what I just discussed about how microplastics just discussed about how microplastics just discussed about how microplastics get into our system and the tissues they get into our system and the tissues they get into our system and the tissues they are lodged in. So, I'll tell you right are lodged in. So, I'll tell you right are lodged in. So, I'll tell you right now that a few ways that you can really do that a few ways that you can really do that a few ways that you can really do yourself a service in limiting your yourself a service in limiting your yourself a service in limiting your exposure to microplastics exposure to microplastics exposure to microplastics is to limit your consumption of water is to limit your consumption of water is to limit your consumption of water from plastic bottles. Okay, that might from plastic bottles. Okay, that might from plastic bottles. Okay, that might seem kind of obvious, but check out seem kind of obvious, but check out seem kind of obvious, but check out these data. This is pretty wild. these data. This is pretty wild. these data. This is pretty wild. There was an analysis of the number of There was an analysis of the number of There was an analysis of the number of microplastic and nanoplastic particles microplastic and nanoplastic particles microplastic and nanoplastic particles in bottled water, and it was estimated in bottled water, and it was estimated in bottled water, and it was estimated that there were about 30,000 of these that there were about 30,000 of these that there were about 30,000 of these particles per liter of water. Okay? And particles per liter of water. Okay? And particles per liter of water. Okay? And those data stood for quite a long time. those data stood for quite a long time. those data stood for quite a long time. Then imaging techniques for measuring Then imaging techniques for measuring Then imaging techniques for measuring the number of these different particles, the number of these different particles, the number of these different particles, in particular the really small in particular the really small in particular the really small nanoparticles, the ones that are less nanoparticles, the ones that are less nanoparticles, the ones that are less than one micron in diameter, the imaging than one micron in diameter, the imaging than one micron in diameter, the imaging tools for those improved. Okay? And I'll tools for those improved. Okay? And I'll tools for those improved. Okay? And I'll explain a little bit about that in a explain a little bit about that in a explain a little bit about that in a moment. And there was a paper published moment. And there was a paper published moment. And there was a paper published in the Proceedings of the National in the Proceedings of the National in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2024 that showed Academy of Sciences in 2024 that showed Academy of Sciences in 2024 that showed that the amount of nanoplastic, in that the amount of nanoplastic, in that the amount of nanoplastic, in particular, but microplastic and particular, but microplastic and particular, but microplastic and nanoplastics that are present in bottled nanoplastics that are present in bottled nanoplastics that are present in bottled water was actually vastly underestimated in was actually vastly underestimated in was actually vastly underestimated in that previous study. that previous study. that previous study. Rather than 30,000 particles per liter, Rather than 30,000 particles per liter, Rather than 30,000 particles per liter, the reanalysis with better methods the reanalysis with better methods the reanalysis with better methods showed that it was showed that it was showed that it was anywhere from 110 all the way up to anywhere from 110 all the way up to anywhere from 110 all the way up to 400,000 particles per liter. And the average was particles per liter. And the average was particles per liter. And the average was 240,000 particles per liter. So, that means that particles per liter. So, that means that particles per liter. So, that means that the amount of microplastics and the amount of microplastics and the amount of microplastics and nanoplastics in bottled water is nanoplastics in bottled water is nanoplastics in bottled water is actually much, much higher than we actually much, much higher than we actually much, much higher than we initially thought. And a very simple way initially thought. And a very simple way initially thought. And a very simple way to limit your exposure to microplastics to limit your exposure to microplastics to limit your exposure to microplastics and nanoplastics is to avoid drinking and nanoplastics is to avoid drinking and nanoplastics is to avoid drinking water from plastic bottles, in water from plastic bottles, in water from plastic bottles, in particular, plastic bottles that have particular, plastic bottles that have particular, plastic bottles that have been heated up. Now, you might say, been heated up. Now, you might say, been heated up. Now, you might say, "Well, I don't heat up my plastic water "Well, I don't heat up my plastic water "Well, I don't heat up my plastic water bottles." Right, but you don't know what bottles." Right, but you don't know what bottles." Right, but you don't know what happened to those plastic water bottles happened to those plastic water bottles happened to those plastic water bottles en route to the store you bought them at en route to the store you bought them at en route to the store you bought them at or en route to your refrigerator. Right, or en route to your refrigerator. Right, or en route to your refrigerator. Right, they could have sat in the back of a hot they could have sat in the back of a hot they could have sat in the back of a hot truck, they could have sat in the back truck, they could have sat in the back truck, they could have sat in the back of a loading dock, of a loading dock, of a loading dock, any number of different things. Now, any number of different things. Now, any number of different things. Now, this is not to say that if you drink the this is not to say that if you drink the this is not to say that if you drink the occasional water out of a plastic bottle that water out of a plastic bottle that water out of a plastic bottle that you're going to harm your health. I'm you're going to harm your health. I'm you're going to harm your health. I'm absolutely not saying that. However, absolutely not saying that. However, absolutely not saying that. However, it's pretty clear that there's a lot of it's pretty clear that there's a lot of it's pretty clear that there's a lot of microplastics and nanoplastics that are microplastics and nanoplastics that are microplastics and nanoplastics that are completely avoidable, at least avoidable completely avoidable, at least avoidable completely avoidable, at least avoidable in terms of your ingestion of them, in terms of your ingestion of them, in terms of your ingestion of them, in plastic water bottles. So, it makes plastic water bottles. So, it makes plastic water bottles. So, it makes sense to me why you would want to avoid sense to me why you would want to avoid sense to me why you would want to avoid those. Also, as a consumable that's not those. Also, as a consumable that's not those. Also, as a consumable that's not very reusable, I suppose you could reuse very reusable, I suppose you could reuse very reusable, I suppose you could reuse those plastic bottles, but most people those plastic bottles, but most people those plastic bottles, but most people don't, at least they don't use them for don't, at least they don't use them for don't, at least they don't use them for very long. They get pretty flimsy pretty very long. They get pretty flimsy pretty very long. They get pretty flimsy pretty quickly. You're much better off having either a You're much better off having either a You're much better off having either a stainless steel bottle or some sort of stainless steel bottle or some sort of stainless steel bottle or some sort of ceramic mug or using glass ceramic mug or using glass ceramic mug or using glass or using some other vessel for water or using some other vessel for water or using some other vessel for water that is reusable and of course that is that is reusable and of course that is that is reusable and of course that is not made of plastic. And then of course, not made of plastic. And then of course, not made of plastic. And then of course, the question arises, how much the question arises, how much the question arises, how much microplastic and nanoplastic is in tap microplastic and nanoplastic is in tap microplastic and nanoplastic is in tap water? And it turns out there's quite a water? And it turns out there's quite a water? And it turns out there's quite a lot of it. Now, it varies according to lot of it. Now, it varies according to lot of it. Now, it varies according to location, but there are ways that you location, but there are ways that you location, but there are ways that you can get those microplastics and can get those microplastics and can get those microplastics and nanoplastics out of your tap water. The nanoplastics out of your tap water. The nanoplastics out of your tap water. The best way turns out to be a little bit best way turns out to be a little bit best way turns out to be a little bit expensive, admittedly, and that's to use expensive, admittedly, and that's to use expensive, admittedly, and that's to use a reverse osmosis filter. So, reverse a reverse osmosis filter. So, reverse a reverse osmosis filter. So, reverse osmosis filters will get rid of all the osmosis filters will get rid of all the osmosis filters will get rid of all the microplastics and nanoplastics. Of microplastics and nanoplastics. Of microplastics and nanoplastics. Of course, it will also remove some key course, it will also remove some key course, it will also remove some key minerals from the water. So, you'll have minerals from the water. So, you'll have minerals from the water. So, you'll have to remineralize that water. If one looks to remineralize that water. If one looks to remineralize that water. If one looks at the price of reverse osmosis at the price of reverse osmosis at the price of reverse osmosis filtration systems, filtration systems, filtration systems, they're not cheap. Uh they can range they're not cheap. Uh they can range they're not cheap. Uh they can range anywhere from 300 to 500 even 600 anywhere from 300 to 500 even 600 anywhere from 300 to 500 even 600 dollars for a home unit. And many of dollars for a home unit. And many of dollars for a home unit. And many of those units will remineralize the water. those units will remineralize the water. those units will remineralize the water. So, basically it takes the water, cleans So, basically it takes the water, cleans So, basically it takes the water, cleans out the microplastics, nanoplastics, and out the microplastics, nanoplastics, and out the microplastics, nanoplastics, and a bunch of other bad stuff that you a bunch of other bad stuff that you a bunch of other bad stuff that you don't want, and then it's going to don't want, and then it's going to don't want, and then it's going to remineralize the water so that you're remineralize the water so that you're remineralize the water so that you're getting enough minerals in your water. getting enough minerals in your water. getting enough minerals in your water. Now, if you look at the cost of a Now, if you look at the cost of a Now, if you look at the cost of a reverse osmosis filter, I, like you, reverse osmosis filter, I, like you, reverse osmosis filter, I, like you, kind of go a little wide-eyed like, "Oh, kind of go a little wide-eyed like, "Oh, kind of go a little wide-eyed like, "Oh, that's a lot of money for water." But, that's a lot of money for water." But, that's a lot of money for water." But, if one thinks about the total amount of if one thinks about the total amount of if one thinks about the total amount of money one spends in a given year on money one spends in a given year on money one spends in a given year on plastic bottled water that we consume plastic bottled water that we consume plastic bottled water that we consume and then, you know, throw away and then, you know, throw away and then, you know, throw away essentially the bottles, or even bottled essentially the bottles, or even bottled essentially the bottles, or even bottled water from glass bottles. I'm in the water from glass bottles. I'm in the water from glass bottles. I'm in the habit of trying to drink water from habit of trying to drink water from habit of trying to drink water from glass bottles. And when you go out and glass bottles. And when you go out and glass bottles. And when you go out and you buy those, you feel better that you buy those, you feel better that you buy those, you feel better that you're not consuming a lot of you're not consuming a lot of you're not consuming a lot of microplastics and nanoplastics, but microplastics and nanoplastics, but microplastics and nanoplastics, but they are very expensive. So, the costs they are very expensive. So, the costs they are very expensive. So, the costs probably line up pretty well. And when I probably line up pretty well. And when I probably line up pretty well. And when I did that analysis, I realized, well, did that analysis, I realized, well, did that analysis, I realized, well, actually the home reverse osmosis filter actually the home reverse osmosis filter actually the home reverse osmosis filter with remineralization actually will save with remineralization actually will save with remineralization actually will save on costs provided that one is good about on costs provided that one is good about on costs provided that one is good about filling glass bottles or stainless steel filling glass bottles or stainless steel filling glass bottles or stainless steel bottles with that water and making sure bottles with that water and making sure bottles with that water and making sure that, you know, when you leave the house that, you know, when you leave the house that, you know, when you leave the house to take those bottles with you. Again, I to take those bottles with you. Again, I to take those bottles with you. Again, I don't think it's possible for everyone don't think it's possible for everyone don't think it's possible for everyone to avoid all consumption of water from to avoid all consumption of water from to avoid all consumption of water from plastic bottles. That's just not plastic bottles. That's just not plastic bottles. That's just not reasonable to ex- back, right? You don't reasonable to ex- back, right? You don't reasonable to ex- back, right? You don't want to be that person that's carrying want to be that person that's carrying want to be that person that's carrying around water everywhere you go, to around water everywhere you go, to around water everywhere you go, to friends' houses, at dinner, et cetera. I friends' houses, at dinner, et cetera. I friends' houses, at dinner, et cetera. I don't think we need to be that concerned don't think we need to be that concerned don't think we need to be that concerned about the amount of microplastic and about the amount of microplastic and about the amount of microplastic and nanoplastic in water sources. It's nanoplastic in water sources. It's nanoplastic in water sources. It's certainly you wouldn't want to avoid certainly you wouldn't want to avoid certainly you wouldn't want to avoid drinking water from plastic bottles to drinking water from plastic bottles to drinking water from plastic bottles to the point where you dehydrate yourself the point where you dehydrate yourself the point where you dehydrate yourself or put yourself at risk. I'm not trying or put yourself at risk. I'm not trying or put yourself at risk. I'm not trying to create that kind of concern here. to create that kind of concern here. to create that kind of concern here. What I'm trying to say is, if you are What I'm trying to say is, if you are What I'm trying to say is, if you are concerned about microplastics and concerned about microplastics and concerned about microplastics and nanoplastics and you really want to nanoplastics and you really want to nanoplastics and you really want to limit your exposure, one of the best limit your exposure, one of the best limit your exposure, one of the best ways to do that is to limit your ways to do that is to limit your ways to do that is to limit your consumption of water from plastic consumption of water from plastic consumption of water from plastic bottles. And because microplastics and bottles. And because microplastics and bottles. And because microplastics and nanoplastics are present in tap water, nanoplastics are present in tap water, nanoplastics are present in tap water, you're going to need some way to remove you're going to need some way to remove you're going to need some way to remove those microplastics and nanoplastics those microplastics and nanoplastics those microplastics and nanoplastics from your tap water if you're very from your tap water if you're very from your tap water if you're very concerned about them. I'm not here to concerned about them. I'm not here to concerned about them. I'm not here to say everyone should do this. I'm say everyone should do this. I'm say everyone should do this. I'm certainly not saying that. I'm saying certainly not saying that. I'm saying certainly not saying that. I'm saying that if you are concerned about that if you are concerned about that if you are concerned about microplastics and nanoplastics, and microplastics and nanoplastics, and microplastics and nanoplastics, and we'll talk about some of the reasons one we'll talk about some of the reasons one we'll talk about some of the reasons one might want to be concerned about them, might want to be concerned about them, might want to be concerned about them, well, then well, then well, then installing a reverse osmosis filtration installing a reverse osmosis filtration installing a reverse osmosis filtration system on your home water system on your home water system on your home water might be a good idea. And it's likely to might be a good idea. And it's likely to might be a good idea. And it's likely to save you costs if you look at it in save you costs if you look at it in save you costs if you look at it in comparison to buying disposable bottles comparison to buying disposable bottles comparison to buying disposable bottles of water. Now, there are a lot of other of water. Now, there are a lot of other of water. Now, there are a lot of other ways besides drinking water from plastic ways besides drinking water from plastic ways besides drinking water from plastic bottles that microplastics and bottles that microplastics and bottles that microplastics and nanoplastics make their way into our nanoplastics make their way into our nanoplastics make their way into our system, and I can list off many of them, system, and I can list off many of them, system, and I can list off many of them, but I'm trying to create a hierarchy but I'm trying to create a hierarchy but I'm trying to create a hierarchy here of the things that are potentially here of the things that are potentially here of the things that are potentially the major sources and the ones that we the major sources and the ones that we the major sources and the ones that we can most easily avoid and that are can most easily avoid and that are can most easily avoid and that are likely to save us likely to save us likely to save us costs overall. So, one thing that's very costs overall. So, one thing that's very costs overall. So, one thing that's very clear is that there's a lot of clear is that there's a lot of clear is that there's a lot of microplastics and nanoplastics in sea microplastics and nanoplastics in sea microplastics and nanoplastics in sea salt. Who would have thought? But then salt. Who would have thought? But then salt. Who would have thought? But then you think about it and it's like, well, you think about it and it's like, well, you think about it and it's like, well, this stuff is getting out into the this stuff is getting out into the this stuff is getting out into the ocean. There's a lot of plastic in the ocean. There's a lot of plastic in the ocean. There's a lot of plastic in the ocean. It's a super depressing scene ocean. It's a super depressing scene ocean. It's a super depressing scene when one sees the pictures of all the when one sees the pictures of all the when one sees the pictures of all the plastic floating out there. In fact, plastic floating out there. In fact, plastic floating out there. In fact, there's a book that I read in there's a book that I read in there's a book that I read in preparation for this episode. Gosh, it preparation for this episode. Gosh, it preparation for this episode. Gosh, it was so depressing, but important for me was so depressing, but important for me was so depressing, but important for me to read. Uh maybe you want to read it as to read. Uh maybe you want to read it as to read. Uh maybe you want to read it as well. It's quite good, although it well. It's quite good, although it well. It's quite good, although it will be a bit of a downer. Uh the title will be a bit of a downer. Uh the title will be a bit of a downer. Uh the title of the book is A Poison Like No Other: of the book is A Poison Like No Other: of the book is A Poison Like No Other: How Microplastics Corrupted Our Planet How Microplastics Corrupted Our Planet How Microplastics Corrupted Our Planet and Our Bodies by Matt Simon. And and Our Bodies by Matt Simon. And and Our Bodies by Matt Simon. And I listened to this book and gosh, it I listened to this book and gosh, it I listened to this book and gosh, it really convinces you that there's really convinces you that there's really convinces you that there's microplastics everywhere microplastics everywhere microplastics everywhere both on land, in the air, and in the both on land, in the air, and in the both on land, in the air, and in the ocean, unfortunately. And ocean, unfortunately. And ocean, unfortunately. And of course, sea salt comes from the of course, sea salt comes from the of course, sea salt comes from the ocean. So, a simple solution to this is ocean. So, a simple solution to this is ocean. So, a simple solution to this is if you're going to use salt, and I'm a if you're going to use salt, and I'm a if you're going to use salt, and I'm a big fan of salt, not overdoing it, but big fan of salt, not overdoing it, but big fan of salt, not overdoing it, but salt has its role, right? It's a salt has its role, right? It's a salt has its role, right? It's a wonderful substance both for sake of wonderful substance both for sake of wonderful substance both for sake of taste and for sake of health. I did an taste and for sake of health. I did an taste and for sake of health. I did an episode about salt. episode about salt. episode about salt. Again, don't overconsume salt. Don't Again, don't overconsume salt. Don't Again, don't overconsume salt. Don't blast your blood pressure. Don't blow a blast your blood pressure. Don't blow a blast your blood pressure. Don't blow a gasket, but many people would do well to gasket, but many people would do well to gasket, but many people would do well to have a little bit more salt, especially have a little bit more salt, especially have a little bit more salt, especially if you're eating a really clean diet, if you're eating a really clean diet, if you're eating a really clean diet, especially if you're hydrating very especially if you're hydrating very especially if you're hydrating very well. Focus on something like pink Himalayan Focus on something like pink Himalayan Focus on something like pink Himalayan salt or salt that comes from a salt or salt that comes from a salt or salt that comes from a non-marine source. Okay? It's very non-marine source. Okay? It's very non-marine source. Okay? It's very simple to do. simple to do. simple to do. It's some of the best salt out there. It's some of the best salt out there. It's some of the best salt out there. It's not terribly expensive. It's not terribly expensive. It's not terribly expensive. And you would do well to avoid sea salt And you would do well to avoid sea salt And you would do well to avoid sea salt and get your salt from those other and get your salt from those other and get your salt from those other sources. In doing so, you're going to sources. In doing so, you're going to sources. In doing so, you're going to lower your exposure to microplastics and lower your exposure to microplastics and lower your exposure to microplastics and nanoplastics. There's some pretty scary pictures of There's some pretty scary pictures of There's some pretty scary pictures of sea salt under the microscope and all sea salt under the microscope and all sea salt under the microscope and all the little bits of plastic that are in the little bits of plastic that are in the little bits of plastic that are in there. You only have to see those there. You only have to see those there. You only have to see those pictures once or just hear it from me to pictures once or just hear it from me to pictures once or just hear it from me to make the shift to Himalayan sea salt or make the shift to Himalayan sea salt or make the shift to Himalayan sea salt or the pink salt is pretty, it looks nice, the pink salt is pretty, it looks nice, the pink salt is pretty, it looks nice, it tastes great. So, that's an easy, it tastes great. So, that's an easy, it tastes great. So, that's an easy, very low cost shift that you can make. very low cost shift that you can make. very low cost shift that you can make. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. AG1 is designed to cover all of your AG1 is designed to cover all of your AG1 is designed to cover all of your foundational nutritional needs and it foundational nutritional needs and it foundational nutritional needs and it tastes great. Now, I've been drinking tastes great. Now, I've been drinking tastes great. Now, I've been drinking AG1 since 2012 and I started doing that AG1 since 2012 and I started doing that AG1 since 2012 and I started doing that at a time when my budget for supplements at a time when my budget for supplements at a time when my budget for supplements was really limited. In fact, I only had was really limited. In fact, I only had was really limited. In fact, I only had enough money back then to purchase one enough money back then to purchase one enough money back then to purchase one supplement and I'm so glad that I made supplement and I'm so glad that I made supplement and I'm so glad that I made that supplement AG1. The reason for that supplement AG1. The reason for that supplement AG1. The reason for that is even though I strive to eat most of is even though I strive to eat most of is even though I strive to eat most of my foods from whole foods and minimally my foods from whole foods and minimally my foods from whole foods and minimally processed foods, it's very difficult for processed foods, it's very difficult for processed foods, it's very difficult for me to get enough fruits, vegetables, me to get enough fruits, vegetables, me to get enough fruits, vegetables, vitamins and minerals, micronutrients, vitamins and minerals, micronutrients, vitamins and minerals, micronutrients, and adaptogens from food alone. And I and adaptogens from food alone. And I and adaptogens from food alone. And I need to do that in order to ensure that need to do that in order to ensure that need to do that in order to ensure that I have enough energy throughout the day, I have enough energy throughout the day, I have enough energy throughout the day, I sleep well at night, and keep my I sleep well at night, and keep my I sleep well at night, and keep my immune system strong. But when I take immune system strong. But when I take immune system strong. But when I take AG1 daily, I find that all aspects of my AG1 daily, I find that all aspects of my AG1 daily, I find that all aspects of my health, my physical health, my mental health, my physical health, my mental health, my physical health, my mental health, and my performance both health, and my performance both health, and my performance both cognitive and physical are better. I cognitive and physical are better. I cognitive and physical are better. I know that because I've had lapses when I know that because I've had lapses when I know that because I've had lapses when I didn't take AG1 and I certainly felt the didn't take AG1 and I certainly felt the didn't take AG1 and I certainly felt the difference. I also notice, and this difference. I also notice, and this difference. I also notice, and this makes perfect sense given the makes perfect sense given the makes perfect sense given the relationship between the gut microbiome relationship between the gut microbiome relationship between the gut microbiome and the brain, that when I regularly and the brain, that when I regularly and the brain, that when I regularly take AG1, which for me means a serving take AG1, which for me means a serving take AG1, which for me means a serving in the morning or mid-morning and again in the morning or mid-morning and again in the morning or mid-morning and again later in the afternoon or evening, that later in the afternoon or evening, that later in the afternoon or evening, that I have more mental clarity and more I have more mental clarity and more I have more mental clarity and more mental energy. If you'd like to try AG1, mental energy. If you'd like to try AG1, mental energy. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, to claim a special offer. Right now, to claim a special offer. Right now, they're giving away five free travel they're giving away five free travel they're giving away five free travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. Okay, so to claim that special offer. Okay, so to claim that special offer. Okay, so we've talked about bottled water we've talked about bottled water we've talked about bottled water sources, and filtering your water. We sources, and filtering your water. We sources, and filtering your water. We talked about sea salt. Another major talked about sea salt. Another major talked about sea salt. Another major source of these microplastics that was source of these microplastics that was source of these microplastics that was very surprising to me very surprising to me very surprising to me is from the lining of canned soup. is from the lining of canned soup. is from the lining of canned soup. I don't think I'm ever going to eat I don't think I'm ever going to eat I don't think I'm ever going to eat canned soup again unless I absolutely canned soup again unless I absolutely canned soup again unless I absolutely need to. need to. need to. Sorry, canned soup companies, but there Sorry, canned soup companies, but there Sorry, canned soup companies, but there was a study. The study was entitled, was a study. The study was entitled, was a study. The study was entitled, "Canned Soup Consumption and Urinary "Canned Soup Consumption and Urinary "Canned Soup Consumption and Urinary Bisphenol A: A Randomized Crossover Bisphenol A: A Randomized Crossover Bisphenol A: A Randomized Crossover Trial." I'll describe a little bit more about I'll describe a little bit more about I'll describe a little bit more about what Bisphenol A is a little bit later, what Bisphenol A is a little bit later, what Bisphenol A is a little bit later, but Bisphenol A is a known endocrine but Bisphenol A is a known endocrine but Bisphenol A is a known endocrine disruptor. It mimics estrogen in ways disruptor. It mimics estrogen in ways disruptor. It mimics estrogen in ways that can activate or block estrogenic that can activate or block estrogenic that can activate or block estrogenic pathways. So, it messes up hormone pathways. So, it messes up hormone pathways. So, it messes up hormone pathways either by activating them or pathways either by activating them or pathways either by activating them or blocking them. It can also bind to blocking them. It can also bind to blocking them. It can also bind to androgen receptors potentially and cause androgen receptors potentially and cause androgen receptors potentially and cause some issues there. Bisphenol A or BPA is some issues there. Bisphenol A or BPA is some issues there. Bisphenol A or BPA is not a good thing. Turns out there's lots not a good thing. Turns out there's lots not a good thing. Turns out there's lots of it in the lining of soup cans. of it in the lining of soup cans. of it in the lining of soup cans. The reason is The reason is The reason is soup tends to be a little bit fatty. So, soup tends to be a little bit fatty. So, soup tends to be a little bit fatty. So, even if you get the nonfat soup, it even if you get the nonfat soup, it even if you get the nonfat soup, it tends to have some lipid in there and it tends to have some lipid in there and it tends to have some lipid in there and it also has some acidity to it. And the also has some acidity to it. And the also has some acidity to it. And the lining helps maintain the flavor and the lining helps maintain the flavor and the lining helps maintain the flavor and the freshness of the soup in those cans. In freshness of the soup in those cans. In freshness of the soup in those cans. In this study, what they did is they gave this study, what they did is they gave this study, what they did is they gave people either fresh soup or canned soup people either fresh soup or canned soup people either fresh soup or canned soup for 5 days. Then they did a so-called for 5 days. Then they did a so-called for 5 days. Then they did a so-called 2-day washout where they took a break 2-day washout where they took a break 2-day washout where they took a break from soup and then they reversed the from soup and then they reversed the from soup and then they reversed the conditions. I'll cut to the chase here conditions. I'll cut to the chase here conditions. I'll cut to the chase here because the conclusion of the study is because the conclusion of the study is because the conclusion of the study is wild. What they found was that wild. What they found was that wild. What they found was that consumption of one serving of canned consumption of one serving of canned consumption of one serving of canned soup daily over the course of 5 days, soup daily over the course of 5 days, soup daily over the course of 5 days, here I'm quoting by the way, was here I'm quoting by the way, was here I'm quoting by the way, was associated with more than a thousand associated with more than a thousand associated with more than a thousand percent increase in urinary BPA percent increase in urinary BPA percent increase in urinary BPA and Bisphenol A. Now, that's urinary and Bisphenol A. Now, that's urinary and Bisphenol A. Now, that's urinary BPA, so people are excreting it. I want BPA, so people are excreting it. I want BPA, so people are excreting it. I want to emphasize that. to emphasize that. to emphasize that. But, a thousandfold increase in BPA from But, a thousandfold increase in BPA from But, a thousandfold increase in BPA from canned soup? canned soup? canned soup? I don't know. I'm not alarmist, but I don't know. I'm not alarmist, but I don't know. I'm not alarmist, but I only have to read this once, think about only have to read this once, think about only have to read this once, think about my of canned soup, not that great, my of canned soup, not that great, my of canned soup, not that great, done. I'm not eating canned soup again done. I'm not eating canned soup again done. I'm not eating canned soup again unless I'm absolutely starving and I unless I'm absolutely starving and I unless I'm absolutely starving and I need some soup very, very badly. My need some soup very, very badly. My need some soup very, very badly. My suggestion would be unless you have a suggestion would be unless you have a suggestion would be unless you have a powerful reason powerful reason powerful reason to consume canned soup, to consume canned soup, to consume canned soup, don't consume canned soup. The one don't consume canned soup. The one don't consume canned soup. The one caveat being that if you can find canned caveat being that if you can find canned caveat being that if you can find canned soup that does not have any BPA, that is soup that does not have any BPA, that is soup that does not have any BPA, that is it says no BPAs it says no BPAs it says no BPAs on the container, well then on the container, well then on the container, well then go at it. Have as much canned soup as go at it. Have as much canned soup as go at it. Have as much canned soup as you want, but you want, but you want, but I should be very clear that a lot of I should be very clear that a lot of I should be very clear that a lot of canned products now say no BPA, but they canned products now say no BPA, but they canned products now say no BPA, but they contain other endocrine disruptors and contain other endocrine disruptors and contain other endocrine disruptors and the amount of microplastics and the amount of microplastics and the amount of microplastics and nanoplastics in those soups is still nanoplastics in those soups is still nanoplastics in those soups is still unknown. So, unknown. So, unknown. So, part of my hidden motivation of this part of my hidden motivation of this part of my hidden motivation of this episode, and perhaps the motivation of episode, and perhaps the motivation of episode, and perhaps the motivation of other podcasters in the health space other podcasters in the health space other podcasters in the health space that are talking about microplastics that are talking about microplastics that are talking about microplastics now, and by the way, Dr. Rhonda Patrick now, and by the way, Dr. Rhonda Patrick now, and by the way, Dr. Rhonda Patrick did a really wonderful podcast about did a really wonderful podcast about did a really wonderful podcast about microplastics just recently. We didn't microplastics just recently. We didn't microplastics just recently. We didn't coordinate, that's why we both ended up coordinate, that's why we both ended up coordinate, that's why we both ended up doing it roughly at the same time. We doing it roughly at the same time. We doing it roughly at the same time. We talked about it afterwards and chuckled talked about it afterwards and chuckled talked about it afterwards and chuckled about that. I guess, you know, we're about that. I guess, you know, we're about that. I guess, you know, we're both interested in some of the same both interested in some of the same both interested in some of the same themes, of course. themes, of course. themes, of course. One of the One of the One of the perhaps hidden agendas is that some of perhaps hidden agendas is that some of perhaps hidden agendas is that some of these food manufacturing companies and these food manufacturing companies and these food manufacturing companies and beverage manufacturing companies will beverage manufacturing companies will beverage manufacturing companies will start to include more thorough start to include more thorough start to include more thorough descriptions on their labeling of what descriptions on their labeling of what descriptions on their labeling of what is and is not contained in the various is and is not contained in the various is and is not contained in the various products such as canned soup and water, products such as canned soup and water, products such as canned soup and water, etc. Not just no BPAs, but hopefully etc. Not just no BPAs, but hopefully etc. Not just no BPAs, but hopefully some of the other things that are some of the other things that are some of the other things that are problematic that we'll talk about in a problematic that we'll talk about in a problematic that we'll talk about in a moment, such as BPS, which is another moment, such as BPS, which is another moment, such as BPS, which is another endocrine disruptor. So, if you see no endocrine disruptor. So, if you see no endocrine disruptor. So, if you see no BPAs, sometimes there's still BPS in BPAs, sometimes there's still BPS in BPAs, sometimes there's still BPS in there, okay? We'll talk about BPS as there, okay? We'll talk about BPS as there, okay? We'll talk about BPS as well as phthalates, which are something well as phthalates, which are something well as phthalates, which are something that make plastic and other containers that make plastic and other containers that make plastic and other containers more durable and more flexible, and more durable and more flexible, and more durable and more flexible, and phthalates have been discussed by people phthalates have been discussed by people phthalates have been discussed by people like Dr. Shanna Swan, who will soon be a like Dr. Shanna Swan, who will soon be a like Dr. Shanna Swan, who will soon be a guest on this podcast, and has shown up guest on this podcast, and has shown up guest on this podcast, and has shown up on other podcasts, on other podcasts, on other podcasts, talking about how phthalates are known talking about how phthalates are known talking about how phthalates are known endocrine disruptors in development and endocrine disruptors in development and endocrine disruptors in development and likely in adulthood as well. So, likely in adulthood as well. So, likely in adulthood as well. So, I guess my push for you to never consume I guess my push for you to never consume I guess my push for you to never consume canned soup again might be a little bit canned soup again might be a little bit canned soup again might be a little bit harsh. That's just my decision. Here's harsh. That's just my decision. Here's harsh. That's just my decision. Here's what I'll do. I'll make a bargain with what I'll do. I'll make a bargain with what I'll do. I'll make a bargain with the canned soup companies. If you all the canned soup companies. If you all the canned soup companies. If you all start putting a more thorough start putting a more thorough start putting a more thorough description about what is and is not description about what is and is not description about what is and is not contained in those soup cans, all right? contained in those soup cans, all right? contained in those soup cans, all right? Not just no BPA, but Not just no BPA, but Not just no BPA, but is there truly also no BPS? Are there no is there truly also no BPS? Are there no is there truly also no BPS? Are there no phthalates, et cetera? Then maybe I'll phthalates, et cetera? Then maybe I'll phthalates, et cetera? Then maybe I'll make the move back to canned soup. And make the move back to canned soup. And make the move back to canned soup. And of course, most of you have probably of course, most of you have probably of course, most of you have probably heard that you're not supposed to heard that you're not supposed to heard that you're not supposed to microwave plastic containers. Now, microwave plastic containers. Now, microwave plastic containers. Now, you'll see microwave safe on a number of you'll see microwave safe on a number of you'll see microwave safe on a number of different containers. That just means different containers. That just means different containers. That just means that it's not going to melt in the that it's not going to melt in the that it's not going to melt in the microwave. It does not mean that you microwave. It does not mean that you microwave. It does not mean that you aren't being exposed to microplastics aren't being exposed to microplastics aren't being exposed to microplastics and nanoplastics and BPAs, BPS, and nanoplastics and BPAs, BPS, and nanoplastics and BPAs, BPS, phthalates, et cetera. So, in general, phthalates, et cetera. So, in general, phthalates, et cetera. So, in general, it's a good idea to avoid putting any it's a good idea to avoid putting any it's a good idea to avoid putting any kind of plastic into the microwave, at kind of plastic into the microwave, at kind of plastic into the microwave, at least if you're going to microwave food least if you're going to microwave food least if you're going to microwave food and then consume that food. The other and then consume that food. The other and then consume that food. The other surprising, at least to me, source of surprising, at least to me, source of surprising, at least to me, source of BPAs and BPSs, so these endocrine BPAs and BPSs, so these endocrine BPAs and BPSs, so these endocrine disruptors and microplastics and disruptors and microplastics and disruptors and microplastics and nanoplastics, that's very robust, is nanoplastics, that's very robust, is nanoplastics, that's very robust, is paper cups. Goodness gracious. I would paper cups. Goodness gracious. I would paper cups. Goodness gracious. I would have thought paper cups are safe. But have thought paper cups are safe. But have thought paper cups are safe. But you know those paper cups that you put you know those paper cups that you put you know those paper cups that you put hot liquids into and that often have a hot liquids into and that often have a hot liquids into and that often have a plastic lid. Well, even if they don't plastic lid. Well, even if they don't plastic lid. Well, even if they don't have a plastic lid on them, the lining have a plastic lid on them, the lining have a plastic lid on them, the lining of the paper cup, which makes those cups of the paper cup, which makes those cups of the paper cup, which makes those cups durable, when you put hot liquids in there, like when you put hot liquids in there, like when you put hot liquids in there, like hot coffee or hot tea, well, that hot coffee or hot tea, well, that hot coffee or hot tea, well, that contains, typically, unless it says no contains, typically, unless it says no contains, typically, unless it says no BPA and no BPS, it contains lots of BPA and no BPS, it contains lots of BPA and no BPS, it contains lots of BPA and BPSs, microplastics, nanoplastics. and BPSs, microplastics, nanoplastics. and BPSs, microplastics, nanoplastics. And so, putting hot liquids in there, And so, putting hot liquids in there, And so, putting hot liquids in there, actually there was an analysis that actually there was an analysis that actually there was an analysis that showed that if liquid that's heated up showed that if liquid that's heated up showed that if liquid that's heated up to 100° Fahrenheit is put in those to 100° Fahrenheit is put in those to 100° Fahrenheit is put in those containers, it starts to leach out. It containers, it starts to leach out. It containers, it starts to leach out. It starts to pull those microplastics, starts to pull those microplastics, starts to pull those microplastics, nanoplastics, BPAs, and BPS from the cup nanoplastics, BPAs, and BPS from the cup nanoplastics, BPAs, and BPS from the cup linings. So, the other day I went across linings. So, the other day I went across linings. So, the other day I went across the street and bought a cup of coffee. the street and bought a cup of coffee. the street and bought a cup of coffee. Of course, they sold it to me in a paper Of course, they sold it to me in a paper Of course, they sold it to me in a paper cup and I thought, "Ah, goodness, I cup and I thought, "Ah, goodness, I cup and I thought, "Ah, goodness, I forgot to bring my mug and my travel forgot to bring my mug and my travel forgot to bring my mug and my travel mug, my stainless steel mug, or my mug, my stainless steel mug, or my mug, my stainless steel mug, or my ceramic mug." ceramic mug." ceramic mug." Did I not purchase the coffee? No, I had Did I not purchase the coffee? No, I had Did I not purchase the coffee? No, I had already ordered the coffee. I walk already ordered the coffee. I walk already ordered the coffee. I walk back. What I did is as soon as I got back. What I did is as soon as I got back. What I did is as soon as I got back, I took the coffee and I poured it back, I took the coffee and I poured it back, I took the coffee and I poured it into a ceramic mug. So, I'm not into a ceramic mug. So, I'm not into a ceramic mug. So, I'm not extremist. I'm not somebody who's going extremist. I'm not somebody who's going extremist. I'm not somebody who's going to completely avoid these things, but in to completely avoid these things, but in to completely avoid these things, but in the future I'll try and remember to the future I'll try and remember to the future I'll try and remember to bring my mug over. Some places even give bring my mug over. Some places even give bring my mug over. Some places even give you a little discount on your coffee. you a little discount on your coffee. you a little discount on your coffee. So, again, these are cost-saving So, again, these are cost-saving So, again, these are cost-saving approaches. You're certainly limiting or approaches. You're certainly limiting or approaches. You're certainly limiting or reducing the amount of waste that you're reducing the amount of waste that you're reducing the amount of waste that you're creating in the world, so that can only creating in the world, so that can only creating in the world, so that can only be a good thing. Okay? And be a good thing. Okay? And be a good thing. Okay? And the plastic lids, the plastic lids, the plastic lids, probably a good idea to avoid drinking probably a good idea to avoid drinking probably a good idea to avoid drinking through those plastic lids too often. through those plastic lids too often. through those plastic lids too often. Again, I want to emphasize I'm not one Again, I want to emphasize I'm not one Again, I want to emphasize I'm not one of these people that's going to freak of these people that's going to freak of these people that's going to freak out about drinking a hot liquid through out about drinking a hot liquid through out about drinking a hot liquid through a plastic lid. a plastic lid. a plastic lid. These microplastics and nanoplastics are These microplastics and nanoplastics are These microplastics and nanoplastics are everywhere. We're consuming them all the everywhere. We're consuming them all the everywhere. We're consuming them all the time. We can remove them from our body, time. We can remove them from our body, time. We can remove them from our body, and later we'll talk about ways that you and later we'll talk about ways that you and later we'll talk about ways that you can accelerate or increase the amount of can accelerate or increase the amount of can accelerate or increase the amount of removal of them from your body. removal of them from your body. removal of them from your body. But, if we're just a little bit more if we're just a little bit more if we're just a little bit more conscious about how they get into our conscious about how they get into our conscious about how they get into our body, and we're a little bit more body, and we're a little bit more body, and we're a little bit more conscious about the elevated costs and conscious about the elevated costs and conscious about the elevated costs and the elevated amount of trash that's the elevated amount of trash that's the elevated amount of trash that's going to recycle into landfill and so going to recycle into landfill and so going to recycle into landfill and so on, probably a good idea to just bring on, probably a good idea to just bring on, probably a good idea to just bring your mug with you, your travel mug with your mug with you, your travel mug with your mug with you, your travel mug with you. Try and make those mugs and travel you. Try and make those mugs and travel you. Try and make those mugs and travel mugs ceramic, stainless steel, or some mugs ceramic, stainless steel, or some mugs ceramic, stainless steel, or some other vessel that doesn't contain BPAs other vessel that doesn't contain BPAs other vessel that doesn't contain BPAs or BPSs. Before we move on to talk about or BPSs. Before we move on to talk about or BPSs. Before we move on to talk about what happens when microplastics and what happens when microplastics and what happens when microplastics and nanoplastics make it into, say, the nanoplastics make it into, say, the nanoplastics make it into, say, the testicle or the brain, like what the testicle or the brain, like what the testicle or the brain, like what the consequences of that is and are, consequences of that is and are, consequences of that is and are, I want to just briefly return to I want to just briefly return to I want to just briefly return to something that I flew past a while ago, something that I flew past a while ago, something that I flew past a while ago, and that's the analysis of microplastics and that's the analysis of microplastics and that's the analysis of microplastics and nanoplastic particles that are in and nanoplastic particles that are in and nanoplastic particles that are in bottled water. Remember, initially it bottled water. Remember, initially it bottled water. Remember, initially it was thought to be 30,000 particles per was thought to be 30,000 particles per was thought to be 30,000 particles per liter, then later it was discovered liter, then later it was discovered liter, then later it was discovered using better techniques that it's using better techniques that it's using better techniques that it's actually more like 240,000 actually more like 240,000 actually more like 240,000 on average particles per liter. on average particles per liter. on average particles per liter. How did that huge discrepancy in data How did that huge discrepancy in data How did that huge discrepancy in data arise? Now, I realize this is not a data Now, I realize this is not a data Now, I realize this is not a data analysis discussion, but I want to talk analysis discussion, but I want to talk analysis discussion, but I want to talk about this just briefly because it about this just briefly because it about this just briefly because it illustrates for you something really illustrates for you something really illustrates for you something really important about science, which is as important about science, which is as important about science, which is as tools for measurement get better, so tools for measurement get better, so tools for measurement get better, so does our understanding about what's does our understanding about what's does our understanding about what's going on in our brains and bodies. And going on in our brains and bodies. And going on in our brains and bodies. And it's a very simple and kind of cool it's a very simple and kind of cool it's a very simple and kind of cool thing related to light. So, you could thing related to light. So, you could thing related to light. So, you could imagine that the first paper imagine that the first paper imagine that the first paper was looking under the microscope at a was looking under the microscope at a was looking under the microscope at a drop of water taken from a bottle that drop of water taken from a bottle that drop of water taken from a bottle that was plastic and then was plastic and then was plastic and then imaged the number of little plastic particles the number of little plastic particles the number of little plastic particles in there. You could say, "Well, there's in there. You could say, "Well, there's in there. You could say, "Well, there's a particle and there's a particle and a particle and there's a particle and a particle and there's a particle and there's a particle." And there are tools there's a particle." And there are tools there's a particle." And there are tools that can count those particles. that can count those particles. that can count those particles. Well, what if you have two particles that are what if you have two particles that are what if you have two particles that are really close together, right? If you really close together, right? If you really close together, right? If you recall, microplastics are anywhere from recall, microplastics are anywhere from recall, microplastics are anywhere from 1 micron in diameter all the way up to 5 1 micron in diameter all the way up to 5 1 micron in diameter all the way up to 5 mm in diameter. But nanoplastics mm in diameter. But nanoplastics mm in diameter. But nanoplastics are less than 1 micron in diameter. So, are less than 1 micron in diameter. So, are less than 1 micron in diameter. So, how do you know that when you see a how do you know that when you see a how do you know that when you see a clump of stuff under the microscope in clump of stuff under the microscope in clump of stuff under the microscope in that drop of water that drop of water that drop of water that you're looking at one big piece of that you're looking at one big piece of that you're looking at one big piece of plastic versus thousands and thousands of little pieces thousands and thousands of little pieces thousands and thousands of little pieces of nanoplastic or even just much smaller of nanoplastic or even just much smaller of nanoplastic or even just much smaller pieces of microplastic? pieces of microplastic? pieces of microplastic? Well, it has to do with what's called Well, it has to do with what's called Well, it has to do with what's called the point spread function and I don't the point spread function and I don't the point spread function and I don't really want to get into this in too much really want to get into this in too much really want to get into this in too much detail, but basically when you shine detail, but basically when you shine detail, but basically when you shine light on something, you get uh kind of a light on something, you get uh kind of a light on something, you get uh kind of a little hill of light, if you will. little hill of light, if you will. little hill of light, if you will. There's a peak at the center and then it There's a peak at the center and then it There's a peak at the center and then it kind of drops off with distance. kind of drops off with distance. kind of drops off with distance. The reason why the numbers jumped from The reason why the numbers jumped from The reason why the numbers jumped from 30,000 to 240,000 30,000 to 240,000 30,000 to 240,000 is not because the researchers got much is not because the researchers got much is not because the researchers got much better, it's because the tools got much better, it's because the tools got much better, it's because the tools got much better. Okay? There are new imaging better. Okay? There are new imaging better. Okay? There are new imaging techniques and I'll put a reference to techniques and I'll put a reference to techniques and I'll put a reference to this for those of you that are into this for those of you that are into this for those of you that are into this kind of stuff kind of stuff kind of stuff entitled rapid single particle chemical entitled rapid single particle chemical entitled rapid single particle chemical imaging of nanoplastics by SRS imaging of nanoplastics by SRS imaging of nanoplastics by SRS microscopy. Okay, pretty nerdy stuff. microscopy. Okay, pretty nerdy stuff. microscopy. Okay, pretty nerdy stuff. But it's fun if you're interested in But it's fun if you're interested in But it's fun if you're interested in light and how light can illuminate light and how light can illuminate light and how light can illuminate things and show detail or not detail, things and show detail or not detail, things and show detail or not detail, but basically what we're realizing is but basically what we're realizing is but basically what we're realizing is that there are a lot more particles of that there are a lot more particles of that there are a lot more particles of plastic in different tissues, in plastic in different tissues, in plastic in different tissues, in different things that we're ingesting, different things that we're ingesting, different things that we're ingesting, etc. Because we're getting better and etc. Because we're getting better and etc. Because we're getting better and better ways of separating those clumps better ways of separating those clumps better ways of separating those clumps of light into lots of little clumps of light into lots of little clumps of light into lots of little clumps of light and realizing, "Oh, that looked light and realizing, "Oh, that looked light and realizing, "Oh, that looked like one particle, right?" Remember, like one particle, right?" Remember, like one particle, right?" Remember, it's particles per it's particles per it's particles per liter. It's not one particle, it's 10,000 It's not one particle, it's 10,000 It's not one particle, it's 10,000 particles. Now, you might say, "Okay, particles. Now, you might say, "Okay, particles. Now, you might say, "Okay, well, what's the difference between a well, what's the difference between a well, what's the difference between a bunch of little particles and one big bunch of little particles and one big bunch of little particles and one big particle?" Ah, there's a big difference. particle?" Ah, there's a big difference. particle?" Ah, there's a big difference. What's the big difference? Little What's the big difference? Little What's the big difference? Little particles can make it across barriers particles can make it across barriers particles can make it across barriers that big particles can't. These little that big particles can't. These little that big particles can't. These little nanoparticles of plastic are especially nanoparticles of plastic are especially nanoparticles of plastic are especially concerning because those are the ones concerning because those are the ones concerning because those are the ones that you find in greatest abundance, that you find in greatest abundance, that you find in greatest abundance, or I should say among the plastics that or I should say among the plastics that or I should say among the plastics that you find in different tissues, the ones you find in different tissues, the ones you find in different tissues, the ones that are in greatest abundance in the that are in greatest abundance in the that are in greatest abundance in the brain, the testes, and the follicle. brain, the testes, and the follicle. brain, the testes, and the follicle. Again, these tissues that nature and Again, these tissues that nature and Again, these tissues that nature and evolution have gone out of their way to evolution have gone out of their way to evolution have gone out of their way to protect with these very stringent protect with these very stringent protect with these very stringent barriers like the blood-brain barrier, barriers like the blood-brain barrier, barriers like the blood-brain barrier, like the blood-testicular barrier, like the blood-testicular barrier, like the blood-testicular barrier, like the blood-follicle barrier. Those are the blood-follicle barrier. Those are the blood-follicle barrier. Those are the ones that are getting across because the ones that are getting across because the ones that are getting across because they're very, very small. They can sneak they're very, very small. They can sneak they're very, very small. They can sneak through the little holes in those through the little holes in those through the little holes in those biological fences. They're getting biological fences. They're getting biological fences. They're getting deposited in those tissues, brain, deposited in those tissues, brain, deposited in those tissues, brain, testicle, and follicle, and they're testicle, and follicle, and they're testicle, and follicle, and they're staying there at least until people die, staying there at least until people die, staying there at least until people die, which in the case of the analysis of which in the case of the analysis of which in the case of the analysis of postmortem tissue is many, many decades postmortem tissue is many, many decades postmortem tissue is many, many decades later. Okay? So, I'm not just raising later. Okay? So, I'm not just raising later. Okay? So, I'm not just raising this discussion about ways to this discussion about ways to this discussion about ways to disambiguate large particles from small disambiguate large particles from small disambiguate large particles from small particles just to be nerdy and particles just to be nerdy and particles just to be nerdy and technical. It turns out to be a really technical. It turns out to be a really technical. It turns out to be a really important issue with real biological important issue with real biological important issue with real biological implications. Okay, so lots of implications. Okay, so lots of implications. Okay, so lots of itty-bitty little pieces of plastic itty-bitty little pieces of plastic itty-bitty little pieces of plastic getting their way into tissues like getting their way into tissues like getting their way into tissues like brain, follicle, testes, liver, lung, etc. What follicle, testes, liver, lung, etc. What follicle, testes, liver, lung, etc. What are some of the implications of this? are some of the implications of this? are some of the implications of this? Now, there are a lot of animal data, Now, there are a lot of animal data, Now, there are a lot of animal data, data in fish, data in mice, etc. data in fish, data in mice, etc. data in fish, data in mice, etc. that have explored how microplastics and that have explored how microplastics and that have explored how microplastics and nanoplastics can disrupt any number of nanoplastics can disrupt any number of nanoplastics can disrupt any number of different biological functions. different biological functions. different biological functions. But, it's probably worth looking at how it's probably worth looking at how it's probably worth looking at how nanoplastic and microplastic nanoplastic and microplastic nanoplastic and microplastic accumulation in specific tissues is accumulation in specific tissues is accumulation in specific tissues is correlated with specific health correlated with specific health correlated with specific health detriments in humans. Even though the detriments in humans. Even though the detriments in humans. Even though the data are correlative, right? It's much data are correlative, right? It's much data are correlative, right? It's much harder to get causal data from human harder to get causal data from human harder to get causal data from human studies because the animal studies, studies because the animal studies, studies because the animal studies, frankly, are hard to translate to humans frankly, are hard to translate to humans frankly, are hard to translate to humans in this case in particular because a lot in this case in particular because a lot in this case in particular because a lot of the features of animal biology, while of the features of animal biology, while of the features of animal biology, while similar to human biology, humans are similar to human biology, humans are similar to human biology, humans are animals, but you get the point, they animals, but you get the point, they animals, but you get the point, they don't correspond so easily when looking don't correspond so easily when looking don't correspond so easily when looking at microplastics and nanoplastics for at microplastics and nanoplastics for at microplastics and nanoplastics for the following reason. Let's say you have the following reason. Let's say you have the following reason. Let's say you have a little fish, that fish is a couple a little fish, that fish is a couple a little fish, that fish is a couple centimeters long, and it turns out centimeters long, and it turns out centimeters long, and it turns out there's uh I don't know about an aspirin's size uh I don't know about an aspirin's size uh I don't know about an aspirin's size of microplastics and nanoplastics in of microplastics and nanoplastics in of microplastics and nanoplastics in that fish when that fish is analyzed that fish when that fish is analyzed that fish when that fish is analyzed postmortem. You say, "Okay, well, that's postmortem. You say, "Okay, well, that's postmortem. You say, "Okay, well, that's kind of a lot, right? An aspirin's worth kind of a lot, right? An aspirin's worth kind of a lot, right? An aspirin's worth in a or an aspirin size in a or an aspirin size in a or an aspirin size batch of microplastics and nanoplastics batch of microplastics and nanoplastics batch of microplastics and nanoplastics in that little fish." in that little fish." in that little fish." And then you look in humans and you And then you look in humans and you And then you look in humans and you realize, "Okay, well, there's more realize, "Okay, well, there's more realize, "Okay, well, there's more microplastics and nanoplastics, but not microplastics and nanoplastics, but not microplastics and nanoplastics, but not that much more. How much of a detriment that much more. How much of a detriment that much more. How much of a detriment is there really going to be? Can you is there really going to be? Can you is there really going to be? Can you look at the study in the fish seeing for look at the study in the fish seeing for look at the study in the fish seeing for instance, and this has been demonstrated instance, and this has been demonstrated instance, and this has been demonstrated that you have disruption in neurological that you have disruption in neurological that you have disruption in neurological pathways, the formation of those pathways, the formation of those pathways, the formation of those pathways, like brain development is pathways, like brain development is pathways, like brain development is altered, reproductive function is altered, reproductive function is altered, reproductive function is altered, et cetera." It's hard to altered, et cetera." It's hard to altered, et cetera." It's hard to translate. We don't really know what it translate. We don't really know what it translate. We don't really know what it means in terms of humans. So, we'll turn means in terms of humans. So, we'll turn means in terms of humans. So, we'll turn to the correlative data in humans, and to the correlative data in humans, and to the correlative data in humans, and I'll look to the strongest data at least I'll look to the strongest data at least I'll look to the strongest data at least that I could find out there, and there that I could find out there, and there that I could find out there, and there are kind of three major cases that I are kind of three major cases that I are kind of three major cases that I think are worth highlighting. The first think are worth highlighting. The first think are worth highlighting. The first one is that one is that one is that there was a study done in humans, this there was a study done in humans, this there was a study done in humans, this is published in 2021. is published in 2021. is published in 2021. It was published in the Journal of It was published in the Journal of It was published in the Journal of Environmental Science and Technology Environmental Science and Technology Environmental Science and Technology that found much higher levels of that found much higher levels of that found much higher levels of microplastics in the stool samples of microplastics in the stool samples of microplastics in the stool samples of people that were diagnosed with people that were diagnosed with people that were diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome. Okay, irritable bowel syndrome. Okay, irritable bowel syndrome. Okay, irritable bowel syndrome is very irritable bowel syndrome is very irritable bowel syndrome is very disruptive to people's well-being. disruptive to people's well-being. disruptive to people's well-being. There isn't an obvious cure for There isn't an obvious cure for There isn't an obvious cure for irritable bowel syndrome, although some irritable bowel syndrome, although some irritable bowel syndrome, although some people find relief by improving their people find relief by improving their people find relief by improving their gut microbiota, by limiting body-wide gut microbiota, by limiting body-wide gut microbiota, by limiting body-wide and gut inflammation through any number and gut inflammation through any number and gut inflammation through any number of different things, improving sleep and of different things, improving sleep and of different things, improving sleep and eating a low inflammation diet, et eating a low inflammation diet, et eating a low inflammation diet, et cetera. This is something that I'll cetera. This is something that I'll cetera. This is something that I'll probably cover in a future episode of probably cover in a future episode of probably cover in a future episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Uh the Huberman Lab Podcast. Uh the Huberman Lab Podcast. Uh gastrointestinal challenges, that is. gastrointestinal challenges, that is. gastrointestinal challenges, that is. So, I want to be very clear there was no I want to be very clear there was no I want to be very clear there was no direct causation established, but it was direct causation established, but it was direct causation established, but it was clear that there were higher levels of clear that there were higher levels of clear that there were higher levels of microplastics found in the stool tissue microplastics found in the stool tissue microplastics found in the stool tissue coming from people who had irritable coming from people who had irritable coming from people who had irritable bowel syndrome than in individuals who bowel syndrome than in individuals who bowel syndrome than in individuals who did not have irritable bowel syndrome. did not have irritable bowel syndrome. did not have irritable bowel syndrome. And while no study is perfect, they And while no study is perfect, they And while no study is perfect, they included a number of important controls included a number of important controls included a number of important controls in the experiment to control for age in the experiment to control for age in the experiment to control for age range and some other features. So, it's range and some other features. So, it's range and some other features. So, it's reasonable to assume that the reasonable to assume that the reasonable to assume that the accumulation of microplastics in the gut accumulation of microplastics in the gut accumulation of microplastics in the gut or somewhere along the GI tract or somewhere along the GI tract or somewhere along the GI tract had somehow led to or related to had somehow led to or related to had somehow led to or related to irritable bowel syndrome. Okay, now you irritable bowel syndrome. Okay, now you irritable bowel syndrome. Okay, now you could also imagine the reverse. This is could also imagine the reverse. This is could also imagine the reverse. This is very important to understand. You could very important to understand. You could very important to understand. You could also imagine that people who had also imagine that people who had also imagine that people who had irritable bowel syndrome perhaps are irritable bowel syndrome perhaps are irritable bowel syndrome perhaps are less good at filtering microplastics and less good at filtering microplastics and less good at filtering microplastics and nanoplastics from the food and liquids nanoplastics from the food and liquids nanoplastics from the food and liquids they consume than are people who don't they consume than are people who don't they consume than are people who don't have irritable bowel syndrome. So, the have irritable bowel syndrome. So, the have irritable bowel syndrome. So, the causality, if it exists at all, could causality, if it exists at all, could causality, if it exists at all, could run in either direction or both. run in either direction or both. run in either direction or both. Nonetheless, I think it's an interesting Nonetheless, I think it's an interesting Nonetheless, I think it's an interesting study. And if you're somebody who study. And if you're somebody who study. And if you're somebody who suffers from gastrointestinal distress suffers from gastrointestinal distress suffers from gastrointestinal distress such as irritable bowel syndrome or such as irritable bowel syndrome or such as irritable bowel syndrome or otherwise, I think you'd be wise, indeed otherwise, I think you'd be wise, indeed otherwise, I think you'd be wise, indeed all people would be wise, but I think all people would be wise, but I think all people would be wise, but I think you'd be especially wise to take into you'd be especially wise to take into you'd be especially wise to take into consideration some of the to-dos and not consideration some of the to-dos and not consideration some of the to-dos and not to dos that I'm covering during today's to dos that I'm covering during today's to dos that I'm covering during today's episode such as avoiding consuming water episode such as avoiding consuming water episode such as avoiding consuming water from plastic bottles, some of the stuff we plastic bottles, some of the stuff we plastic bottles, some of the stuff we talked about earlier, avoiding canned talked about earlier, avoiding canned talked about earlier, avoiding canned soup and other BPA BPS containing soup and other BPA BPS containing soup and other BPA BPS containing containers and things of that sort or containers and things of that sort or containers and things of that sort or things that come from those containers. things that come from those containers. things that come from those containers. The other area where there was some The other area where there was some The other area where there was some really interesting correlative data really interesting correlative data really interesting correlative data relates to reproductive function and relates to reproductive function and relates to reproductive function and hormone health. And this is where we can hormone health. And this is where we can hormone health. And this is where we can start to get into a bit more detail start to get into a bit more detail start to get into a bit more detail about BPAs and BPSs and phthalates and about BPAs and BPSs and phthalates and about BPAs and BPSs and phthalates and some of their roles in disrupting some of their roles in disrupting some of their roles in disrupting endocrine, that is hormone, pathways. endocrine, that is hormone, pathways. endocrine, that is hormone, pathways. So, there's a study So, there's a study So, there's a study I'll put a link to in the show note I'll put a link to in the show note I'll put a link to in the show note captions that's entitled "Urinary captions that's entitled "Urinary captions that's entitled "Urinary Phthalate Metabolites Are Associated Phthalate Metabolites Are Associated Phthalate Metabolites Are Associated with Decreased Serum Testosterone." So, with Decreased Serum Testosterone." So, with Decreased Serum Testosterone." So, that's in blood in men, women, and that's in blood in men, women, and that's in blood in men, women, and children. Okay? children. Okay? children. Okay? This is an interesting study for a This is an interesting study for a This is an interesting study for a number of reasons. First of all, number of reasons. First of all, number of reasons. First of all, it emphasizes something that everybody it emphasizes something that everybody it emphasizes something that everybody should know, which is that testosterone should know, which is that testosterone should know, which is that testosterone plays key roles in men, women, and kids, plays key roles in men, women, and kids, plays key roles in men, women, and kids, okay? It is not the case that okay? It is not the case that okay? It is not the case that testosterone is just present in men and testosterone is just present in men and testosterone is just present in men and boys. It's also present in women and boys. It's also present in women and boys. It's also present in women and girls, and it plays an important role in girls, and it plays an important role in girls, and it plays an important role in everybody, okay? It's involved, of everybody, okay? It's involved, of everybody, okay? It's involved, of course, in some of the things that we course, in some of the things that we course, in some of the things that we normally associate with testosterone, normally associate with testosterone, normally associate with testosterone, such as muscle mass, bone density, such as muscle mass, bone density, such as muscle mass, bone density, strength, etc. But, testosterone can be strength, etc. But, testosterone can be strength, etc. But, testosterone can be converted to estrogen. Testosterone is converted to estrogen. Testosterone is converted to estrogen. Testosterone is involved in libido in both men and involved in libido in both men and involved in libido in both men and women. It's involved in brain women. It's involved in brain women. It's involved in brain development in boys and girls, in development in boys and girls, in development in boys and girls, in genitalia development, and on and on. genitalia development, and on and on. genitalia development, and on and on. So, it's an important hormone, So, it's an important hormone, So, it's an important hormone, and it was clear from this study that and it was clear from this study that and it was clear from this study that elevated levels of phthalates, that is elevated levels of phthalates, that is elevated levels of phthalates, that is phthalate metabolites, are associated phthalate metabolites, are associated phthalate metabolites, are associated with lower testosterone levels in all with lower testosterone levels in all with lower testosterone levels in all those populations. They point out, those populations. They point out, those populations. They point out, quote, that the strongest and most quote, that the strongest and most quote, that the strongest and most consistent inverse relationships between consistent inverse relationships between consistent inverse relationships between level of phthalates and testosterone, level of phthalates and testosterone, level of phthalates and testosterone, that is elevated phthalate metabolites, that is elevated phthalate metabolites, that is elevated phthalate metabolites, lower testosterone, were found among lower testosterone, were found among lower testosterone, were found among women ages 40 to 60 years. And this is women ages 40 to 60 years. And this is women ages 40 to 60 years. And this is very important. If you saw the episode very important. If you saw the episode very important. If you saw the episode that we did with Dr. Mary Claire Haver that we did with Dr. Mary Claire Haver that we did with Dr. Mary Claire Haver on perimenopause, menopause, on perimenopause, menopause, on perimenopause, menopause, she emphasized that perimenopause, she emphasized that perimenopause, she emphasized that perimenopause, menopause, which typically sets in menopause, which typically sets in menopause, which typically sets in somewhere between one's late 40s and somewhere between one's late 40s and somewhere between one's late 40s and 60s, okay? There's huge variation there. 60s, okay? There's huge variation there. 60s, okay? There's huge variation there. Sometimes it's early as one's 30s. That Sometimes it's early as one's 30s. That Sometimes it's early as one's 30s. That would be early, however. would be early, however. would be early, however. More often in one's 40s and 50s, More often in one's 40s and 50s, More often in one's 40s and 50s, sometimes as late as 60s, sometimes as late as 60s, sometimes as late as 60s, involves reductions in estrogen, but involves reductions in estrogen, but involves reductions in estrogen, but also in testosterone, and this has major also in testosterone, and this has major also in testosterone, and this has major implications for creating less feelings implications for creating less feelings implications for creating less feelings of vigor, lowered libido, less recovery of vigor, lowered libido, less recovery of vigor, lowered libido, less recovery from exercise and other life stressors, from exercise and other life stressors, from exercise and other life stressors, and things of that sort. Now, the study and things of that sort. Now, the study and things of that sort. Now, the study also, interestingly, shows that in also, interestingly, shows that in also, interestingly, shows that in quote, adult men, the only significant quote, adult men, the only significant quote, adult men, the only significant or suggestive inverse association or suggestive inverse association or suggestive inverse association between phthalate metabolites and between phthalate metabolites and between phthalate metabolites and testosterone were observed among men 40 testosterone were observed among men 40 testosterone were observed among men 40 to 60 years old. Now, there are a number to 60 years old. Now, there are a number to 60 years old. Now, there are a number of different ways that we can interpret of different ways that we can interpret of different ways that we can interpret those data. One is that men younger than those data. One is that men younger than those data. One is that men younger than 40 have high enough levels of 40 have high enough levels of 40 have high enough levels of testosterone that or the ranges of testosterone that or the ranges of testosterone that or the ranges of testosterone are great enough in that testosterone are great enough in that testosterone are great enough in that sample of younger than 40 years old that sample of younger than 40 years old that sample of younger than 40 years old that somehow that was able to swamp out any somehow that was able to swamp out any somehow that was able to swamp out any reductions in testosterone reductions in testosterone reductions in testosterone that were caused by phthalate that were caused by phthalate that were caused by phthalate metabolites or rather that once men get metabolites or rather that once men get metabolites or rather that once men get from 40 to 60 years old that there's from 40 to 60 years old that there's from 40 to 60 years old that there's somehow a vulnerability of the somehow a vulnerability of the somehow a vulnerability of the testosterone pathways to phthalates or testosterone pathways to phthalates or testosterone pathways to phthalates or and none of these are mutually exclusive and none of these are mutually exclusive and none of these are mutually exclusive of course that the phthalates had built of course that the phthalates had built of course that the phthalates had built up in those men's system over a number up in those men's system over a number up in those men's system over a number of years and then were having their of years and then were having their of years and then were having their major effects on those men between 40 major effects on those men between 40 major effects on those men between 40 and 60 years old. I do find it and 60 years old. I do find it and 60 years old. I do find it interesting that the major effects were interesting that the major effects were interesting that the major effects were observed in both men and women 40 to 60 observed in both men and women 40 to 60 observed in both men and women 40 to 60 years old and the interpretation of years old and the interpretation of years old and the interpretation of those data that makes the most sense to those data that makes the most sense to those data that makes the most sense to me at least is that there's a cumulative me at least is that there's a cumulative me at least is that there's a cumulative effect of these phthalates over time effect of these phthalates over time effect of these phthalates over time that reveals itself at least that reveals itself at least that reveals itself at least statistically in men and women once they statistically in men and women once they statistically in men and women once they reach 40 to 60 years. So, what are these reach 40 to 60 years. So, what are these reach 40 to 60 years. So, what are these phthalates? Well, phthalates? Well, phthalates? Well, these phthalates are things that are these phthalates are things that are these phthalates are things that are included in plastics that house liquids included in plastics that house liquids included in plastics that house liquids and foods that we eat or that we cook and foods that we eat or that we cook and foods that we eat or that we cook with or that simply exist in our environment or that simply exist in our environment or that simply exist in our environment and are getting broken down and that and are getting broken down and that and are getting broken down and that we're inhaling and then are making their we're inhaling and then are making their we're inhaling and then are making their way across the blood testes barrier way across the blood testes barrier way across the blood testes barrier blood follicle barrier or into any blood follicle barrier or into any blood follicle barrier or into any number of other tissues. number of other tissues. number of other tissues. Those phthalates are there of course to Those phthalates are there of course to Those phthalates are there of course to make plastic more flexible and durable make plastic more flexible and durable make plastic more flexible and durable but they're known endocrine disruptors. but they're known endocrine disruptors. but they're known endocrine disruptors. Dr. Shanna Swan has done beautiful work Dr. Shanna Swan has done beautiful work Dr. Shanna Swan has done beautiful work showing that young animals and showing that young animals and showing that young animals and potentially humans who are exposed to potentially humans who are exposed to potentially humans who are exposed to phthalates from things like pesticides phthalates from things like pesticides phthalates from things like pesticides in particular in particular in particular can actually have a can actually have a can actually have a fairly major disruption in what's called fairly major disruption in what's called fairly major disruption in what's called the anogenital distance, okay? the anogenital distance, okay? the anogenital distance, okay? Withhold your chuckles. The distance Withhold your chuckles. The distance Withhold your chuckles. The distance between the penis and the anus between the penis and the anus between the penis and the anus uh in people that have been exposed to uh in people that have been exposed to uh in people that have been exposed to phthalates or mothers of boys that have phthalates or mothers of boys that have phthalates or mothers of boys that have been exposed to phthalates, those boys been exposed to phthalates, those boys been exposed to phthalates, those boys are born with a shorter are born with a shorter are born with a shorter penile to anal distance, okay? penile to anal distance, okay? penile to anal distance, okay? Typically, it's of a certain distance Typically, it's of a certain distance Typically, it's of a certain distance and there's a correlation with reduced and there's a correlation with reduced and there's a correlation with reduced anogenital distance. anogenital distance. anogenital distance. That is a external marker, okay? It's That is a external marker, okay? It's That is a external marker, okay? It's not that itself is necessarily a not that itself is necessarily a not that itself is necessarily a bad thing. Um that's not what we're bad thing. Um that's not what we're bad thing. Um that's not what we're saying here, but that's an external saying here, but that's an external saying here, but that's an external marker that can be measured in mice, and marker that can be measured in mice, and marker that can be measured in mice, and there are some studies that are there are some studies that are there are some studies that are exploring that in humans as well, that exploring that in humans as well, that exploring that in humans as well, that correlates with a number of other correlates with a number of other correlates with a number of other things, including lower sperm counts, things, including lower sperm counts, things, including lower sperm counts, reduced sperm motility, and things of reduced sperm motility, and things of reduced sperm motility, and things of that sort. Likewise, BPAs, the bisphenol that sort. Likewise, BPAs, the bisphenol that sort. Likewise, BPAs, the bisphenol A and BPS, A and BPS, A and BPS, are known endocrine disruptors. I talked are known endocrine disruptors. I talked are known endocrine disruptors. I talked about this a little bit earlier. They're about this a little bit earlier. They're about this a little bit earlier. They're known to bind to estrogen receptors, so known to bind to estrogen receptors, so known to bind to estrogen receptors, so they mimic estrogen. Sometimes they mimic estrogen. Sometimes they mimic estrogen. Sometimes they activate those estrogen receptor-dependent those estrogen receptor-dependent those estrogen receptor-dependent pathways, so they literally mimic pathways, so they literally mimic pathways, so they literally mimic estrogen. Sometimes they block those estrogen Sometimes they block those estrogen Sometimes they block those estrogen receptors, so that estrogen cannot have receptors, so that estrogen cannot have receptors, so that estrogen cannot have the normal role of docking in those the normal role of docking in those the normal role of docking in those receptors and causing their normal receptors and causing their normal receptors and causing their normal functions. And BPA, and to some extent functions. And BPA, and to some extent functions. And BPA, and to some extent BPS, and potentially phthalates, can BPS, and potentially phthalates, can BPS, and potentially phthalates, can dock to androgen receptors as well, dock to androgen receptors as well, dock to androgen receptors as well, sometimes referred to as testosterone sometimes referred to as testosterone sometimes referred to as testosterone receptors, androgen receptors. So, the receptors, androgen receptors. So, the receptors, androgen receptors. So, the point is that BPAs, BPSs, and phthalates point is that BPAs, BPSs, and phthalates point is that BPAs, BPSs, and phthalates are not good for endocrine function, and are not good for endocrine function, and are not good for endocrine function, and they are present in basically all they are present in basically all they are present in basically all plastics unless it says no BPA or all plastics unless it says no BPA or all plastics unless it says no BPA or all phthalates removed. They're present in phthalates removed. They're present in phthalates removed. They're present in herbicides, et cetera. And they're of herbicides, et cetera. And they're of herbicides, et cetera. And they're of real concern. And it's very clear, as I real concern. And it's very clear, as I real concern. And it's very clear, as I mentioned earlier, that you can detect mentioned earlier, that you can detect mentioned earlier, that you can detect microplastics in human testes, and I microplastics in human testes, and I microplastics in human testes, and I didn't mention this earlier, and in didn't mention this earlier, and in didn't mention this earlier, and in semen, and semen, and semen, and it is now very clear that that's it is now very clear that that's it is now very clear that that's correlated with reduced sperm counts and correlated with reduced sperm counts and correlated with reduced sperm counts and lower sperm motility. Now, I also want lower sperm motility. Now, I also want lower sperm motility. Now, I also want to be very clear. Remember, I'm not an to be very clear. Remember, I'm not an to be very clear. Remember, I'm not an alarmist. I want to be clear that just alarmist. I want to be clear that just alarmist. I want to be clear that just because sperm counts are significantly because sperm counts are significantly because sperm counts are significantly lower in people that have a certain lower in people that have a certain lower in people that have a certain amount of microplastics and nanoplastics amount of microplastics and nanoplastics amount of microplastics and nanoplastics potentially in their testes or that potentially in their testes or that potentially in their testes or that they've been exposed to, does not they've been exposed to, does not they've been exposed to, does not necessarily mean that they're infertile. necessarily mean that they're infertile. necessarily mean that they're infertile. It is true that total sperm count and It is true that total sperm count and It is true that total sperm count and sperm motility, forward motility being sperm motility, forward motility being sperm motility, forward motility being an important indicator of sperm health, an important indicator of sperm health, an important indicator of sperm health, are correlated with one's ability to are correlated with one's ability to are correlated with one's ability to fertilize an egg, okay? This was covered fertilize an egg, okay? This was covered fertilize an egg, okay? This was covered in a quite long, but quite detailed in a quite long, but quite detailed in a quite long, but quite detailed episode that I did about fertility in episode that I did about fertility in episode that I did about fertility in both males and females. There are number both males and females. There are number both males and females. There are number of things one can do to increase sperm of things one can do to increase sperm of things one can do to increase sperm counts or to at least limit sperm count counts or to at least limit sperm count counts or to at least limit sperm count depletion. There are number of things depletion. There are number of things depletion. There are number of things that one can do to improve sperm that one can do to improve sperm that one can do to improve sperm motility. I encourage you to check out motility. I encourage you to check out motility. I encourage you to check out that episode. I'll provide a link to it that episode. I'll provide a link to it that episode. I'll provide a link to it in the show note captions. In fact, I'll in the show note captions. In fact, I'll in the show note captions. In fact, I'll link to the specific time stamp in the link to the specific time stamp in the link to the specific time stamp in the show note captions that gets to those show note captions that gets to those show note captions that gets to those particular strategies. But, the point particular strategies. But, the point particular strategies. But, the point here is that here is that here is that microplastics and nanoplastics are found microplastics and nanoplastics are found microplastics and nanoplastics are found in human testes and that's correlated in human testes and that's correlated in human testes and that's correlated with reductions in sperm count and with reductions in sperm count and with reductions in sperm count and reductions in sperm motility. I'd like reductions in sperm motility. I'd like reductions in sperm motility. I'd like to take a quick break and thank one of to take a quick break and thank one of to take a quick break and thank one of our sponsors, Function. our sponsors, Function. our sponsors, Function. I recently became a Function member I recently became a Function member I recently became a Function member after searching for the most after searching for the most after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. While I've long been a fan of blood While I've long been a fan of blood While I've long been a fan of blood testing, I really wanted to find a more testing, I really wanted to find a more testing, I really wanted to find a more in-depth program for analyzing blood, in-depth program for analyzing blood, in-depth program for analyzing blood, urine, and saliva to get a full picture urine, and saliva to get a full picture urine, and saliva to get a full picture of my heart health, my hormone status, of my heart health, my hormone status, of my heart health, my hormone status, my immune system regulation, my immune system regulation, my immune system regulation, my metabolic function, my vitamin and metabolic function, my vitamin and metabolic function, my vitamin and mineral status, and other critical areas mineral status, and other critical areas mineral status, and other critical areas of my overall health and vitality. of my overall health and vitality. of my overall health and vitality. Function not only provides testing of Function not only provides testing of Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to physical and over 100 biomarkers key to physical and over 100 biomarkers key to physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors on your results. For top doctors on your results. For top doctors on your results. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had too high Function, I learned that I had too high Function, I learned that I had too high levels of mercury in my blood. This was levels of mercury in my blood. This was levels of mercury in my blood. This was totally surprising to me. I had no idea totally surprising to me. I had no idea totally surprising to me. I had no idea prior to taking the test. Function not prior to taking the test. Function not prior to taking the test. Function not only helped me detect this, but offered only helped me detect this, but offered only helped me detect this, but offered medical doctor-informed insights on how medical doctor-informed insights on how medical doctor-informed insights on how to best reduce those mercury levels, to best reduce those mercury levels, to best reduce those mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption because I'd been eating a consumption because I'd been eating a consumption because I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort lot of tuna, while also making an effort lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and to eat more leafy greens and to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC, supplementing with NAC, supplementing with NAC, N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification and worked to reduce my detoxification and worked to reduce my detoxification and worked to reduce my mercury levels. Comprehensive lab mercury levels. Comprehensive lab mercury levels. Comprehensive lab testing like this is so important for testing like this is so important for testing like this is so important for health, and while I've been doing it for health, and while I've been doing it for health, and while I've been doing it for years, I've always found it to be overly years, I've always found it to be overly years, I've always found it to be overly complicated and expensive. I've been so complicated and expensive. I've been so complicated and expensive. I've been so impressed by Function both at the level impressed by Function both at the level impressed by Function both at the level of ease of use, that is getting the test of ease of use, that is getting the test of ease of use, that is getting the test done, as well as how comprehensive and done, as well as how comprehensive and done, as well as how comprehensive and how actionable the tests are that I how actionable the tests are that I how actionable the tests are that I recently joined their advisory board and recently joined their advisory board and recently joined their advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, podcast. If you'd like to try Function, podcast. If you'd like to try Function, go to functionhealth.com/huberman. go to functionhealth.com/huberman. go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman Lab offering early access to Huberman Lab offering early access to Huberman Lab listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. Today's to get early access to Function. Today's to get early access to Function. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight episode is also brought to us by Eight episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. Now, I've spoken many tracking capacity. Now, I've spoken many tracking capacity. Now, I've spoken many times before on this podcast about the times before on this podcast about the times before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate critical need for us to get adequate critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each night. amounts of quality sleep each night. amounts of quality sleep each night. That's truly the foundation of all That's truly the foundation of all That's truly the foundation of all mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. And one of the best ways to performance. And one of the best ways to performance. And one of the best ways to ensure that you get a great night's ensure that you get a great night's ensure that you get a great night's sleep is to control the temperature of sleep is to control the temperature of sleep is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment. And that's your sleeping environment. And that's your sleeping environment. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply because in order to fall and stay deeply because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually asleep, your body temperature actually asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and order to wake up feeling refreshed and order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature energized, your body temperature energized, your body temperature actually has to increase about 1 to 3°. actually has to increase about 1 to 3°. actually has to increase about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep makes it incredibly easy to Eight Sleep makes it incredibly easy to Eight Sleep makes it incredibly easy to control the temperature of your sleeping control the temperature of your sleeping control the temperature of your sleeping environment by allowing you to control environment by allowing you to control environment by allowing you to control the temperature of your mattress cover the temperature of your mattress cover the temperature of your mattress cover at the beginning, middle, and end of the at the beginning, middle, and end of the at the beginning, middle, and end of the night. I've been sleeping on an Eight night. I've been sleeping on an Eight night. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years now and it has completely transformed now and it has completely transformed now and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. and improved the quality of my sleep. and improved the quality of my sleep. Eight Sleep has now launched their Eight Sleep has now launched their Eight Sleep has now launched their newest generation of the Pod Cover, the newest generation of the Pod Cover, the newest generation of the Pod Cover, the Pod 4 Ultra. The Pod 4 Ultra has Pod 4 Ultra. The Pod 4 Ultra has Pod 4 Ultra. The Pod 4 Ultra has improved cooling and heating capacity, improved cooling and heating capacity, improved cooling and heating capacity, higher fidelity sleep tracking higher fidelity sleep tracking higher fidelity sleep tracking technology, and even has snoring technology, and even has snoring technology, and even has snoring detection that will automatically lift detection that will automatically lift detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees to improve your head a few degrees to improve your head a few degrees to improve your airflow and stop your snoring. If you'd airflow and stop your snoring. If you'd airflow and stop your snoring. If you'd like to try an Eight Sleep mattress like to try an Eight Sleep mattress like to try an Eight Sleep mattress cover, go to eightsleep.com/huberman cover, go to eightsleep.com/huberman cover, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $350 off their Pod 4 to save up to $350 off their Pod 4 to save up to $350 off their Pod 4 Ultra. Eight Sleep currently ships in Ultra. Eight Sleep currently ships in Ultra. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's the EU, and Australia. Again, that's the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. Another study that got people's Another study that got people's Another study that got people's attention that I think is worth attention that I think is worth attention that I think is worth mentioning, which relates to microplastics, which relates to microplastics, which relates to microplastics, nanoplastics, and cardiovascular nanoplastics, and cardiovascular nanoplastics, and cardiovascular disease. This was a study published in disease. This was a study published in disease. This was a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine in the New England Journal of Medicine in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2024. So, this is a fabulously good 2024. So, this is a fabulously good 2024. So, this is a fabulously good journal. And what it found was that polyethylene, what it found was that polyethylene, what it found was that polyethylene, which is a component of many plastics which is a component of many plastics which is a component of many plastics out there, out there, out there, were detected in the carotid artery were detected in the carotid artery were detected in the carotid artery plaques of in this case, 150 patients, plaques of in this case, 150 patients, plaques of in this case, 150 patients, which is approximately 58% of the ones which is approximately 58% of the ones which is approximately 58% of the ones that were included in the study. And that were included in the study. And that were included in the study. And they also found using a technique called they also found using a technique called they also found using a technique called electron microscopy. Today's fun cuz we electron microscopy. Today's fun cuz we electron microscopy. Today's fun cuz we get to talk about different types of get to talk about different types of get to talk about different types of microscopy. Electron microscopy allows microscopy. Electron microscopy allows microscopy. Electron microscopy allows you to look at things that are smaller you to look at things that are smaller you to look at things that are smaller than a micron. You can look all the way than a micron. You can look all the way than a micron. You can look all the way down into the nanometer range, right? down into the nanometer range, right? down into the nanometer range, right? You can start breaking up that 1/1000th You can start breaking up that 1/1000th You can start breaking up that 1/1000th of a millimeter into nanometers, and you of a millimeter into nanometers, and you of a millimeter into nanometers, and you can start to see things that are really, can start to see things that are really, can start to see things that are really, really small. really small. really small. And in this study, electron microscopy And in this study, electron microscopy And in this study, electron microscopy showed that there were these little showed that there were these little showed that there were these little jagged-edge foreign particles among the jagged-edge foreign particles among the jagged-edge foreign particles among the plaque macrophages plaque macrophages plaque macrophages of these cardiovascular plaques, okay? these cardiovascular plaques, okay? these cardiovascular plaques, okay? Macrophages are part of the immune Macrophages are part of the immune Macrophages are part of the immune system. These are cells that go in and system. These are cells that go in and system. These are cells that go in and try and eat things up. They're kind of try and eat things up. They're kind of try and eat things up. They're kind of like little ambulances. Later, we're like little ambulances. Later, we're like little ambulances. Later, we're going to talk about microglia, which are going to talk about microglia, which are going to talk about microglia, which are the brain's resident macrophages, the brain's resident macrophages, the brain's resident macrophages, or macrophages, depending on where you or macrophages, depending on where you or macrophages, depending on where you live and how you like to pronounce it. live and how you like to pronounce it. live and how you like to pronounce it. But the point here is that when using a But the point here is that when using a But the point here is that when using a technique like electron microscopy that technique like electron microscopy that technique like electron microscopy that allows you to look at really, really allows you to look at really, really allows you to look at really, really small stuff, it was very clear that the small stuff, it was very clear that the small stuff, it was very clear that the plaques that form these plaques that form these plaques that form these you know, basically occlusions within you know, basically occlusions within you know, basically occlusions within the arteries, these are not good. Um the arteries, these are not good. Um the arteries, these are not good. Um this is one of the reasons you want to this is one of the reasons you want to this is one of the reasons you want to eat properly and do cardiovascular eat properly and do cardiovascular eat properly and do cardiovascular exercise and take great care of exercise and take great care of exercise and take great care of yourself, etc. yourself, etc. yourself, etc. Electron microscopy made very clear that Electron microscopy made very clear that Electron microscopy made very clear that there were little plastic foreign jagged there were little plastic foreign jagged there were little plastic foreign jagged particles deposited in some of these particles deposited in some of these particles deposited in some of these plaques. Now, were they the cause of plaques. Now, were they the cause of plaques. Now, were they the cause of these plaques? Did they contribute to these plaques? Did they contribute to these plaques? Did they contribute to some of the occlusion caused by those some of the occlusion caused by those some of the occlusion caused by those plaques? Unclear. But plaques? Unclear. But plaques? Unclear. But it's reasonable to assume that they form it's reasonable to assume that they form it's reasonable to assume that they form part of the physical substrate that part of the physical substrate that part of the physical substrate that could occlude blood flow through these could occlude blood flow through these could occlude blood flow through these arteries, which of course leads to arteries, which of course leads to arteries, which of course leads to cardiovascular events, which of course cardiovascular events, which of course cardiovascular events, which of course are not good. So, I'll put a link to the are not good. So, I'll put a link to the are not good. So, I'll put a link to the study in the show note captions. Again, study in the show note captions. Again, study in the show note captions. Again, these are correlative studies in humans. these are correlative studies in humans. these are correlative studies in humans. Correlative studies are only that, Correlative studies are only that, Correlative studies are only that, they're just correlative, but I'm trying they're just correlative, but I'm trying they're just correlative, but I'm trying to provide a patchwork of things that to provide a patchwork of things that to provide a patchwork of things that suggest that it would indeed be a good suggest that it would indeed be a good suggest that it would indeed be a good idea to try and limit your ingestion or idea to try and limit your ingestion or idea to try and limit your ingestion or at least facilitate the removal of at least facilitate the removal of at least facilitate the removal of microplastics and nanoplastics from your microplastics and nanoplastics from your microplastics and nanoplastics from your system. Another reason to do that system. Another reason to do that system. Another reason to do that relates to the so-called P F A S okay? relates to the so-called P F A S okay? relates to the so-called P F A S okay? These are a group of chemicals sometimes These are a group of chemicals sometimes These are a group of chemicals sometimes referred to as the quote unquote forever referred to as the quote unquote forever referred to as the quote unquote forever chemicals because they are very chemicals because they are very chemicals because they are very long-standing once they get into your long-standing once they get into your long-standing once they get into your system. These things have names other than P F A These things have names other than P F A These things have names other than P F A S which is an acronym, things like S which is an acronym, things like S which is an acronym, things like perfluoroalkyl, things like polyfluoroalkyl. things like polyfluoroalkyl. things like polyfluoroalkyl. I don't know how good my pronunciation I don't know how good my pronunciation I don't know how good my pronunciation of those is, but um if you look up the P of those is, but um if you look up the P of those is, but um if you look up the P F A S you'll see that these things are F A S you'll see that these things are F A S you'll see that these things are known to cause liver damage, they can known to cause liver damage, they can known to cause liver damage, they can damage the immune system. damage the immune system. damage the immune system. They are considered forever chemicals They are considered forever chemicals They are considered forever chemicals because they are not broken down, they because they are not broken down, they because they are not broken down, they last forever. Then again, some of the last forever. Then again, some of the last forever. Then again, some of the other components of microplastics and other components of microplastics and other components of microplastics and nanoplastics are also known to last nanoplastics are also known to last nanoplastics are also known to last forever. So you're starting to get a forever. So you're starting to get a forever. So you're starting to get a picture of these little tiny bits of picture of these little tiny bits of picture of these little tiny bits of plastic, some tinier than others, plastic, some tinier than others, plastic, some tinier than others, depositing themselves in our tissues. depositing themselves in our tissues. depositing themselves in our tissues. They're everywhere out there, they are They're everywhere out there, they are They're everywhere out there, they are most prominent in certain sources, but most prominent in certain sources, but most prominent in certain sources, but they're going to get into our system. they're going to get into our system. they're going to get into our system. Now, does that mean that we can't get Now, does that mean that we can't get Now, does that mean that we can't get rid of them? No. We absolutely can get rid of them? No. We absolutely can get rid of them? No. We absolutely can get rid of them. In fact, we have a number rid of them. In fact, we have a number rid of them. In fact, we have a number of different ways that we get rid of different ways that we get rid of different ways that we get rid of toxins and foreign invaders in our body. toxins and foreign invaders in our body. toxins and foreign invaders in our body. Some of those include the immune system, Some of those include the immune system, Some of those include the immune system, right? Even if you have just some sort right? Even if you have just some sort right? Even if you have just some sort of foreign object like a splinter, your of foreign object like a splinter, your of foreign object like a splinter, your immune system has a reaction to that. immune system has a reaction to that. immune system has a reaction to that. Typically, you get some pus around it, Typically, you get some pus around it, Typically, you get some pus around it, some inflammation, and that pus and some inflammation, and that pus and some inflammation, and that pus and inflammation is part of the process of inflammation is part of the process of inflammation is part of the process of isolating that foreign intruder, that isolating that foreign intruder, that isolating that foreign intruder, that splinter, and then eventually creating splinter, and then eventually creating splinter, and then eventually creating some tissues that extrude it some tissues that extrude it some tissues that extrude it or allow you to extrude it. You of or allow you to extrude it. You of or allow you to extrude it. You of course also have what's called your course also have what's called your course also have what's called your adaptive immune system, which doesn't adaptive immune system, which doesn't adaptive immune system, which doesn't just react to the presence of something just react to the presence of something just react to the presence of something foreign, but creates antibodies which foreign, but creates antibodies which foreign, but creates antibodies which can combat that and so on and so forth. can combat that and so on and so forth. can combat that and so on and so forth. So your body has these So your body has these So your body has these frankly miraculous frankly miraculous frankly miraculous ways of dealing with foreign intruders ways of dealing with foreign intruders ways of dealing with foreign intruders of different sorts. of different sorts. of different sorts. But it does seem that microplastics and But it does seem that microplastics and But it does seem that microplastics and nanoplastics can deposit themselves in nanoplastics can deposit themselves in nanoplastics can deposit themselves in their tissues and stay there. Does that their tissues and stay there. Does that their tissues and stay there. Does that mean that you don't have any chance of mean that you don't have any chance of mean that you don't have any chance of getting them out? No. getting them out? No. getting them out? No. You have a liver. Your liver, yes, You have a liver. Your liver, yes, You have a liver. Your liver, yes, contains microplastics and nanoplastics contains microplastics and nanoplastics contains microplastics and nanoplastics very likely if you've been alive for any very likely if you've been alive for any very likely if you've been alive for any amount of time, but it also has what's amount of time, but it also has what's amount of time, but it also has what's called phase one and phase two called phase one and phase two called phase one and phase two detoxification processes that allow you detoxification processes that allow you detoxification processes that allow you to break down and get rid of certain to break down and get rid of certain to break down and get rid of certain foreign products including microplastics foreign products including microplastics foreign products including microplastics and nanoplastics. So let's talk about and nanoplastics. So let's talk about and nanoplastics. So let's talk about liver detoxification and the some of the liver detoxification and the some of the liver detoxification and the some of the things that can facilitate liver things that can facilitate liver things that can facilitate liver detoxification that you actually have detoxification that you actually have detoxification that you actually have control over. Okay, so let's talk about control over. Okay, so let's talk about control over. Okay, so let's talk about liver detoxification. liver detoxification. liver detoxification. The liver is such a cool organ. It does The liver is such a cool organ. It does The liver is such a cool organ. It does so many cool things. It's not just about so many cool things. It's not just about so many cool things. It's not just about detoxification by the way. detoxification by the way. detoxification by the way. It does all sorts of things related to It does all sorts of things related to It does all sorts of things related to blood clotting. It's just an amazing blood clotting. It's just an amazing blood clotting. It's just an amazing organ. We should probably do an amazing organ. We should probably do an amazing organ. We should probably do an entire episode about the liver. entire episode about the liver. entire episode about the liver. And not just eating liver. I'm not a fan And not just eating liver. I'm not a fan And not just eating liver. I'm not a fan of eating liver. I do it every once in a of eating liver. I do it every once in a of eating liver. I do it every once in a while um because I'm told it's nutritious, but um because I'm told it's nutritious, but um because I'm told it's nutritious, but let's talk about the living functioning let's talk about the living functioning let's talk about the living functioning liver. There are two types of liver liver. There are two types of liver liver. There are two types of liver detoxification processes, okay? So this detoxification processes, okay? So this detoxification processes, okay? So this is not about detoxing your liver. Okay, is not about detoxing your liver. Okay, is not about detoxing your liver. Okay, you may hear about detoxing your liver, you may hear about detoxing your liver, you may hear about detoxing your liver, that's a whole other discussion I don't that's a whole other discussion I don't that's a whole other discussion I don't want to get into, at least not here. want to get into, at least not here. want to get into, at least not here. There's type one and type two liver There's type one and type two liver There's type one and type two liver detoxification. Okay, there's type one detoxification. Okay, there's type one detoxification. Okay, there's type one so called phase one liver detoxification so called phase one liver detoxification so called phase one liver detoxification is also called the oxidation phase. It is also called the oxidation phase. It is also called the oxidation phase. It involves something called cytochrome involves something called cytochrome involves something called cytochrome P450 enzymes. Okay, so enzymes are P450 enzymes. Okay, so enzymes are P450 enzymes. Okay, so enzymes are involved in the breakdown of different involved in the breakdown of different involved in the breakdown of different things. It converts toxins into less harmful It converts toxins into less harmful It converts toxins into less harmful components that ideally are excreted components that ideally are excreted components that ideally are excreted from the body, okay? from the body, okay? from the body, okay? Type two or phase two liver Type two or phase two liver Type two or phase two liver detoxification. Again, this is not detoxification. Again, this is not detoxification. Again, this is not detoxification of your liver, this is detoxification of your liver, this is detoxification of your liver, this is detoxification by your liver. detoxification by your liver. detoxification by your liver. Is also called the conjugation phase of Is also called the conjugation phase of Is also called the conjugation phase of detoxification. It involves enzymes that detoxification. It involves enzymes that detoxification. It involves enzymes that attach molecules to toxins, okay? attach molecules to toxins, okay? attach molecules to toxins, okay? It makes those toxins water soluble and It makes those toxins water soluble and It makes those toxins water soluble and easier to excrete from the body easier to excrete from the body easier to excrete from the body in the form of urine. Okay? in the form of urine. Okay? in the form of urine. Okay? It neutralizes reactive intermediates It neutralizes reactive intermediates It neutralizes reactive intermediates from phase one. Okay, so phase one and from phase one. Okay, so phase one and from phase one. Okay, so phase one and phase two detoxification work together. phase two detoxification work together. phase two detoxification work together. During phase two of liver controlled During phase two of liver controlled During phase two of liver controlled detoxification is where toxins are detoxification is where toxins are detoxification is where toxins are broken down and those broken down broken down and those broken down broken down and those broken down components are prepared to be removed components are prepared to be removed components are prepared to be removed from the body. Okay? from the body. Okay? from the body. Okay? It is thought that the liver plays a It is thought that the liver plays a It is thought that the liver plays a primary role in the removal of primary role in the removal of primary role in the removal of microplastics and nanoplastics, BPAs and microplastics and nanoplastics, BPAs and microplastics and nanoplastics, BPAs and BPSs. And by the way, I realize I didn't BPSs. And by the way, I realize I didn't BPSs. And by the way, I realize I didn't say this earlier and I should have, say this earlier and I should have, say this earlier and I should have, these BPAs and BPSs are sometimes these BPAs and BPSs are sometimes these BPAs and BPSs are sometimes chemical components within the chemical components within the chemical components within the microplastics and nanoplastics. They microplastics and nanoplastics. They microplastics and nanoplastics. They sometimes attach themselves to the sometimes attach themselves to the sometimes attach themselves to the microplastics and nanoplastics. I should microplastics and nanoplastics. I should microplastics and nanoplastics. I should have said that earlier. Forgive me. have said that earlier. Forgive me. have said that earlier. Forgive me. The microplastics and nanoplastics can The microplastics and nanoplastics can The microplastics and nanoplastics can act as what are called vectors or act as what are called vectors or act as what are called vectors or carriers of things like BPAs, BPSs, carriers of things like BPAs, BPSs, carriers of things like BPAs, BPSs, phthalates, and forever chemicals. Okay? phthalates, and forever chemicals. Okay? phthalates, and forever chemicals. Okay? I should have mentioned that earlier. I should have mentioned that earlier. I should have mentioned that earlier. So, type two, that is phase two of liver So, type two, that is phase two of liver So, type two, that is phase two of liver controlled detoxification, is where controlled detoxification, is where controlled detoxification, is where these toxins that are in the body and these toxins that are in the body and these toxins that are in the body and potentially these microplastics potentially these microplastics potentially these microplastics themselves and nanoplastics themselves and nanoplastics themselves and nanoplastics themselves are not necessarily broken down because are not necessarily broken down because are not necessarily broken down because some of those things can't be broken some of those things can't be broken some of those things can't be broken down, but where they are prepared to be down, but where they are prepared to be down, but where they are prepared to be excreted from the body. And we have some excreted from the body. And we have some excreted from the body. And we have some degree of control over phase two of degree of control over phase two of degree of control over phase two of liver controlled detoxification. Again, liver controlled detoxification. Again, liver controlled detoxification. Again, I'm calling it liver controlled I'm calling it liver controlled I'm calling it liver controlled detoxification so that this doesn't get detoxification so that this doesn't get detoxification so that this doesn't get misconstrued as detoxing the liver, misconstrued as detoxing the liver, misconstrued as detoxing the liver, which frankly is a very controversial which frankly is a very controversial which frankly is a very controversial topic and may not be possible at all. topic and may not be possible at all. topic and may not be possible at all. Although, simply by saying that I'm Although, simply by saying that I'm Although, simply by saying that I'm probably going to get attacked, but here probably going to get attacked, but here probably going to get attacked, but here we're just talking about your liver's we're just talking about your liver's we're just talking about your liver's ability to break down and remove ability to break down and remove ability to break down and remove things from your body that you frankly things from your body that you frankly things from your body that you frankly don't want in your body. One way that don't want in your body. One way that don't want in your body. One way that you can enhance phase two liver you can enhance phase two liver you can enhance phase two liver controlled detoxification processes is controlled detoxification processes is controlled detoxification processes is by increasing your intake of something by increasing your intake of something by increasing your intake of something called sulforaphane, which is present in called sulforaphane, which is present in called sulforaphane, which is present in cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli and cauliflower. and cauliflower. and cauliflower. Now, is there enough sulforaphane in Now, is there enough sulforaphane in Now, is there enough sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables cruciferous vegetables cruciferous vegetables such that you could eat reasonable such that you could eat reasonable such that you could eat reasonable amounts, that you wouldn't have to amounts, that you wouldn't have to amounts, that you wouldn't have to overeat cruciferous vegetables in order overeat cruciferous vegetables in order overeat cruciferous vegetables in order to get this enhancement of phase two to get this enhancement of phase two to get this enhancement of phase two liver detoxification processes? liver detoxification processes? liver detoxification processes? Potentially, yes. The animal studies Potentially, yes. The animal studies Potentially, yes. The animal studies that were carried out, so this would be that were carried out, so this would be that were carried out, so this would be in rodents like rats, used supplemented in rodents like rats, used supplemented in rodents like rats, used supplemented sulforaphane at dosages that were sulforaphane at dosages that were sulforaphane at dosages that were comparable to the amounts of comparable to the amounts of comparable to the amounts of sulforaphane that a human might ingest sulforaphane that a human might ingest sulforaphane that a human might ingest from a large serving of broccoli or a large a large serving of broccoli or a large a large serving of broccoli or a large serving of cauliflower. So, this could serving of cauliflower. So, this could serving of cauliflower. So, this could be a few cups of raw broccoli or raw be a few cups of raw broccoli or raw be a few cups of raw broccoli or raw cauliflower. Although, frankly, if cauliflower. Although, frankly, if cauliflower. Although, frankly, if you're like me, that basically you're like me, that basically you're like me, that basically translates to gastrointestinal distress. translates to gastrointestinal distress. translates to gastrointestinal distress. I can't tell you how many times I've I can't tell you how many times I've I can't tell you how many times I've gone to a party and there's some like, gone to a party and there's some like, gone to a party and there's some like, you know, broccoli and cauliflower, you know, broccoli and cauliflower, you know, broccoli and cauliflower, maybe with some dip or something like maybe with some dip or something like maybe with some dip or something like that. I usually avoid the dip cuz I'm that. I usually avoid the dip cuz I'm that. I usually avoid the dip cuz I'm not really into dips, but we'll have a not really into dips, but we'll have a not really into dips, but we'll have a few pieces of broccoli and boy, does few pieces of broccoli and boy, does few pieces of broccoli and boy, does that disrupt my gut. I don't know about that disrupt my gut. I don't know about that disrupt my gut. I don't know about you. Um, and most things don't disrupt you. Um, and most things don't disrupt you. Um, and most things don't disrupt my gut. That's not something that I my gut. That's not something that I my gut. That's not something that I uh, struggle with. uh, struggle with. uh, struggle with. I prefer to cook broccoli and to cook I prefer to cook broccoli and to cook I prefer to cook broccoli and to cook cauliflower. If you cook broccoli and cauliflower. If you cook broccoli and cauliflower. If you cook broccoli and cauliflower lightly, okay, so you don't cauliflower lightly, okay, so you don't cauliflower lightly, okay, so you don't just, you know, turn into a complete just, you know, turn into a complete just, you know, turn into a complete mash, you don't boil it such that a lot mash, you don't boil it such that a lot mash, you don't boil it such that a lot of the nutrients are leached out into of the nutrients are leached out into of the nutrients are leached out into the water around it. So, if you do sort the water around it. So, if you do sort the water around it. So, if you do sort of a light boil or a steam or something of a light boil or a steam or something of a light boil or a steam or something like that or you pan uh, pan cook it in like that or you pan uh, pan cook it in like that or you pan uh, pan cook it in maybe in some olive oil, this is making maybe in some olive oil, this is making maybe in some olive oil, this is making me hungry, by the way. You'll still me hungry, by the way. You'll still me hungry, by the way. You'll still maintain the sulforaphane in those maintain the sulforaphane in those maintain the sulforaphane in those cruciferous vegetables, meaning they'll cruciferous vegetables, meaning they'll cruciferous vegetables, meaning they'll still be beneficial to you. Now, some still be beneficial to you. Now, some still be beneficial to you. Now, some people, including me, don't tend to eat people, including me, don't tend to eat people, including me, don't tend to eat that many cruciferous vegetables. I that many cruciferous vegetables. I that many cruciferous vegetables. I don't know why. I just somehow don't know why. I just somehow don't know why. I just somehow don't make it a point to shop for them enough. make it a point to shop for them enough. make it a point to shop for them enough. I ought to. I ought to. I ought to. For people like me, or perhaps you're in For people like me, or perhaps you're in For people like me, or perhaps you're in the same boat, you can supplement with the same boat, you can supplement with the same boat, you can supplement with sulforaphane and what you'll find is sulforaphane and what you'll find is sulforaphane and what you'll find is that it's sold by various companies and that it's sold by various companies and that it's sold by various companies and it's available at a quite wide range of it's available at a quite wide range of it's available at a quite wide range of dosages. You'll see, dosages. You'll see, dosages. You'll see, for instance, two products similarly for instance, two products similarly for instance, two products similarly priced. One product will contain 50 mg priced. One product will contain 50 mg priced. One product will contain 50 mg of sulforaphane. The other product will of sulforaphane. The other product will of sulforaphane. The other product will contain 225 mg of sulforaphane. Now, if contain 225 mg of sulforaphane. Now, if contain 225 mg of sulforaphane. Now, if you go to what I consider a really you go to what I consider a really you go to what I consider a really excellent website for thinking about and excellent website for thinking about and excellent website for thinking about and evaluating this kind of stuff, which is evaluating this kind of stuff, which is evaluating this kind of stuff, which is examine.com. I've talked a lot about examine.com. I've talked a lot about examine.com. I've talked a lot about this um site on the podcast before. this um site on the podcast before. this um site on the podcast before. On examine.com, they talk about the On examine.com, they talk about the On examine.com, they talk about the translation of the rodent studies to translation of the rodent studies to translation of the rodent studies to humans. And here's what they say. They say And here's what they say. They say And here's what they say. They say supplementation of 0.1 supplementation of 0.1 supplementation of 0.1 to 0.5 mg per kilogram of sulforaphane to 0.5 mg per kilogram of sulforaphane to 0.5 mg per kilogram of sulforaphane in rats has been noted to be bioactive. in rats has been noted to be bioactive. in rats has been noted to be bioactive. Okay, just bioactive. They're not Okay, just bioactive. They're not Okay, just bioactive. They're not getting specifically at removal of getting specifically at removal of getting specifically at removal of microplastics or nanoplastics. microplastics or nanoplastics. microplastics or nanoplastics. And they translate that to a human dose And they translate that to a human dose And they translate that to a human dose of Okay, if you're a 150-lb person, then of Okay, if you're a 150-lb person, then of Okay, if you're a 150-lb person, then that's going to be anywhere from 1.1 to that's going to be anywhere from 1.1 to that's going to be anywhere from 1.1 to 5.5 mg for that 150-lb person. If you're 5.5 mg for that 150-lb person. If you're 5.5 mg for that 150-lb person. If you're a 200-lb person, that's approximately my a 200-lb person, that's approximately my a 200-lb person, that's approximately my weight. I think right now I'm sitting weight. I think right now I'm sitting weight. I think right now I'm sitting somewhere around 215, so about 100 kg, somewhere around 215, so about 100 kg, somewhere around 215, so about 100 kg, 215, I don't know, somewhere in there. I 215, I don't know, somewhere in there. I 215, I don't know, somewhere in there. I haven't stood on a scale in a while. haven't stood on a scale in a while. haven't stood on a scale in a while. It's 1.5 to 7.2 mg for a 200-lb person. It's 1.5 to 7.2 mg for a 200-lb person. It's 1.5 to 7.2 mg for a 200-lb person. Now, then you think about the typical Now, then you think about the typical Now, then you think about the typical dosages that are found in supplements of dosages that are found in supplements of dosages that are found in supplements of 50 mg per serving versus 225 mg per 50 mg per serving versus 225 mg per 50 mg per serving versus 225 mg per serving. And in either case, you realize serving. And in either case, you realize serving. And in either case, you realize that that's much, much higher than that that's much, much higher than that that's much, much higher than what's being discussed here. So, what what's being discussed here. So, what what's being discussed here. So, what that says to me is that I would probably that says to me is that I would probably that says to me is that I would probably go with the lower dosage, although go with the lower dosage, although go with the lower dosage, although according to examine.com, they say, according to examine.com, they say, according to examine.com, they say, quote, "These low quantities are likely quote, "These low quantities are likely quote, "These low quantities are likely attainable through raw broccoli or attainable through raw broccoli or attainable through raw broccoli or cruciferous vegetable products." So, cruciferous vegetable products." So, cruciferous vegetable products." So, that's great. What this means is that that's great. What this means is that that's great. What this means is that you don't need to supplement with you don't need to supplement with you don't need to supplement with sulforaphane if you're willing to eat sulforaphane if you're willing to eat sulforaphane if you're willing to eat raw broccoli. They're specifically raw broccoli. They're specifically raw broccoli. They're specifically saying raw broccoli saying raw broccoli saying raw broccoli or other cruciferous vegetable products, or other cruciferous vegetable products, or other cruciferous vegetable products, while higher dosages may be further while higher dosages may be further while higher dosages may be further beneficial. So, this is still a bit of a beneficial. So, this is still a bit of a beneficial. So, this is still a bit of a vague space. vague space. vague space. I realize there's some discrepancies in I realize there's some discrepancies in I realize there's some discrepancies in what I'm describing here. I said you what I'm describing here. I said you what I'm describing here. I said you could lightly cook the broccoli or could lightly cook the broccoli or could lightly cook the broccoli or cauliflower. That's my read and cauliflower. That's my read and cauliflower. That's my read and understanding of sulforaphane, that it's understanding of sulforaphane, that it's understanding of sulforaphane, that it's not broken down at low temperatures. not broken down at low temperatures. not broken down at low temperatures. But perhaps you just decide to eat it But perhaps you just decide to eat it But perhaps you just decide to eat it raw if you can bear it. I can't, so I raw if you can bear it. I can't, so I raw if you can bear it. I can't, so I don't. You could supplement it if you don't. You could supplement it if you don't. You could supplement it if you choose. What dosage? Well, that depends choose. What dosage? Well, that depends choose. What dosage? Well, that depends on your weight. And it seems that in any on your weight. And it seems that in any on your weight. And it seems that in any case, most supplements are going to more case, most supplements are going to more case, most supplements are going to more than cover the amount of sulforaphane than cover the amount of sulforaphane than cover the amount of sulforaphane that's described here translated from that's described here translated from that's described here translated from the rat studies. So, the rat studies. So, the rat studies. So, in my case, after researching this in my case, after researching this in my case, after researching this episode, I opted to start taking 50 mg, episode, I opted to start taking 50 mg, episode, I opted to start taking 50 mg, 5 0 mg of sulforaphane per day. I'm 5 0 mg of sulforaphane per day. I'm 5 0 mg of sulforaphane per day. I'm going to see how that goes. going to see how that goes. going to see how that goes. Uh I guess it's fair to say that I'm Uh I guess it's fair to say that I'm Uh I guess it's fair to say that I'm sufficiently about uh microplastics and sufficiently about uh microplastics and sufficiently about uh microplastics and nanoplastics given that I'm 49 years nanoplastics given that I'm 49 years nanoplastics given that I'm 49 years old. All my biomarkers seem fine, but old. All my biomarkers seem fine, but old. All my biomarkers seem fine, but hey, I'm always interested in doing hey, I'm always interested in doing hey, I'm always interested in doing something for my health or to promote my something for my health or to promote my something for my health or to promote my health that is if I can. And it's pretty health that is if I can. And it's pretty health that is if I can. And it's pretty clear to me that if one's thinking about clear to me that if one's thinking about clear to me that if one's thinking about liver control detoxification both for liver control detoxification both for liver control detoxification both for sake of offsetting or removing sake of offsetting or removing sake of offsetting or removing BPAs, BPSs, but also other potentially BPAs, BPSs, but also other potentially BPAs, BPSs, but also other potentially toxic metabolites from microplastics, toxic metabolites from microplastics, toxic metabolites from microplastics, nanoplastics, and other environmental nanoplastics, and other environmental nanoplastics, and other environmental factors, that taking 50 mg of factors, that taking 50 mg of factors, that taking 50 mg of sulforaphane per day sulforaphane per day sulforaphane per day perhaps can be beneficial. So, I don't perhaps can be beneficial. So, I don't perhaps can be beneficial. So, I don't think it's necessary for everybody. In think it's necessary for everybody. In think it's necessary for everybody. In fact, I think everybody should probably fact, I think everybody should probably fact, I think everybody should probably be getting some cruciferous vegetables be getting some cruciferous vegetables be getting some cruciferous vegetables in their diet anyway. At least once a in their diet anyway. At least once a in their diet anyway. At least once a week or a couple times a week. So, if week or a couple times a week. So, if week or a couple times a week. So, if you're not interested in supplementing, you're not interested in supplementing, you're not interested in supplementing, that would be the route to go. If if you that would be the route to go. If if you that would be the route to go. If if you are interested in supplementing, I'll are interested in supplementing, I'll are interested in supplementing, I'll provide a link to this particular provide a link to this particular provide a link to this particular location in the examine.com page so that location in the examine.com page so that location in the examine.com page so that you can translate some of these dosages you can translate some of these dosages you can translate some of these dosages to your potential sources of to your potential sources of to your potential sources of supplemental forms of sulforaphane. The supplemental forms of sulforaphane. The supplemental forms of sulforaphane. The other way that microplastics and other way that microplastics and other way that microplastics and nanoplastics can be excreted from the nanoplastics can be excreted from the nanoplastics can be excreted from the body is in the bowel. body is in the bowel. body is in the bowel. And one way to potentially increase the And one way to potentially increase the And one way to potentially increase the amount of microplastics, nanoplastics, amount of microplastics, nanoplastics, amount of microplastics, nanoplastics, BPAs, BPSs, phthalates, and forever BPAs, BPSs, phthalates, and forever BPAs, BPSs, phthalates, and forever chemicals, those PFASs, chemicals, those PFASs, chemicals, those PFASs, from your body is to make sure that from your body is to make sure that from your body is to make sure that you're getting enough dietary fiber. you're getting enough dietary fiber. you're getting enough dietary fiber. Now, most people can do that simply by Now, most people can do that simply by Now, most people can do that simply by eating a fair amount of fruits and eating a fair amount of fruits and eating a fair amount of fruits and vegetables, which I always make a point vegetables, which I always make a point vegetables, which I always make a point to do. I also ingest starches. Okay, so to do. I also ingest starches. Okay, so to do. I also ingest starches. Okay, so I'm not pure carnivore. I eat things I'm not pure carnivore. I eat things I'm not pure carnivore. I eat things like rice, like oatmeal. I like fresh like rice, like oatmeal. I like fresh like rice, like oatmeal. I like fresh pastas, although it's mainly rice and pastas, although it's mainly rice and pastas, although it's mainly rice and oatmeal for me these days in terms of oatmeal for me these days in terms of oatmeal for me these days in terms of starches. Plenty of fruits and vegetables, that's Plenty of fruits and vegetables, that's Plenty of fruits and vegetables, that's something that I just really make it a something that I just really make it a something that I just really make it a point to do. Why is fiber good at doing point to do. Why is fiber good at doing point to do. Why is fiber good at doing this? Well, it can bind lipophilic this? Well, it can bind lipophilic this? Well, it can bind lipophilic molecules. Okay, it can bind molecules molecules. Okay, it can bind molecules molecules. Okay, it can bind molecules that are able to cross cell membranes. that are able to cross cell membranes. that are able to cross cell membranes. And earlier we were talking about the And earlier we were talking about the And earlier we were talking about the fact that BPA and BP S's fact that BPA and BP S's fact that BPA and BP S's mimic estrogen and combine estrogen mimic estrogen and combine estrogen mimic estrogen and combine estrogen receptors and potentially to androgen receptors and potentially to androgen receptors and potentially to androgen receptors as well. receptors as well. receptors as well. Keep in mind that one of the reasons why Keep in mind that one of the reasons why Keep in mind that one of the reasons why those so-called steroid hormone those so-called steroid hormone those so-called steroid hormone pathways, I know people hear the word pathways, I know people hear the word pathways, I know people hear the word steroid and they think steroid and they think steroid and they think performance-enhancing steroids, but no. performance-enhancing steroids, but no. performance-enhancing steroids, but no. Turns out that testosterone and estrogen Turns out that testosterone and estrogen Turns out that testosterone and estrogen are both steroid hormones. are both steroid hormones. are both steroid hormones. One of the reasons those are interesting One of the reasons those are interesting One of the reasons those are interesting is that because of their structure, is that because of their structure, is that because of their structure, they're able to bind cell surface they're able to bind cell surface they're able to bind cell surface receptors and have effects on those receptors and have effects on those receptors and have effects on those cells. They are also able to pass cells. They are also able to pass cells. They are also able to pass through, okay, the hormones, okay, here through, okay, the hormones, okay, here through, okay, the hormones, okay, here I'm not talking about BP A's and BP S's, I'm not talking about BP A's and BP S's, I'm not talking about BP A's and BP S's, but the hormones testosterone and but the hormones testosterone and but the hormones testosterone and estrogen can actually get to the nucleus estrogen can actually get to the nucleus estrogen can actually get to the nucleus of cells of cells of cells and can and can and can control gene expression. These steroid control gene expression. These steroid control gene expression. These steroid hormones, testosterone and estrogen, hormones, testosterone and estrogen, hormones, testosterone and estrogen, work in a very coordinated fashion to work in a very coordinated fashion to work in a very coordinated fashion to create what we call secondary sex create what we call secondary sex create what we call secondary sex characteristics, which are the characteristics, which are the characteristics, which are the characteristics of the external body and characteristics of the external body and characteristics of the external body and brain changes and brain changes and brain changes and internal changes all over the place, internal changes all over the place, internal changes all over the place, right? Ovaries, testes, et cetera, that right? Ovaries, testes, et cetera, that right? Ovaries, testes, et cetera, that are what underlie what we call puberty. are what underlie what we call puberty. are what underlie what we call puberty. And that's because these molecules can And that's because these molecules can And that's because these molecules can actually control gene expression. So, actually control gene expression. So, actually control gene expression. So, when we talk about these molecules like when we talk about these molecules like when we talk about these molecules like BP A's and BP S's impacting these BP A's and BP S's impacting these BP A's and BP S's impacting these pathways like estrogen and androgen pathways like estrogen and androgen pathways like estrogen and androgen pathways, this is serious stuff because pathways, this is serious stuff because pathways, this is serious stuff because what you're doing is you're potentially what you're doing is you're potentially what you're doing is you're potentially activating or blocking pathways that are activating or blocking pathways that are activating or blocking pathways that are involved not just in the function of involved not just in the function of involved not just in the function of those cells, but actually the genes that those cells, but actually the genes that those cells, but actually the genes that those particular cells express. And this those particular cells express. And this those particular cells express. And this is particularly concerning for any kind is particularly concerning for any kind is particularly concerning for any kind of hormone-dependent cancers, right? of hormone-dependent cancers, right? of hormone-dependent cancers, right? It's perhaps not surprising to you based It's perhaps not surprising to you based It's perhaps not surprising to you based on what you now know about how hormones on what you now know about how hormones on what you now know about how hormones work with gene expression, etc., that work with gene expression, etc., that work with gene expression, etc., that many tissues that turnover cells a lot, many tissues that turnover cells a lot, many tissues that turnover cells a lot, such as the testes, right? Producing such as the testes, right? Producing such as the testes, right? Producing sperm, pretty much throughout the lifespan. pretty much throughout the lifespan. pretty much throughout the lifespan. The follicle and eggs, The follicle and eggs, The follicle and eggs, right? Breast tissue, right? These are right? Breast tissue, right? These are right? Breast tissue, right? These are common sites of cancer. Okay, there are common sites of cancer. Okay, there are common sites of cancer. Okay, there are other cancers that can form, of course, other cancers that can form, of course, other cancers that can form, of course, in other tissues like the pancreas and in other tissues like the pancreas and in other tissues like the pancreas and brain, etc., but tissues that turnover brain, etc., but tissues that turnover brain, etc., but tissues that turnover quite a bit because of the involvement quite a bit because of the involvement quite a bit because of the involvement of the cell cycle and because cancer is, of the cell cycle and because cancer is, of the cell cycle and because cancer is, among other things, a dysregulation of among other things, a dysregulation of among other things, a dysregulation of the cell cycle and an overproduction of the cell cycle and an overproduction of the cell cycle and an overproduction of cells that we call tumors, cells that we call tumors, cells that we call tumors, those are pathways that are particularly those are pathways that are particularly those are pathways that are particularly vulnerable to endocrine or hormone vulnerable to endocrine or hormone vulnerable to endocrine or hormone disruption. And this is why there's disruption. And this is why there's disruption. And this is why there's additional concern about microplastics additional concern about microplastics additional concern about microplastics and nanoplastics perhaps increasing and nanoplastics perhaps increasing and nanoplastics perhaps increasing cancer rates in particular in tissues cancer rates in particular in tissues cancer rates in particular in tissues like the ovary, in particular like the ovary, in particular like the ovary, in particular the testes, in particular any tissue the testes, in particular any tissue the testes, in particular any tissue where there's a lot of cellular where there's a lot of cellular where there's a lot of cellular turnover. So, the point here is that turnover. So, the point here is that turnover. So, the point here is that eating broccoli, eating cauliflower, eating broccoli, eating cauliflower, eating broccoli, eating cauliflower, potentially supplementing with potentially supplementing with potentially supplementing with sulforaphane, here I'm summarizing a bit sulforaphane, here I'm summarizing a bit sulforaphane, here I'm summarizing a bit what I talked about earlier, avoiding what I talked about earlier, avoiding what I talked about earlier, avoiding drinking water from plastic bottles, drinking water from plastic bottles, drinking water from plastic bottles, maybe getting a reverse osmosis filter, maybe getting a reverse osmosis filter, maybe getting a reverse osmosis filter, avoiding those avoiding those avoiding those diabolical canned soups. I had no idea diabolical canned soups. I had no idea diabolical canned soups. I had no idea about these canned soups, or ensuring about these canned soups, or ensuring about these canned soups, or ensuring that the canned soups that you're eating that the canned soups that you're eating that the canned soups that you're eating are safe in the ways that we discussed are safe in the ways that we discussed are safe in the ways that we discussed earlier, avoiding sea salts, avoiding earlier, avoiding sea salts, avoiding earlier, avoiding sea salts, avoiding I'm throwing a few other things in here I'm throwing a few other things in here I'm throwing a few other things in here that I haven't mentioned yet, avoiding that I haven't mentioned yet, avoiding that I haven't mentioned yet, avoiding nonstick pans, trying to cook mainly nonstick pans, trying to cook mainly nonstick pans, trying to cook mainly with cast iron or ceramic, and making with cast iron or ceramic, and making with cast iron or ceramic, and making sure that those are BPA, BPS, sure that those are BPA, BPS, sure that those are BPA, BPS, and PFAS free. Just look at the and PFAS free. Just look at the and PFAS free. Just look at the packaging, do a little bit of homework packaging, do a little bit of homework packaging, do a little bit of homework there. And get this one. This is a there. And get this one. This is a there. And get this one. This is a really surprising one, or at least was really surprising one, or at least was really surprising one, or at least was surprising to me. surprising to me. surprising to me. Carbonated water, okay? Mineral waters. Carbonated water, okay? Mineral waters. Carbonated water, okay? Mineral waters. A few years ago, there was an analysis A few years ago, there was an analysis A few years ago, there was an analysis of different popular forms of carbonated of different popular forms of carbonated of different popular forms of carbonated water, which is sold in glass water, which is sold in glass water, which is sold in glass containers, okay? It turned out that containers, okay? It turned out that containers, okay? It turned out that Topo Chico, which I happened, past Topo Chico, which I happened, past Topo Chico, which I happened, past tense, happened to love, Topo Chico tense, happened to love, Topo Chico tense, happened to love, Topo Chico had 9.76 had 9.76 had 9.76 particles per trillion of these PFAS, particles per trillion of these PFAS, particles per trillion of these PFAS, these forever chemicals, okay? That was these forever chemicals, okay? That was these forever chemicals, okay? That was an analysis done in 2020. an analysis done in 2020. an analysis done in 2020. Perrier, 1.1. Perrier, 1.1. Perrier, 1.1. San Pellegrino, 0.31. San Pellegrino, 0.31. San Pellegrino, 0.31. So, we're comparing 9.76 So, we're comparing 9.76 So, we're comparing 9.76 versus 1.1 versus 0.31, which tells me versus 1.1 versus 0.31, which tells me versus 1.1 versus 0.31, which tells me I'm avoiding Topo Chico. I'm avoiding Topo Chico. I'm avoiding Topo Chico. I might even avoid Perrier. I might even avoid Perrier. I might even avoid Perrier. I'll probably drink San Pellegrino. I'll probably drink San Pellegrino. I'll probably drink San Pellegrino. I'll probably buy a Perrier drink a I'll probably buy a Perrier drink a I'll probably buy a Perrier drink a Perrier every once in a while. I'm not Perrier every once in a while. I'm not Perrier every once in a while. I'm not crazy about carbonated water. By the crazy about carbonated water. By the crazy about carbonated water. By the way, this was an analysis by Consumer way, this was an analysis by Consumer way, this was an analysis by Consumer Reports, and it caught some attention, Reports, and it caught some attention, Reports, and it caught some attention, such that the Coca-Cola company, which such that the Coca-Cola company, which such that the Coca-Cola company, which makes Topo Chico, said that they were makes Topo Chico, said that they were makes Topo Chico, said that they were going to fix this problem, and they going to fix this problem, and they going to fix this problem, and they claimed, okay, I don't know if they've claimed, okay, I don't know if they've claimed, okay, I don't know if they've done this, all right? I don't want to done this, all right? I don't want to done this, all right? I don't want to get the folks at Coca-Cola angry with get the folks at Coca-Cola angry with get the folks at Coca-Cola angry with me. Coca-Cola claimed that by 2023, they me. Coca-Cola claimed that by 2023, they me. Coca-Cola claimed that by 2023, they were going to cut the amount of these were going to cut the amount of these were going to cut the amount of these particles in half, but that would still particles in half, but that would still particles in half, but that would still make them 4.5 parts per trillion, still make them 4.5 parts per trillion, still make them 4.5 parts per trillion, still much higher, at least four times higher much higher, at least four times higher much higher, at least four times higher than any of the other brands. So, I have than any of the other brands. So, I have than any of the other brands. So, I have to be direct. I'm just speaking for my to be direct. I'm just speaking for my to be direct. I'm just speaking for my own experience and choices. own experience and choices. own experience and choices. Until I see data that Topo Chico has Until I see data that Topo Chico has Until I see data that Topo Chico has reduced the amount of these foreign reduced the amount of these foreign reduced the amount of these foreign contaminants to basically less than contaminants to basically less than contaminants to basically less than 0.31, I'm going with San Pellegrino or 0.31, I'm going with San Pellegrino or 0.31, I'm going with San Pellegrino or Perrier. Okay, I don't tend to drink a Perrier. Okay, I don't tend to drink a Perrier. Okay, I don't tend to drink a lot of mineral water, but given that lot of mineral water, but given that lot of mineral water, but given that you're ordering it in the glass, in a you're ordering it in the glass, in a you're ordering it in the glass, in a glass container that is, given that glass container that is, given that glass container that is, given that these things are not particularly cheap, these things are not particularly cheap, these things are not particularly cheap, all right? And that you have choices. all right? And that you have choices. all right? And that you have choices. You could either decide to avoid You could either decide to avoid You could either decide to avoid carbonated water altogether, or carbonated water altogether, or carbonated water altogether, or if you're going to be smart about it, if you're going to be smart about it, if you're going to be smart about it, you probably want to avoid the ones that you probably want to avoid the ones that you probably want to avoid the ones that contain more of these foreign contain more of these foreign contain more of these foreign contaminants because of their ability to contaminants because of their ability to contaminants because of their ability to get lodged in different tissues in your get lodged in different tissues in your get lodged in different tissues in your body. So, that was very surprising to me body. So, that was very surprising to me body. So, that was very surprising to me that you would have these forever that you would have these forever that you would have these forever chemicals in carbonated water. What it chemicals in carbonated water. What it chemicals in carbonated water. What it tells us is that tells us is that tells us is that the water going into those products the water going into those products the water going into those products contains either microplastics, contains either microplastics, contains either microplastics, nanoplastics, PFAS is other sources or something. And PFAS is other sources or something. And PFAS is other sources or something. And so, I think that we should all be aware so, I think that we should all be aware so, I think that we should all be aware of this. If you're going to drink of this. If you're going to drink of this. If you're going to drink carbonated water, probably go going with carbonated water, probably go going with carbonated water, probably go going with a Perrier or San Pellegrino would be a Perrier or San Pellegrino would be a Perrier or San Pellegrino would be better than going with Topo Chico better than going with Topo Chico better than going with Topo Chico because even though they've halved the because even though they've halved the because even though they've halved the amount of these forever chemicals in amount of these forever chemicals in amount of these forever chemicals in there, it's still quite high. there, it's still quite high. there, it's still quite high. Okay, so I've mentioned some to-dos Okay, so I've mentioned some to-dos Okay, so I've mentioned some to-dos to reduce your microplastic, to reduce your microplastic, to reduce your microplastic, nanoplastic, BPA, BPS, and Pfas exposure nanoplastic, BPA, BPS, and Pfas exposure nanoplastic, BPA, BPS, and Pfas exposure such as ingesting cruciferous such as ingesting cruciferous such as ingesting cruciferous vegetables, potentially supplementing vegetables, potentially supplementing vegetables, potentially supplementing with sulforaphane, trying to avoid with sulforaphane, trying to avoid with sulforaphane, trying to avoid drinking out of plastic water bottles. drinking out of plastic water bottles. drinking out of plastic water bottles. There are a few other things There are a few other things There are a few other things I'll just list off here to keep it I'll just list off here to keep it I'll just list off here to keep it relatively short. relatively short. relatively short. Talked about making sure you're getting Talked about making sure you're getting Talked about making sure you're getting enough dietary fiber. enough dietary fiber. enough dietary fiber. I talked before about using a glass or I talked before about using a glass or I talked before about using a glass or steel vessel and reverse osmosis water, steel vessel and reverse osmosis water, steel vessel and reverse osmosis water, using Himalayan salt, avoiding sea salt. using Himalayan salt, avoiding sea salt. using Himalayan salt, avoiding sea salt. The other thing that you can do, oh, and The other thing that you can do, oh, and The other thing that you can do, oh, and I mentioned using cast iron and ceramic I mentioned using cast iron and ceramic I mentioned using cast iron and ceramic as opposed to nonstick cookware whenever as opposed to nonstick cookware whenever as opposed to nonstick cookware whenever you can. And if you're going to you can. And if you're going to you can. And if you're going to microwave food, making sure that you're microwave food, making sure that you're microwave food, making sure that you're doing that on plates or in containers doing that on plates or in containers doing that on plates or in containers that does not or do not contain plastic that does not or do not contain plastic that does not or do not contain plastic of any kind, even if it says microwave of any kind, even if it says microwave of any kind, even if it says microwave safe. The other thing is to sweat, okay? We The other thing is to sweat, okay? We The other thing is to sweat, okay? We vastly underestimate or vastly underestimate or vastly underestimate or downgrade the power of sweating. downgrade the power of sweating. downgrade the power of sweating. Sweating is an incredible mechanism. Sweating is an incredible mechanism. Sweating is an incredible mechanism. Now, I realize that as soon as somebody Now, I realize that as soon as somebody Now, I realize that as soon as somebody says sweating is a great way to remove says sweating is a great way to remove says sweating is a great way to remove toxins from the body, that a bunch of toxins from the body, that a bunch of toxins from the body, that a bunch of people out there get really inflamed, people out there get really inflamed, people out there get really inflamed, pun intended. pun intended. pun intended. I'm not saying that. What I am saying is I'm not saying that. What I am saying is I'm not saying that. What I am saying is that there are a number of different that there are a number of different that there are a number of different ways for ways for ways for foreign products to leave the body foreign products to leave the body foreign products to leave the body including urine, feces, but including urine, feces, but including urine, feces, but including sweat. Okay? So, I'm not saying that's sweat. Okay? So, I'm not saying that's sweat. Okay? So, I'm not saying that's going to detox you completely. That's going to detox you completely. That's going to detox you completely. That's not what I'm saying. Okay, I don't fall not what I'm saying. Okay, I don't fall not what I'm saying. Okay, I don't fall into that camp. However, there are a into that camp. However, there are a into that camp. However, there are a number of beneficial number of beneficial number of beneficial aspects to sweating. aspects to sweating. aspects to sweating. And also, there are a number of And also, there are a number of And also, there are a number of beneficial aspects to doing the things beneficial aspects to doing the things beneficial aspects to doing the things that make you sweat. So, I've done that make you sweat. So, I've done that make you sweat. So, I've done entire episodes about deliberate heat entire episodes about deliberate heat entire episodes about deliberate heat exposure, so things like sauna done exposure, so things like sauna done exposure, so things like sauna done anywhere from once a week to four times anywhere from once a week to four times anywhere from once a week to four times a week. a week. a week. Pretty impressive data in terms of Pretty impressive data in terms of Pretty impressive data in terms of reducing all-cause mortality, improving reducing all-cause mortality, improving reducing all-cause mortality, improving cardiovascular function. It's also for cardiovascular function. It's also for cardiovascular function. It's also for most people pretty pleasant to sit in a most people pretty pleasant to sit in a most people pretty pleasant to sit in a sauna. If you don't have access to a sauna. If you don't have access to a sauna. If you don't have access to a sauna, taking a hot bath, not so hot sauna, taking a hot bath, not so hot sauna, taking a hot bath, not so hot that you burn yourself, but a hot bath, that you burn yourself, but a hot bath, that you burn yourself, but a hot bath, that also will activate some of these that also will activate some of these that also will activate some of these same pathways. same pathways. same pathways. Things like hot yoga, things like going Things like hot yoga, things like going Things like hot yoga, things like going out for a run in a hoodie. out for a run in a hoodie. out for a run in a hoodie. Trying to get your body to sweat pretty Trying to get your body to sweat pretty Trying to get your body to sweat pretty robustly once a week is a good idea for robustly once a week is a good idea for robustly once a week is a good idea for all sorts of reasons. Also, just your all sorts of reasons. Also, just your all sorts of reasons. Also, just your ability to thermoregulate. By the way, ability to thermoregulate. By the way, ability to thermoregulate. By the way, for those of you that don't sweat much, for those of you that don't sweat much, for those of you that don't sweat much, sweating is actually something that you sweating is actually something that you sweating is actually something that you can get better at. That's right. You can get better at. That's right. You can get better at. That's right. You can get better at sweating by what? By get better at sweating by what? By get better at sweating by what? By sweating, by exposing yourself in safe sweating, by exposing yourself in safe sweating, by exposing yourself in safe ways to heat. And I talk about that in ways to heat. And I talk about that in ways to heat. And I talk about that in the deliberate heat exposure episode. We the deliberate heat exposure episode. We the deliberate heat exposure episode. We also have a newsletter on deliberate also have a newsletter on deliberate also have a newsletter on deliberate heat exposure. I'll put links to those heat exposure. I'll put links to those heat exposure. I'll put links to those in the show note captions. in the show note captions. in the show note captions. And those explain safe ways And those explain safe ways And those explain safe ways uh to encourage sweating. uh to encourage sweating. uh to encourage sweating. Why am I talking about this? Well, Why am I talking about this? Well, Why am I talking about this? Well, sweating may help remove some of the sweating may help remove some of the sweating may help remove some of the things that are attached to things that are attached to things that are attached to microplastics and nanoplastics that can microplastics and nanoplastics that can microplastics and nanoplastics that can act as endocrine disruptors. act as endocrine disruptors. act as endocrine disruptors. It's very, very unlikely that the It's very, very unlikely that the It's very, very unlikely that the microplastics and nanoplastics would microplastics and nanoplastics would microplastics and nanoplastics would actually be removed as whole particles actually be removed as whole particles actually be removed as whole particles in sweat. I think that's very unlikely, in sweat. I think that's very unlikely, in sweat. I think that's very unlikely, frankly. What's more likely is that the What's more likely is that the What's more likely is that the microplastics and nanoplastics aren't microplastics and nanoplastics aren't microplastics and nanoplastics aren't really getting removed from or broken really getting removed from or broken really getting removed from or broken down within our body at all. They're down within our body at all. They're down within our body at all. They're getting lodged in these different getting lodged in these different getting lodged in these different tissues, but the stuff that's on them tissues, but the stuff that's on them tissues, but the stuff that's on them and in them is potentially causing some and in them is potentially causing some and in them is potentially causing some of the biological harms that we've of the biological harms that we've of the biological harms that we've talked about. And so, removing those talked about. And so, removing those talked about. And so, removing those more robustly is what sweating is about. more robustly is what sweating is about. more robustly is what sweating is about. It's what consuming cruciferous It's what consuming cruciferous It's what consuming cruciferous vegetables is about, and so on and so vegetables is about, and so on and so vegetables is about, and so on and so forth. So, those are a few more to-dos. forth. So, those are a few more to-dos. forth. So, those are a few more to-dos. The other two don'ts, or I should say The other two don'ts, or I should say The other two don'ts, or I should say don'ts, are things like avoiding consumption of are things like avoiding consumption of are things like avoiding consumption of packaged food or food that's packaged in packaged food or food that's packaged in packaged food or food that's packaged in plastic. Now, this is tough to do. You plastic. Now, this is tough to do. You plastic. Now, this is tough to do. You know, I love berries, for instance. I know, I love berries, for instance. I know, I love berries, for instance. I love blueberries. I'm what you call a love blueberries. I'm what you call a love blueberries. I'm what you call a drive-by blueberry eater. If there's drive-by blueberry eater. If there's drive-by blueberry eater. If there's blueberries in a bowl, I just kind of blueberries in a bowl, I just kind of blueberries in a bowl, I just kind of like sweep them up like by the fistful. like sweep them up like by the fistful. like sweep them up like by the fistful. So, if there are blueberries on the So, if there are blueberries on the So, if there are blueberries on the counter, you're probably not getting counter, you're probably not getting counter, you're probably not getting very many. very many. very many. Um I'm getting most of them. Um I'm getting most of them. Um I'm getting most of them. I love blueberries, but I noticed that I love blueberries, but I noticed that I love blueberries, but I noticed that I was starting to accumulate, and of was starting to accumulate, and of was starting to accumulate, and of course I recycle those blueberry course I recycle those blueberry course I recycle those blueberry containers that are those plastic containers that are those plastic containers that are those plastic containers. One way that you can avoid plastic One way that you can avoid plastic One way that you can avoid plastic packaging is packaging is packaging is go to farmers markets, bring your own go to farmers markets, bring your own go to farmers markets, bring your own bags, bring your own baskets. I love bags, bring your own baskets. I love bags, bring your own baskets. I love that at the farmers markets they have that at the farmers markets they have that at the farmers markets they have those cardboard containers. Of course, those cardboard containers. Of course, those cardboard containers. Of course, some of you may be shouting, "Wait, but some of you may be shouting, "Wait, but some of you may be shouting, "Wait, but those are colored green, and the those are colored green, and the those are colored green, and the coloration is a problem, and they have coloration is a problem, and they have coloration is a problem, and they have the microfibers with the Yeah, true, but the microfibers with the Yeah, true, but the microfibers with the Yeah, true, but probably better than plastic containers probably better than plastic containers probably better than plastic containers that they use now in the grocery store that they use now in the grocery store that they use now in the grocery store for pretty much every fruit and for pretty much every fruit and for pretty much every fruit and vegetable. Okay, so solution is either vegetable. Okay, so solution is either vegetable. Okay, so solution is either farmers markets or trying to bring your farmers markets or trying to bring your farmers markets or trying to bring your own bags to the grocery store. I know own bags to the grocery store. I know own bags to the grocery store. I know this is starting to sound kind of, you this is starting to sound kind of, you this is starting to sound kind of, you know, hippie-dippy, but you know, these know, hippie-dippy, but you know, these know, hippie-dippy, but you know, these little things make a big difference over little things make a big difference over little things make a big difference over time. You're reducing your plastic time. You're reducing your plastic time. You're reducing your plastic waste. You're reducing the amount of waste. You're reducing the amount of waste. You're reducing the amount of plastic exposure of the fruits and plastic exposure of the fruits and plastic exposure of the fruits and vegetables you eat. This can correspond vegetables you eat. This can correspond vegetables you eat. This can correspond to a real difference in the number of to a real difference in the number of to a real difference in the number of microplastics and nanoplastics and the microplastics and nanoplastics and the microplastics and nanoplastics and the bad stuff that comes with them that you bad stuff that comes with them that you bad stuff that comes with them that you ingest. And again, ingest. And again, ingest. And again, most of the time these things are going most of the time these things are going most of the time these things are going to save you cost as opposed to introduce to save you cost as opposed to introduce to save you cost as opposed to introduce new costs. The other don'ts that we new costs. The other don'ts that we new costs. The other don'ts that we haven't talked so much about haven't talked so much about haven't talked so much about are to reduce are to reduce are to reduce the number of clothes that you purchase. the number of clothes that you purchase. the number of clothes that you purchase. I know this might seem like, "Oh my god, I know this might seem like, "Oh my god, I know this might seem like, "Oh my god, where where's this all going?" But it where where's this all going?" But it where where's this all going?" But it turns out that one of the major sources turns out that one of the major sources turns out that one of the major sources of microplastics and nanoplastics are of microplastics and nanoplastics are of microplastics and nanoplastics are the microfibers on clothing that come the microfibers on clothing that come the microfibers on clothing that come off in washing machines that then get off in washing machines that then get off in washing machines that then get distributed into the oceans through the distributed into the oceans through the distributed into the oceans through the water or that get escape into the air. There are that get escape into the air. There are that get escape into the air. There are a number of ways that you can trap a number of ways that you can trap a number of ways that you can trap those. There are the things like the those. There are the things like the those. There are the things like the Guppy Bag that you can I love the name, Guppy Bag that you can I love the name, Guppy Bag that you can I love the name, the Guppy Bag that you can buy at pretty the Guppy Bag that you can buy at pretty the Guppy Bag that you can buy at pretty low cost. You'll find those easily low cost. You'll find those easily low cost. You'll find those easily online that will trap some of that online that will trap some of that online that will trap some of that stuff. There are filters that you can stuff. There are filters that you can stuff. There are filters that you can put within specific washing machines. put within specific washing machines. put within specific washing machines. Some places actually require this now Some places actually require this now Some places actually require this now that capture those microfibers. These that capture those microfibers. These that capture those microfibers. These microfibers, when I first heard about microfibers, when I first heard about microfibers, when I first heard about them, I thought, "Oh goodness, are we them, I thought, "Oh goodness, are we them, I thought, "Oh goodness, are we really talking about microfibers in really talking about microfibers in really talking about microfibers in clothing? Well, I'll just I don't know, clothing? Well, I'll just I don't know, clothing? Well, I'll just I don't know, wear 100% cotton clothing. But then you wear 100% cotton clothing. But then you wear 100% cotton clothing. But then you find out, because I read this book, this find out, because I read this book, this find out, because I read this book, this um scary book and it and it was scary. um scary book and it and it was scary. um scary book and it and it was scary. It does kind of bum me out when you It does kind of bum me out when you It does kind of bum me out when you start reading this stuff that start reading this stuff that start reading this stuff that when you read a poison like no other, when you read a poison like no other, when you read a poison like no other, how microplastics corrupted our planet how microplastics corrupted our planet how microplastics corrupted our planet and our bodies, you find out that so and our bodies, you find out that so and our bodies, you find out that so much of the waste that exists in much of the waste that exists in much of the waste that exists in landfills is clothing that people have landfills is clothing that people have landfills is clothing that people have discarded and there was nothing wrong discarded and there was nothing wrong discarded and there was nothing wrong with that clothing. The clothing has with that clothing. The clothing has with that clothing. The clothing has dyes, it has little microfibers, the dyes, it has little microfibers, the dyes, it has little microfibers, the stuff gets into the environment, gets stuff gets into the environment, gets stuff gets into the environment, gets into the oceans. into the oceans. into the oceans. Here's the simple solution to all this. Here's the simple solution to all this. Here's the simple solution to all this. It turns out that we replace far more It turns out that we replace far more It turns out that we replace far more clothing than we need to. Okay, this is clothing than we need to. Okay, this is clothing than we need to. Okay, this is actually a great relief to me because I actually a great relief to me because I actually a great relief to me because I love few things more in terms of clothing, few things more in terms of clothing, few things more in terms of clothing, anyway, the feeling of a t-shirt that anyway, the feeling of a t-shirt that anyway, the feeling of a t-shirt that I've worn many, many times and it's I've worn many, many times and it's I've worn many, many times and it's really, really soft and kind of worn really, really soft and kind of worn really, really soft and kind of worn down, that kind of distressed look down, that kind of distressed look down, that kind of distressed look t-shirt. Even though that might be t-shirt. Even though that might be t-shirt. Even though that might be fashionable to some people, to some fashionable to some people, to some fashionable to some people, to some people it's not, I love the feeling of a people it's not, I love the feeling of a people it's not, I love the feeling of a really worn down, soft t-shirt. really worn down, soft t-shirt. really worn down, soft t-shirt. Even the ones that have a little bit of, Even the ones that have a little bit of, Even the ones that have a little bit of, you know, sort of uh jagged toothing you know, sort of uh jagged toothing you know, sort of uh jagged toothing along the collar. along the collar. along the collar. Now, some people might loathe that. They Now, some people might loathe that. They Now, some people might loathe that. They only want the pristine t-shirt that, you only want the pristine t-shirt that, you only want the pristine t-shirt that, you know, is super crisp. That's not me. I know, is super crisp. That's not me. I know, is super crisp. That's not me. I know I own a few of these uh black know I own a few of these uh black know I own a few of these uh black button-down shirts and indeed the same button-down shirts and indeed the same button-down shirts and indeed the same ones, I use them over and over again. I ones, I use them over and over again. I ones, I use them over and over again. I do own a fair number of them, but I use do own a fair number of them, but I use do own a fair number of them, but I use the same ones over and over again. And I the same ones over and over again. And I the same ones over and over again. And I think that's in keeping with this other think that's in keeping with this other think that's in keeping with this other recommendation, which this book, A recommendation, which this book, A recommendation, which this book, A Poison Like No Other, said could make a Poison Like No Other, said could make a Poison Like No Other, said could make a major dent in the amount of major dent in the amount of major dent in the amount of microplastics and nanoplastics that are microplastics and nanoplastics that are microplastics and nanoplastics that are out there in the environment and that we out there in the environment and that we out there in the environment and that we end up ingesting and that the other end up ingesting and that the other end up ingesting and that the other animals on the planet, who are so very animals on the planet, who are so very animals on the planet, who are so very important, end up ingesting and important, end up ingesting and important, end up ingesting and potentially suffering from. And that's potentially suffering from. And that's potentially suffering from. And that's to simply to simply to simply not buy or replace so much of our not buy or replace so much of our not buy or replace so much of our clothing, but to reuse our clothing. clothing, but to reuse our clothing. clothing, but to reuse our clothing. Now, the argument has been made and they Now, the argument has been made and they Now, the argument has been made and they counter it in the book, well, then counter it in the book, well, then counter it in the book, well, then you're just going to wash the same you're just going to wash the same you're just going to wash the same clothing over and over, you're going to clothing over and over, you're going to clothing over and over, you're going to break down those microfibers and break down those microfibers and break down those microfibers and introduce those dyes and things into the introduce those dyes and things into the introduce those dyes and things into the ocean, etc., into the air. ocean, etc., into the air. ocean, etc., into the air. But it turns out that when you reuse the But it turns out that when you reuse the But it turns out that when you reuse the same clothing and wash it over and over same clothing and wash it over and over same clothing and wash it over and over again, you actually see a diminishment again, you actually see a diminishment again, you actually see a diminishment in the amount of microfibers and the in the amount of microfibers and the in the amount of microfibers and the amount of dyes and things that you amount of dyes and things that you amount of dyes and things that you extract from those clothing over time. extract from those clothing over time. extract from those clothing over time. Okay, so now in some odd way we're Okay, so now in some odd way we're Okay, so now in some odd way we're talking about clothing purchases or talking about clothing purchases or talking about clothing purchases or non-purchases in this case on the non-purchases in this case on the non-purchases in this case on the Huberman Lab podcast, but you know, in Huberman Lab podcast, but you know, in Huberman Lab podcast, but you know, in researching this episode I discovered researching this episode I discovered researching this episode I discovered that these are a major source, if not that these are a major source, if not that these are a major source, if not the major source of microplastic and the major source of microplastic and the major source of microplastic and nanoplastic particles in the environment nanoplastic particles in the environment nanoplastic particles in the environment and landfills, ocean, air, etc. So, and landfills, ocean, air, etc. So, and landfills, ocean, air, etc. So, while none of us, I believe none of us while none of us, I believe none of us while none of us, I believe none of us are going to go out there and create a are going to go out there and create a are going to go out there and create a tire that doesn't degrade as quickly as tire that doesn't degrade as quickly as tire that doesn't degrade as quickly as current tires, right? Most of us don't current tires, right? Most of us don't current tires, right? Most of us don't have the capacity to do that. Let's face have the capacity to do that. Let's face have the capacity to do that. Let's face it. We got to get around in vehicles. All We got to get around in vehicles. All We got to get around in vehicles. All those tires breaking down, not a whole those tires breaking down, not a whole those tires breaking down, not a whole lot we can do about that. We're inhaling lot we can do about that. We're inhaling lot we can do about that. We're inhaling all that stuff, but we can make the all that stuff, but we can make the all that stuff, but we can make the decision to use the clothing that we've decision to use the clothing that we've decision to use the clothing that we've got for longer periods of time. Is it got for longer periods of time. Is it got for longer periods of time. Is it really necessary to keep buying more and really necessary to keep buying more and really necessary to keep buying more and more clothes and replacing the old more clothes and replacing the old more clothes and replacing the old clothes, throwing out the old clothes or even throwing out the old clothes or even throwing out the old clothes or even donating those old clothes? donating those old clothes? donating those old clothes? Who knows? I'm all for donating clothing Who knows? I'm all for donating clothing Who knows? I'm all for donating clothing after you're done with it, but now I after you're done with it, but now I after you're done with it, but now I have justification for just keeping the have justification for just keeping the have justification for just keeping the t-shirts that I have, making them softer t-shirts that I have, making them softer t-shirts that I have, making them softer and softer and softer over time. And I and softer and softer over time. And I and softer and softer over time. And I should mention that, of course, when you should mention that, of course, when you should mention that, of course, when you wear clothing that is shedding these wear clothing that is shedding these wear clothing that is shedding these microfiber particles, you're ingesting microfiber particles, you're ingesting microfiber particles, you're ingesting or rather you're inhaling, more or rather you're inhaling, more or rather you're inhaling, more typically, the microfibers and the typically, the microfibers and the typically, the microfibers and the microplastics and the nanoplastics and microplastics and the nanoplastics and microplastics and the nanoplastics and all the bad goodies that go with them. all the bad goodies that go with them. all the bad goodies that go with them. You know, as I say that, I think we need You know, as I say that, I think we need You know, as I say that, I think we need to be fair about what that means and to be fair about what that means and to be fair about what that means and what it doesn't mean. what it doesn't mean. what it doesn't mean. I personally just don't see myself going I personally just don't see myself going I personally just don't see myself going around and looking at labels, finding around and looking at labels, finding around and looking at labels, finding only 100% cotton with no microfiber only 100% cotton with no microfiber only 100% cotton with no microfiber shedding, no dyes, etc. I mean, there are a lot of no dyes, etc. I mean, there are a lot of no dyes, etc. I mean, there are a lot of things that are now introduced to even things that are now introduced to even things that are now introduced to even 100% cotton clothing that make them a 100% cotton clothing that make them a 100% cotton clothing that make them a little bit more water and stain little bit more water and stain little bit more water and stain resistant. It's very, very difficult to resistant. It's very, very difficult to resistant. It's very, very difficult to find such sources of clothing. All find such sources of clothing. All find such sources of clothing. All right, I know they're out there, but right, I know they're out there, but right, I know they're out there, but they're very difficult to find and they're very difficult to find and they're very difficult to find and they're quite costly in cases. If you they're quite costly in cases. If you they're quite costly in cases. If you happen to know of some true low-cost happen to know of some true low-cost happen to know of some true low-cost versions of those things, please put versions of those things, please put versions of those things, please put those in the comment section on YouTube, those in the comment section on YouTube, those in the comment section on YouTube, but I think we have to be realistic but I think we have to be realistic but I think we have to be realistic here. Plastics were introduced in the here. Plastics were introduced in the here. Plastics were introduced in the 1950s. They are everywhere. 1950s. They are everywhere. 1950s. They are everywhere. They are in our clothing. They are in They are in our clothing. They are in They are in our clothing. They are in tires. They are in medical devices. tires. They are in medical devices. tires. They are in medical devices. They're just everywhere. The point of They're just everywhere. The point of They're just everywhere. The point of this discussion today is not to try and this discussion today is not to try and this discussion today is not to try and eliminate plastics. I don't think that's eliminate plastics. I don't think that's eliminate plastics. I don't think that's reasonable. I don't even think that reasonable. I don't even think that reasonable. I don't even think that would be useful relative to the would be useful relative to the would be useful relative to the incredibly powerful use of plastics in incredibly powerful use of plastics in incredibly powerful use of plastics in just about every industry. There's just about every industry. There's just about every industry. There's always a trade-off with these sorts of always a trade-off with these sorts of always a trade-off with these sorts of things and I acknowledge that. What I'm things and I acknowledge that. What I'm things and I acknowledge that. What I'm talking about is trying to limit your talking about is trying to limit your talking about is trying to limit your exposure and trying to buffer yourself exposure and trying to buffer yourself exposure and trying to buffer yourself against this bioaccumulation against this bioaccumulation against this bioaccumulation in ways that can protect your endocrine in ways that can protect your endocrine in ways that can protect your endocrine system, protect your brain, protect your system, protect your brain, protect your system, protect your brain, protect your cardiovascular system, protect your cardiovascular system, protect your cardiovascular system, protect your liver, protect the organs and tissue liver, protect the organs and tissue liver, protect the organs and tissue systems of your body so that you can systems of your body so that you can systems of your body so that you can thrive as much as possible. So, there thrive as much as possible. So, there thrive as much as possible. So, there some other not to do's or things to some other not to do's or things to some other not to do's or things to avoid. Microwave popcorn turns out to be avoid. Microwave popcorn turns out to be avoid. Microwave popcorn turns out to be a major source of these things. a major source of these things. a major source of these things. Basically, any bag or container, can, Basically, any bag or container, can, Basically, any bag or container, can, bag, or plastic that has a lining that bag, or plastic that has a lining that bag, or plastic that has a lining that prevents oily stuff from staining it and prevents oily stuff from staining it and prevents oily stuff from staining it and getting through such as microwave getting through such as microwave getting through such as microwave popcorn very likely is a source or I popcorn very likely is a source or I popcorn very likely is a source or I should say a rich source of should say a rich source of should say a rich source of microplastics, nanoplastics, and microplastics, nanoplastics, and microplastics, nanoplastics, and endocrine disruptors. Does that mean endocrine disruptors. Does that mean endocrine disruptors. Does that mean that if you have some microwave popcorn that if you have some microwave popcorn that if you have some microwave popcorn every once in a while, that's going to every once in a while, that's going to every once in a while, that's going to screw up your estrogen or testosterone screw up your estrogen or testosterone screw up your estrogen or testosterone system and make you infertile? No, I system and make you infertile? No, I system and make you infertile? No, I don't believe that. These things are all don't believe that. These things are all don't believe that. These things are all a matter of dosage, exposure over time, a matter of dosage, exposure over time, a matter of dosage, exposure over time, and so on. and so on. and so on. Toothpaste in plastic tubing, another Toothpaste in plastic tubing, another Toothpaste in plastic tubing, another rich source of microplastics, rich source of microplastics, rich source of microplastics, nanoplastics that people ingest, of nanoplastics that people ingest, of nanoplastics that people ingest, of course, because you're putting in your course, because you're putting in your course, because you're putting in your mouth. When I did the oral health mouth. When I did the oral health mouth. When I did the oral health episode, I talked about some tooth episode, I talked about some tooth episode, I talked about some tooth tablets. I've become quite fond of tablets. I've become quite fond of tablets. I've become quite fond of these. I have no financial relationship these. I have no financial relationship these. I have no financial relationship to the company that makes these, but to the company that makes these, but to the company that makes these, but these are tooth tablets that um include these are tooth tablets that um include these are tooth tablets that um include something called hydroxyapatite, which something called hydroxyapatite, which something called hydroxyapatite, which is great for the remineralization of is great for the remineralization of is great for the remineralization of teeth cuz it turns out your teeth can teeth cuz it turns out your teeth can teeth cuz it turns out your teeth can fill in little cavities that start to fill in little cavities that start to fill in little cavities that start to form and overall tooth health. It's also form and overall tooth health. It's also form and overall tooth health. It's also great for travel cuz first of all, these great for travel cuz first of all, these great for travel cuz first of all, these things come in a glass jar, so no things come in a glass jar, so no things come in a glass jar, so no plastic. You take the tooth tablets, you plastic. You take the tooth tablets, you plastic. You take the tooth tablets, you just chew them up, and then you brush just chew them up, and then you brush just chew them up, and then you brush your teeth. Uh it's great because you your teeth. Uh it's great because you your teeth. Uh it's great because you don't have to worry about how many don't have to worry about how many don't have to worry about how many ounces is going through the ounces is going through the ounces is going through the uh you know, the screening process at uh you know, the screening process at uh you know, the screening process at the airport because it's not a liquid, the airport because it's not a liquid, the airport because it's not a liquid, it's not a paste. It's a tablet. They're it's not a paste. It's a tablet. They're it's not a paste. It's a tablet. They're super convenient. I love those. We'll super convenient. I love those. We'll super convenient. I love those. We'll provide a link to those in the show note provide a link to those in the show note provide a link to those in the show note captions even though I have no captions even though I have no captions even though I have no relationship to the company. I'm just relationship to the company. I'm just relationship to the company. I'm just big fan of that sort of thing, the big fan of that sort of thing, the big fan of that sort of thing, the convenience and the fact that it's convenience and the fact that it's convenience and the fact that it's housed in glass. housed in glass. housed in glass. But as I say all this stuff, right? But as I say all this stuff, right? But as I say all this stuff, right? Avoiding drinking out of plastic. Avoiding drinking out of plastic. Avoiding drinking out of plastic. Don't turn over your clothing so much. Don't turn over your clothing so much. Don't turn over your clothing so much. Wash your clothes, but don't Wash your clothes, but don't Wash your clothes, but don't purchase and throw away clothing too purchase and throw away clothing too purchase and throw away clothing too much or more than is necessary. Avoiding much or more than is necessary. Avoiding much or more than is necessary. Avoiding sea salt, these kinds of things. sea salt, these kinds of things. sea salt, these kinds of things. These are all just choices for you in These are all just choices for you in These are all just choices for you in the buffet of options of ways to reduce the buffet of options of ways to reduce the buffet of options of ways to reduce your microplastic nanoplastic ingestion your microplastic nanoplastic ingestion your microplastic nanoplastic ingestion and exposure and exposure and exposure and the bioaccumulation of those things and the bioaccumulation of those things and the bioaccumulation of those things over time and to increase, in the case over time and to increase, in the case over time and to increase, in the case of things like sulforaphane and of things like sulforaphane and of things like sulforaphane and sweating, etc., and to increase the sweating, etc., and to increase the sweating, etc., and to increase the detoxification and removal of some of detoxification and removal of some of detoxification and removal of some of the more harmful products attached to or the more harmful products attached to or the more harmful products attached to or within these microplastics and within these microplastics and within these microplastics and nanoplastics, right? nanoplastics, right? nanoplastics, right? I certainly don't expect anyone, I certainly don't expect anyone, I certainly don't expect anyone, including myself, to start living a life including myself, to start living a life including myself, to start living a life free of microplastics and nanoplastics. free of microplastics and nanoplastics. free of microplastics and nanoplastics. To do that, you'd probably have to leave To do that, you'd probably have to leave To do that, you'd probably have to leave planet Earth. I know certain people are planet Earth. I know certain people are planet Earth. I know certain people are developing plans to enable us to do that developing plans to enable us to do that developing plans to enable us to do that even if we're not astronauts. even if we're not astronauts. even if we're not astronauts. And frankly, when you get out to Mars or And frankly, when you get out to Mars or And frankly, when you get out to Mars or you get it into outer space, those you get it into outer space, those you get it into outer space, those microplastics and nanoplastics, based on microplastics and nanoplastics, based on microplastics and nanoplastics, based on everything I've learned and how everything I've learned and how everything I've learned and how incredibly sneaky, small, and pervasive incredibly sneaky, small, and pervasive incredibly sneaky, small, and pervasive they are, well, they're probably in they are, well, they're probably in they are, well, they're probably in outer space as well. Now, the final outer space as well. Now, the final outer space as well. Now, the final thing I want to touch on is the thing I want to touch on is the thing I want to touch on is the potential role of microplastics, potential role of microplastics, potential role of microplastics, nanoplastics, BPAs, BPSS, and forever nanoplastics, BPAs, BPSS, and forever nanoplastics, BPAs, BPSS, and forever chemicals on the developing brain. This chemicals on the developing brain. This chemicals on the developing brain. This is an area that is an area that is an area that I'm very familiar with because much of I'm very familiar with because much of I'm very familiar with because much of my career I've focused on brain my career I've focused on brain my career I've focused on brain development, neural development. And one development, neural development. And one development, neural development. And one can find a lot of papers out there can find a lot of papers out there can find a lot of papers out there about the potential neurotoxicity of about the potential neurotoxicity of about the potential neurotoxicity of micro and nanoplastics. Certainly, the micro and nanoplastics. Certainly, the micro and nanoplastics. Certainly, the established neurotoxicity of micro established neurotoxicity of micro established neurotoxicity of micro plastics and nano plastics in animal plastics and nano plastics in animal plastics and nano plastics in animal models and the potential models and the potential models and the potential neurotoxicity of those things in human neurotoxicity of those things in human neurotoxicity of those things in human tissues. Now, of course, because this animal Now, of course, because this animal Now, of course, because this animal literature and some correlative human literature and some correlative human literature and some correlative human literature have been out there for a literature have been out there for a literature have been out there for a while, the media and some people in particular the media and some people in particular the media and some people in particular have become have become have become concerned about and have mentioned the concerned about and have mentioned the concerned about and have mentioned the potential role of micro plastics and potential role of micro plastics and potential role of micro plastics and nano plastics nano plastics nano plastics and the bad goodies that attach to them and the bad goodies that attach to them and the bad goodies that attach to them or come from them or come from them or come from them in potentially causing neurodevelopmental potentially causing neurodevelopmental potentially causing neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and ADHD. I disorders such as autism and ADHD. I disorders such as autism and ADHD. I want to be very clear. I went into this want to be very clear. I went into this want to be very clear. I went into this literature. I read this review. It's a literature. I read this review. It's a literature. I read this review. It's a quite nice review. The plastic brain quite nice review. The plastic brain quite nice review. The plastic brain neurotoxicity of micro and nano plastics neurotoxicity of micro and nano plastics neurotoxicity of micro and nano plastics and sure, there's a lot of animal and sure, there's a lot of animal and sure, there's a lot of animal literature showing for instance that there's a showing for instance that there's a showing for instance that there's a disruption in certain enzymatic pathways disruption in certain enzymatic pathways disruption in certain enzymatic pathways within neurons. In particular, and this within neurons. In particular, and this within neurons. In particular, and this is the one that intrigues me the most, a is the one that intrigues me the most, a is the one that intrigues me the most, a disruption in what's called disruption in what's called disruption in what's called acetylcholinesterase. Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator involved in neuroplasticity in involved in neuroplasticity in involved in neuroplasticity in attention, among other things, levels of attention, among other things, levels of attention, among other things, levels of alertness, a number of things, including alertness, a number of things, including alertness, a number of things, including control of the so-called neuromuscular control of the so-called neuromuscular control of the so-called neuromuscular junctions that allow for us to move our junctions that allow for us to move our junctions that allow for us to move our limbs. Acetylcholinesterase is involved limbs. Acetylcholinesterase is involved limbs. Acetylcholinesterase is involved in the degradation, the breakdown of in the degradation, the breakdown of in the degradation, the breakdown of acetylcholine in the synapse. So, acetylcholine in the synapse. So, acetylcholine in the synapse. So, neurons release acetylcholine into the neurons release acetylcholine into the neurons release acetylcholine into the synapse where it can have an effect on synapse where it can have an effect on synapse where it can have an effect on muscle or can have an effect on other muscle or can have an effect on other muscle or can have an effect on other neurons if we're talking about within neurons if we're talking about within neurons if we're talking about within the brain. the brain. the brain. And indeed, And indeed, And indeed, there's a fair amount of evidence there's a fair amount of evidence there's a fair amount of evidence showing that micro plastics and nano showing that micro plastics and nano showing that micro plastics and nano plastics are correlated with reductions plastics are correlated with reductions plastics are correlated with reductions in or just changes in or just changes in or just changes in acetylcholinesterase activity. Now, it acetylcholinesterase activity. Now, it acetylcholinesterase activity. Now, it is true that where acetylcholine is true that where acetylcholine is true that where acetylcholine is released in the brain, it can impinge on released in the brain, it can impinge on released in the brain, it can impinge on dopamine circuits that are involved in dopamine circuits that are involved in dopamine circuits that are involved in reward pathways and movement, but I want reward pathways and movement, but I want reward pathways and movement, but I want to be clear. to be clear. to be clear. People have taken some of those People have taken some of those People have taken some of those findings, translated them to the findings, translated them to the findings, translated them to the correlative data in humans, and have correlative data in humans, and have correlative data in humans, and have started to link the presence of micro started to link the presence of micro started to link the presence of micro plastics and nano plastics, in their plastics and nano plastics, in their plastics and nano plastics, in their words, not mine, in their words, to words, not mine, in their words, to words, not mine, in their words, to neurodevelopmental disorders such as neurodevelopmental disorders such as neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and ADHD. And while there is some autism and ADHD. And while there is some autism and ADHD. And while there is some evidence that some of the behavioral evidence that some of the behavioral evidence that some of the behavioral components or cognitive components of autism and or cognitive components of autism and or cognitive components of autism and ADHD may increase may increase may increase in line with increases in microplastic in line with increases in microplastic in line with increases in microplastic or nanoplastic exposure, the data there or nanoplastic exposure, the data there or nanoplastic exposure, the data there are still, in my opinion, very, very are still, in my opinion, very, very are still, in my opinion, very, very weak. So, in my opinion, it's far too weak. So, in my opinion, it's far too weak. So, in my opinion, it's far too early to conclude that microplastics and early to conclude that microplastics and early to conclude that microplastics and nanoplastics have any role, and nanoplastics have any role, and nanoplastics have any role, and certainly not a causal role, certainly not a causal role, certainly not a causal role, in the development of autism or ADHD or in the development of autism or ADHD or in the development of autism or ADHD or other neurodevelopmental disorders. That other neurodevelopmental disorders. That other neurodevelopmental disorders. That said, the presence of microplastics and said, the presence of microplastics and said, the presence of microplastics and nanoplastics in placenta and in that nanoplastics in placenta and in that nanoplastics in placenta and in that first stool from babies, which shows us first stool from babies, which shows us first stool from babies, which shows us that those microplastics and that those microplastics and that those microplastics and nanoplastics are getting into the nanoplastics are getting into the nanoplastics are getting into the developing fetus, well, that does, developing fetus, well, that does, developing fetus, well, that does, I think, raise a level of concern, and I think, raise a level of concern, and I think, raise a level of concern, and it certainly should motivate pregnant it certainly should motivate pregnant it certainly should motivate pregnant women, as well as people who have women, as well as people who have women, as well as people who have newborn kids or going to have kids to newborn kids or going to have kids to newborn kids or going to have kids to look around their home environment, look around their home environment, look around their home environment, think about the things they're putting think about the things they're putting think about the things they're putting into their body or the vessels they're into their body or the vessels they're into their body or the vessels they're using to ingest liquids, to ingest using to ingest liquids, to ingest using to ingest liquids, to ingest foods, and to start limiting foods, and to start limiting foods, and to start limiting microplastic and nanoplastic exposure, microplastic and nanoplastic exposure, microplastic and nanoplastic exposure, certainly during, but also perhaps certainly during, but also perhaps certainly during, but also perhaps before pregnancy and after pregnancy before pregnancy and after pregnancy before pregnancy and after pregnancy when one is breastfeeding. when one is breastfeeding. when one is breastfeeding. So, the point here is that we can't draw So, the point here is that we can't draw So, the point here is that we can't draw a direct relationship between a direct relationship between a direct relationship between microplastics and nanoplastics and microplastics and nanoplastics and microplastics and nanoplastics and neurodevelopmental disorders. I don't neurodevelopmental disorders. I don't neurodevelopmental disorders. I don't think it would be appropriate at all to think it would be appropriate at all to think it would be appropriate at all to do that. However, given that do that. However, given that do that. However, given that microplastics and nanoplastics have microplastics and nanoplastics have microplastics and nanoplastics have these issues, both from their own these issues, both from their own these issues, both from their own breakdown, their presence, right? Their breakdown, their presence, right? Their breakdown, their presence, right? Their own structural presence can be a own structural presence can be a own structural presence can be a problem, the chemicals within them can problem, the chemicals within them can problem, the chemicals within them can be a problem, the chemicals that attach be a problem, the chemicals that attach be a problem, the chemicals that attach to them can be a problem potentially, I to them can be a problem potentially, I to them can be a problem potentially, I think learning to limit our exposure think learning to limit our exposure think learning to limit our exposure throughout our lifespan, throughout our lifespan, throughout our lifespan, learning to reduce the bioaccumulation learning to reduce the bioaccumulation learning to reduce the bioaccumulation through detoxification and excretion through detoxification and excretion through detoxification and excretion pathways, using the various approaches pathways, using the various approaches pathways, using the various approaches that we talked about, and certainly to that we talked about, and certainly to that we talked about, and certainly to pay extra attention to those things pay extra attention to those things pay extra attention to those things around the time of meaning before, around the time of meaning before, around the time of meaning before, during, and after pregnancy is during, and after pregnancy is during, and after pregnancy is especially important because we just especially important because we just especially important because we just don't know all the things that these don't know all the things that these don't know all the things that these chemicals and these plastics are doing, chemicals and these plastics are doing, chemicals and these plastics are doing, but none of them seem to be very good, but none of them seem to be very good, but none of them seem to be very good, at least not in terms of the ways that at least not in terms of the ways that at least not in terms of the ways that they impact our brain and bodily they impact our brain and bodily they impact our brain and bodily tissues. Okay, so today we've talked a tissues. Okay, so today we've talked a tissues. Okay, so today we've talked a lot about microplastics. What they are, lot about microplastics. What they are, lot about microplastics. What they are, where they're found, how they get into where they're found, how they get into where they're found, how they get into our body, where they get lodged within our body, where they get lodged within our body, where they get lodged within our body, what they potentially do in our body, what they potentially do in our body, what they potentially do in our body, none of which is good, some our body, none of which is good, some our body, none of which is good, some might be innocuous, some might be bad, might be innocuous, some might be bad, might be innocuous, some might be bad, none of which at least as far as I know none of which at least as far as I know none of which at least as far as I know is good, is good, is good, and some ways both through some to-dos and some ways both through some to-dos and some ways both through some to-dos and some to-avoids that we can increase and some to-avoids that we can increase and some to-avoids that we can increase our excretion or our breakdown and our excretion or our breakdown and our excretion or our breakdown and removal of the bad stuff on and in removal of the bad stuff on and in removal of the bad stuff on and in microplastics and nanoplastics. microplastics and nanoplastics. microplastics and nanoplastics. And I realize that even though we And I realize that even though we And I realize that even though we covered a lot of things, we also just covered a lot of things, we also just covered a lot of things, we also just scratched the surface. For instance, we scratched the surface. For instance, we scratched the surface. For instance, we know that receipts know that receipts know that receipts are rich sources of BPAs, okay? So if you rich sources of BPAs, okay? So if you rich sources of BPAs, okay? So if you are somebody who handles receipts a lot are somebody who handles receipts a lot are somebody who handles receipts a lot for your job, for your job, for your job, probably best to use nitrile gloves, probably best to use nitrile gloves, probably best to use nitrile gloves, okay? Not latex gloves, but nitrile okay? Not latex gloves, but nitrile okay? Not latex gloves, but nitrile gloves. Those are going to protect your gloves. Those are going to protect your gloves. Those are going to protect your hands. If you're somebody who purchases hands. If you're somebody who purchases hands. If you're somebody who purchases things, maybe just say, "No thanks, I'll things, maybe just say, "No thanks, I'll things, maybe just say, "No thanks, I'll take the electronic receipt." or "No take the electronic receipt." or "No take the electronic receipt." or "No receipt." Okay. However, we need to be receipt." Okay. However, we need to be receipt." Okay. However, we need to be reasonable here as well. Does this mean reasonable here as well. Does this mean reasonable here as well. Does this mean that if you touch a receipt that you're that if you touch a receipt that you're that if you touch a receipt that you're going to screw up your testosterone or going to screw up your testosterone or going to screw up your testosterone or estrogen? No. But you probably don't estrogen? No. But you probably don't estrogen? No. But you probably don't want to be rubbing those receipts, and want to be rubbing those receipts, and want to be rubbing those receipts, and it's very clear that if you use it's very clear that if you use it's very clear that if you use sunscreen or lotions of any kind on your sunscreen or lotions of any kind on your sunscreen or lotions of any kind on your hands, you handle receipts, it can hands, you handle receipts, it can hands, you handle receipts, it can increase the access of those BPAs to increase the access of those BPAs to increase the access of those BPAs to your bloodstream. And if you're somebody your bloodstream. And if you're somebody your bloodstream. And if you're somebody who handles receipts a lot, well then who handles receipts a lot, well then who handles receipts a lot, well then probably best to use those nitrile probably best to use those nitrile probably best to use those nitrile gloves. The point here is that there are gloves. The point here is that there are gloves. The point here is that there are a lot of different sources of these a lot of different sources of these a lot of different sources of these BPAs, BPSs, PFASs, BPAs, BPSs, PFASs, BPAs, BPSs, PFASs, so-called forever chemicals, so-called forever chemicals, so-called forever chemicals, microplastics, nanoplastics. I also microplastics, nanoplastics. I also microplastics, nanoplastics. I also would just encourage you to do your would just encourage you to do your would just encourage you to do your research. Look at the cans research. Look at the cans research. Look at the cans that you drink from. that you drink from. that you drink from. Ensure that they don't include BPAs. Ensure that they don't include BPAs. Ensure that they don't include BPAs. Look at the different things that you Look at the different things that you Look at the different things that you cook with in your kitchen. Try and cook with in your kitchen. Try and cook with in your kitchen. Try and cook from cast iron or ceramic, and if you from cast iron or ceramic, and if you from cast iron or ceramic, and if you don't, look at the other don't, look at the other don't, look at the other pans and cans and things in your pans and cans and things in your pans and cans and things in your environment and see what your likely environment and see what your likely environment and see what your likely exposure to these BPAs, BPSs, and exposure to these BPAs, BPSs, and exposure to these BPAs, BPSs, and forever chemicals is and make choices forever chemicals is and make choices forever chemicals is and make choices accordingly. That's what today's accordingly. That's what today's accordingly. That's what today's episode, and frankly this podcast, is episode, and frankly this podcast, is episode, and frankly this podcast, is about. It's about you being informed and about. It's about you being informed and about. It's about you being informed and making the best choices for your mental making the best choices for your mental making the best choices for your mental health and physical health. If you're health and physical health. If you're health and physical health. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a Apple, you can leave us up to a Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. Please check out the five-star review. Please check out the five-star review. Please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast, or guests or topics that the podcast, or guests or topics that the podcast, or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. If you're not already Human Body. If you're not already Human Body. If you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X platforms. So, that's Instagram, X platforms. So, that's Instagram, X formerly known as Twitter, Threads, formerly known as Twitter, Threads, formerly known as Twitter, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and platforms, I discuss science and platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which science-related tools, some of which science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the is distinct from the content on the is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media channels. If you haven't already channels. If you haven't already channels. If you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network newsletter, our Neural Network newsletter, our Neural Network newsletter, our Neural Network newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as protocols in the summaries as well as protocols in the summaries as well as protocols in the form of brief one-to-three-page PDFs. form of brief one-to-three-page PDFs. form of brief one-to-three-page PDFs. Those protocol PDFs are on things like Those protocol PDFs are on things like Those protocol PDFs are on things like neuroplasticity and learning, optimizing neuroplasticity and learning, optimizing neuroplasticity and learning, optimizing dopamine, improving your sleep, dopamine, improving your sleep, dopamine, improving your sleep, deliberate cold exposure, deliberate cold exposure, deliberate cold exposure, deliberate heat exposure. We have a foundational heat exposure. We have a foundational heat exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that describes a fitness protocol that describes a fitness protocol that describes a template routine that includes template routine that includes template routine that includes cardiovascular training and resistance cardiovascular training and resistance cardiovascular training and resistance training with sets and reps, all backed training with sets and reps, all backed training with sets and reps, all backed by science, and all of which again is by science, and all of which again is by science, and all of which again is completely zero cost. To subscribe, completely zero cost. To subscribe, completely zero cost. To subscribe, simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab up in the upper right corner, menu tab up in the upper right corner, menu tab up in the upper right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and provide scroll down to newsletter, and provide scroll down to newsletter, and provide your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about today's discussion all about today's discussion all about microplastics and nanoplastics. And microplastics and nanoplastics. And microplastics and nanoplastics. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.