Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Alex Honnold. Alex Honnold is a today is Alex Honnold. Alex Honnold is a today is Alex Honnold. Alex Honnold is a professional rock climber. He's best professional rock climber. He's best professional rock climber. He's best known for successfully free soloing, known for successfully free soloing, known for successfully free soloing, meaning climbing with no ropes or meaning climbing with no ropes or meaning climbing with no ropes or latching on of any kind, El Capitan, latching on of any kind, El Capitan, latching on of any kind, El Capitan, also called El Cap, which is a nearly also called El Cap, which is a nearly also called El Cap, which is a nearly 3,000-ft climb in Yosemite National 3,000-ft climb in Yosemite National 3,000-ft climb in Yosemite National Park. It was also, of course, the topic Park. It was also, of course, the topic Park. It was also, of course, the topic and focus of the incredible movie Free and focus of the incredible movie Free and focus of the incredible movie Free Solo, which if you haven't seen, you Solo, which if you haven't seen, you Solo, which if you haven't seen, you absolutely should watch. absolutely should watch. absolutely should watch. I've wanted to talk to Alex for a long I've wanted to talk to Alex for a long I've wanted to talk to Alex for a long time now. I'm not a rock climber. I've time now. I'm not a rock climber. I've time now. I'm not a rock climber. I've tried it a few times, but I've been tried it a few times, but I've been tried it a few times, but I've been extremely curious to understand Alex's extremely curious to understand Alex's extremely curious to understand Alex's mental frame around learning and mental frame around learning and mental frame around learning and training and his broader philosophy on training and his broader philosophy on training and his broader philosophy on life. My interest stems from the fact life. My interest stems from the fact life. My interest stems from the fact that Alex's free solo of El Cap and his that Alex's free solo of El Cap and his that Alex's free solo of El Cap and his other climbs make him one of the most other climbs make him one of the most other climbs make him one of the most accomplished and innovative athletes in accomplished and innovative athletes in accomplished and innovative athletes in all of history. And of course, the free all of history. And of course, the free all of history. And of course, the free solo of El Cap is extremely high risk solo of El Cap is extremely high risk solo of El Cap is extremely high risk and high consequence. Today, we discuss and high consequence. Today, we discuss and high consequence. Today, we discuss how to envision and make progress how to envision and make progress how to envision and make progress towards your goals and how to merge the towards your goals and how to merge the towards your goals and how to merge the demands of daily work and family life demands of daily work and family life demands of daily work and family life with incremental training for with incremental training for with incremental training for spectacularly big or long challenges of spectacularly big or long challenges of spectacularly big or long challenges of any kind. Alex makes clear that it's any kind. Alex makes clear that it's any kind. Alex makes clear that it's essential and possible to build your essential and possible to build your essential and possible to build your capacity to exert effort and how to do capacity to exert effort and how to do capacity to exert effort and how to do that in a regimented way so as to bring that in a regimented way so as to bring that in a regimented way so as to bring seemingly impossible goals within your seemingly impossible goals within your seemingly impossible goals within your reach. We also discuss how coming to reach. We also discuss how coming to reach. We also discuss how coming to terms with one's own mortality is terms with one's own mortality is terms with one's own mortality is actually one of the best motivators for actually one of the best motivators for actually one of the best motivators for building a great life and why most building a great life and why most building a great life and why most people hide from that reality and as a people hide from that reality and as a people hide from that reality and as a result, end up living much smaller lives result, end up living much smaller lives result, end up living much smaller lives than they otherwise would. We also than they otherwise would. We also than they otherwise would. We also discuss training, literally what to do discuss training, literally what to do discuss training, literally what to do to build strength and endurance, not to build strength and endurance, not to build strength and endurance, not just for sake of rock climbing, but just for sake of rock climbing, but just for sake of rock climbing, but just generally. And that takes us into generally. And that takes us into generally. And that takes us into discussions about weight training, discussions about weight training, discussions about weight training, bodyweight training, running, hiking and bodyweight training, running, hiking and bodyweight training, running, hiking and a bunch of other things that you can a bunch of other things that you can a bunch of other things that you can apply. Even if you have zero interest in apply. Even if you have zero interest in apply. Even if you have zero interest in rock climbing, today's conversation with rock climbing, today's conversation with rock climbing, today's conversation with Alex Honnold will definitely change the Alex Honnold will definitely change the Alex Honnold will definitely change the way that you think about your life, what way that you think about your life, what way that you think about your life, what you can make of it and how go about you can make of it and how go about you can make of it and how go about that. Before we begin, I'd like to that. Before we begin, I'd like to that. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Alex And now for my discussion with Alex And now for my discussion with Alex Honnold. Alex Honnold, welcome. Thanks Honnold. Alex Honnold, welcome. Thanks Honnold. Alex Honnold, welcome. Thanks for having me. for having me. for having me. I think Free Solo is remarkable for I think Free Solo is remarkable for I think Free Solo is remarkable for a ton of reasons, but as a good friend a ton of reasons, but as a good friend a ton of reasons, but as a good friend of mine, who I think you know, Michael of mine, who I think you know, Michael of mine, who I think you know, Michael Muller, photographer, he said, before Muller, photographer, he said, before Muller, photographer, he said, before I'd seen the film, he said, I'd seen the film, he said, I'd seen the film, he said, "It's wild because you're terrified as "It's wild because you're terrified as "It's wild because you're terrified as an observer the entire time, an observer the entire time, an observer the entire time, but you also know that Alex survives but you also know that Alex survives but you also know that Alex survives from the very beginning, which is a very from the very beginning, which is a very from the very beginning, which is a very unusual Well, I think some people don't unusual Well, I think some people don't unusual Well, I think some people don't know that. Some people watch the movie know that. Some people watch the movie know that. Some people watch the movie and they literally have no idea what and they literally have no idea what and they literally have no idea what it's about or what's going on, and they it's about or what's going on, and they it's about or what's going on, and they spend the whole movie being like, "Oh my spend the whole movie being like, "Oh my spend the whole movie being like, "Oh my god, what's going to happen?" Okay, so I god, what's going to happen?" Okay, so I god, what's going to happen?" Okay, so I just spoiled it. Oh, yeah. Yeah. just spoiled it. Oh, yeah. Yeah. just spoiled it. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, at this point, I'm like, nobody Well, at this point, I'm like, nobody Well, at this point, I'm like, nobody cares. It's old news. Well, it's a cares. It's old news. Well, it's a cares. It's old news. Well, it's a spectacular feat, and we can go into spectacular feat, and we can go into spectacular feat, and we can go into that feat, but I'd actually like to that feat, but I'd actually like to that feat, but I'd actually like to drill in a little bit to just your drill in a little bit to just your drill in a little bit to just your process in general. process in general. process in general. I'm sure that's changed over time, and I'm sure that's changed over time, and I'm sure that's changed over time, and feel free to talk about that, but you feel free to talk about that, but you feel free to talk about that, but you know, I'm very curious about sort of notions I'm very curious about sort of notions I'm very curious about sort of notions of intrinsic versus extrinsic of intrinsic versus extrinsic of intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation, right? And and I think Free motivation, right? And and I think Free motivation, right? And and I think Free Solo was also remarkable because you had Solo was also remarkable because you had Solo was also remarkable because you had cameras on you. cameras on you. cameras on you. Um it was obviously to be recorded, and Um it was obviously to be recorded, and Um it was obviously to be recorded, and you knew you had cameras on you. And yet you knew you had cameras on you. And yet you knew you had cameras on you. And yet I always thought of climbing as kind of I always thought of climbing as kind of I always thought of climbing as kind of a solitary sport, um or things that a solitary sport, um or things that a solitary sport, um or things that people do in small groups, kind of people do in small groups, kind of people do in small groups, kind of off the grid. Things have changed now off the grid. Things have changed now off the grid. Things have changed now with social media, the way everything with social media, the way everything with social media, the way everything can be posted very quickly, or even run can be posted very quickly, or even run can be posted very quickly, or even run live, but live, but live, but when you think about sort of when you think about sort of when you think about sort of the work that you're doing in terms the work that you're doing in terms the work that you're doing in terms of progressing and goals and you know, of progressing and goals and you know, of progressing and goals and you know, kind of milestones for yourself, kind of milestones for yourself, kind of milestones for yourself, how do you envision that? Is this in how do you envision that? Is this in how do you envision that? Is this in like a Do you have a diary? Do you like a Do you have a diary? Do you like a Do you have a diary? Do you have a process where you sit back and have a process where you sit back and have a process where you sit back and you think, you know, what would be you think, you know, what would be you think, you know, what would be awesome for me to experience? Would awesome for me to experience? Would awesome for me to experience? Would people like to see it? How do What's the people like to see it? How do What's the people like to see it? How do What's the sort of balance between intrinsic and sort of balance between intrinsic and sort of balance between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation for you? So, extrinsic motivation for you? So, extrinsic motivation for you? So, basically, I think climbing is always basically, I think climbing is always basically, I think climbing is always intrinsically motivated. I mean, since intrinsically motivated. I mean, since intrinsically motivated. I mean, since I've I started climbing when I was a I've I started climbing when I was a I've I started climbing when I was a child. I've always loved climbing. I child. I've always loved climbing. I child. I've always loved climbing. I love the movement of climbing. I love the movement of climbing. I love the movement of climbing. I love the feeling of it. I love the whole the feeling of it. I love the whole the feeling of it. I love the whole experience, you know, just everything experience, you know, just everything experience, you know, just everything about it's great. But, then, you know, about it's great. But, then, you know, about it's great. But, then, you know, now as a professional climber, now as a professional climber, now as a professional climber, obviously, there is that extrinsic obviously, there is that extrinsic obviously, there is that extrinsic motivation as well, where you're like, motivation as well, where you're like, motivation as well, where you're like, "Oh, this is how I make a living." And "Oh, this is how I make a living." And "Oh, this is how I make a living." And so, I think with the film Free Solo, you so, I think with the film Free Solo, you so, I think with the film Free Solo, you know, it's a really interesting balance know, it's a really interesting balance know, it's a really interesting balance of the two, where it's like, "This is of the two, where it's like, "This is of the two, where it's like, "This is something that I'd love to do for something that I'd love to do for something that I'd love to do for myself, and even if no one else in the myself, and even if no one else in the myself, and even if no one else in the world existed, I'd want to do this world existed, I'd want to do this world existed, I'd want to do this thing." But, then, you also know that if you're But, then, you also know that if you're But, then, you also know that if you're if the film turns out well, and which it if the film turns out well, and which it if the film turns out well, and which it did, uh you know, it's going to be great for you know, it's going to be great for you know, it's going to be great for your career. It's going to be great for your career. It's going to be great for your career. It's going to be great for whatever. And so, like, there is that whatever. And so, like, there is that whatever. And so, like, there is that extrinsic motivation as well. And so, extrinsic motivation as well. And so, extrinsic motivation as well. And so, then, you're always trying to parse out then, you're always trying to parse out then, you're always trying to parse out like which part is which, and you know, like which part is which, and you know, like which part is which, and you know, cuz you don't want to cuz you don't want to cuz you don't want to particularly with free soloing, you particularly with free soloing, you particularly with free soloing, you don't want to be too extrinsically don't want to be too extrinsically don't want to be too extrinsically motivated, cuz you don't want to want to motivated, cuz you don't want to want to motivated, cuz you don't want to want to get pushed into something that get pushed into something that get pushed into something that you're not prepared for or that you you're not prepared for or that you you're not prepared for or that you shouldn't be doing. shouldn't be doing. shouldn't be doing. Of course, you know, being even being Of course, you know, being even being Of course, you know, being even being extrinsically motivated, you can do extrinsically motivated, you can do extrinsically motivated, you can do something you shouldn't. You know, I something you shouldn't. You know, I something you shouldn't. You know, I don't know. I mean, but you're just don't know. I mean, but you're just don't know. I mean, but you're just constantly thinking about those things constantly thinking about those things constantly thinking about those things as a climber. as a climber. as a climber. In order to free solo El Cap, In order to free solo El Cap, In order to free solo El Cap, did you memorize sequences, or is it did you memorize sequences, or is it did you memorize sequences, or is it more sort of like motifs, where you more sort of like motifs, where you more sort of like motifs, where you kind of know that um you're going to do kind of know that um you're going to do kind of know that um you're going to do any number of different things in a in a any number of different things in a in a any number of different things in a in a given pitch? given pitch? given pitch? It depends. So, for the hardest parts, I It depends. So, for the hardest parts, I It depends. So, for the hardest parts, I memorized, like, for sure. Memorized memorized, like, for sure. Memorized memorized, like, for sure. Memorized every aspect of it. But, that's only the every aspect of it. But, that's only the every aspect of it. But, that's only the hardest parts. That's maybe like a third hardest parts. That's maybe like a third hardest parts. That's maybe like a third of the route. And then, for the easiest of the route. And then, for the easiest of the route. And then, for the easiest third, and some of it is actually quite third, and some of it is actually quite third, and some of it is actually quite easy. Some of it's like even a easy. Some of it's like even a easy. Some of it's like even a non-climber could climb small sections non-climber could climb small sections non-climber could climb small sections of the wall. Like, there are parts that of the wall. Like, there are parts that of the wall. Like, there are parts that are quite easy are quite easy are quite easy uh here and there, you know, it's like uh here and there, you know, it's like uh here and there, you know, it's like uh not the bulk, but so, for the easy not the bulk, but so, for the easy not the bulk, but so, for the easy parts, you just know that you can do it, parts, you just know that you can do it, parts, you just know that you can do it, and you don't have to stress it. And and you don't have to stress it. And and you don't have to stress it. And then, the medium parts kind of then, the medium parts kind of then, the medium parts kind of like, the remaining third of the wall, like, the remaining third of the wall, like, the remaining third of the wall, you sort of remember, kind of like you sort of remember, kind of like you sort of remember, kind of like you said, motifs. Like, you know the said, motifs. Like, you know the said, motifs. Like, you know the hardest part, and you just kind of know hardest part, and you just kind of know hardest part, and you just kind of know that it's going to be fine, but you that it's going to be fine, but you that it's going to be fine, but you don't have to memorize it per se. don't have to memorize it per se. don't have to memorize it per se. But certainly I knew the But certainly I knew the But certainly I knew the route very well. You know, you the route very well. You know, you the route very well. You know, you just you just know all the things you just you just know all the things you just you just know all the things you have to know. You recognize not just have to know. You recognize not just have to know. You recognize not just holds, but like visceral sensations. holds, but like visceral sensations. holds, but like visceral sensations. Like it this feels different or cuz I Like it this feels different or cuz I Like it this feels different or cuz I imagine conditions change, right? I imagine conditions change, right? I imagine conditions change, right? I mean, weather conditions, heat on the mean, weather conditions, heat on the mean, weather conditions, heat on the rock, uh shadows on the rock. rock, uh shadows on the rock. rock, uh shadows on the rock. &gt;&gt; Yeah, but not as much as you might think &gt;&gt; Yeah, but not as much as you might think &gt;&gt; Yeah, but not as much as you might think because uh like I was only climbing in because uh like I was only climbing in because uh like I was only climbing in shade like uh in the springtime the that shade like uh in the springtime the that shade like uh in the springtime the that whole west side of the wall stays in the shade west side of the wall stays in the shade west side of the wall stays in the shade until 11:00 or noonish in the morning. until 11:00 or noonish in the morning. until 11:00 or noonish in the morning. So you go at 4:00 in the morning, and So you go at 4:00 in the morning, and So you go at 4:00 in the morning, and then you have you sort of 8 hours of then you have you sort of 8 hours of then you have you sort of 8 hours of solid shade. So normally solid shade. So normally solid shade. So normally the temperature and the conditions the temperature and the conditions the temperature and the conditions feel relatively stable, and you spend feel relatively stable, and you spend feel relatively stable, and you spend the whole season working on it. So you the whole season working on it. So you the whole season working on it. So you kind of know that tomorrow's going to kind of know that tomorrow's going to kind of know that tomorrow's going to feel the same as it did today roughly, feel the same as it did today roughly, feel the same as it did today roughly, you know, and so it's all within a you know, and so it's all within a you know, and so it's all within a relatively narrow band. relatively narrow band. relatively narrow band. Particularly in the spring, which is why Particularly in the spring, which is why Particularly in the spring, which is why I did it in the springtime. In the in I did it in the springtime. In the in I did it in the springtime. In the in the fall in the autumn, it's a little the fall in the autumn, it's a little the fall in the autumn, it's a little bit different because the sun is lower bit different because the sun is lower bit different because the sun is lower in the sky, so it gets sun much earlier, in the sky, so it gets sun much earlier, in the sky, so it gets sun much earlier, and it actually is way hotter and it actually is way hotter and it actually is way hotter counterintuitively. It's like colder counterintuitively. It's like colder counterintuitively. It's like colder when it's in the shade, and then hotter when it's in the shade, and then hotter when it's in the shade, and then hotter when it's in the sun. And anyway, that when it's in the sun. And anyway, that when it's in the sun. And anyway, that makes it harder for climbing, obviously. makes it harder for climbing, obviously. makes it harder for climbing, obviously. But when I free soloed El Cap, I was But when I free soloed El Cap, I was But when I free soloed El Cap, I was spending 3 or 4 months a year in spending 3 or 4 months a year in spending 3 or 4 months a year in Yosemite every year. Like, you know, a Yosemite every year. Like, you know, a Yosemite every year. Like, you know, a month or two every spring and every month or two every spring and every month or two every spring and every autumn. every autumn. every autumn. And so you're spending 4 months a year And so you're spending 4 months a year And so you're spending 4 months a year in a place, you just know how it feels, in a place, you just know how it feels, in a place, you just know how it feels, you know? It's like you're used to you know? It's like you're used to you know? It's like you're used to getting up that early, you're used to getting up that early, you're used to getting up that early, you're used to climbing on the wall, and you're just climbing on the wall, and you're just climbing on the wall, and you're just kind of like, "Oh, it's going to be kind of like, "Oh, it's going to be kind of like, "Oh, it's going to be another beautiful day on the rock." And another beautiful day on the rock." And another beautiful day on the rock." And actually the day that I did the free actually the day that I did the free actually the day that I did the free solo of El Cap, it was actually a little solo of El Cap, it was actually a little solo of El Cap, it was actually a little more humid and a little warmer than more humid and a little warmer than more humid and a little warmer than I maybe than would have been optimal, I maybe than would have been optimal, I maybe than would have been optimal, you know, like it's not what I would you know, like it's not what I would you know, like it's not what I would have chosen. have chosen. have chosen. But that's just the way it was that day, But that's just the way it was that day, But that's just the way it was that day, and I was kind of like, "Well, this is and I was kind of like, "Well, this is and I was kind of like, "Well, this is my day." You know, you kind of just have my day." You know, you kind of just have my day." You know, you kind of just have to do the thing. to do the thing. to do the thing. Uh but it'd been like overcast that Uh but it'd been like overcast that Uh but it'd been like overcast that night. And you know when it's cloudy at night. And you know when it's cloudy at night. And you know when it's cloudy at night, the lows don't drop as low. And night, the lows don't drop as low. And night, the lows don't drop as low. And so I woke up, and it was like kind of so I woke up, and it was like kind of so I woke up, and it was like kind of muggy-ish feeling. I was like, "It's not muggy-ish feeling. I was like, "It's not muggy-ish feeling. I was like, "It's not it's not great for being 4:00 in the it's not great for being 4:00 in the it's not great for being 4:00 in the morning. It's like feels kind of gross." morning. It's like feels kind of gross." morning. It's like feels kind of gross." But I was like, "This is my day." But I was like, "This is my day." But I was like, "This is my day." It was fine. It was fine. It was fine. So you form a relationship with the So you form a relationship with the So you form a relationship with the rock. You kind of like learn to rock. You kind of like learn to rock. You kind of like learn to recognize um its different states. When you did it um its different states. When you did it um its different states. When you did it and completed it cuz I know you said out and completed it cuz I know you said out and completed it cuz I know you said out one day and then you called it off. one day and then you called it off. one day and then you called it off. &gt;&gt; that was in the autumn. That was that &gt;&gt; that was in the autumn. That was that &gt;&gt; that was in the autumn. That was that was the season before. And basically the was the season before. And basically the was the season before. And basically the season was ending like the storms were season was ending like the storms were season was ending like the storms were coming in the next week type deal and it coming in the next week type deal and it coming in the next week type deal and it was like the season was winding down. I was like the season was winding down. I was like the season was winding down. I was kind of like, well, I should at was kind of like, well, I should at was kind of like, well, I should at least take a shot because I'd done a lot least take a shot because I'd done a lot least take a shot because I'd done a lot of prep and I felt mostly ready. And it of prep and I felt mostly ready. And it of prep and I felt mostly ready. And it turns out I just wasn't ready ready. And turns out I just wasn't ready ready. And turns out I just wasn't ready ready. And so I wind up bailing. But that was so I wind up bailing. But that was so I wind up bailing. But that was kind of my end of the season like I kind of my end of the season like I kind of my end of the season like I think I can squeak this in knowing that think I can squeak this in knowing that think I can squeak this in knowing that if I couldn't squeak it in then I'd if I couldn't squeak it in then I'd if I couldn't squeak it in then I'd have to wait 6 more months. And with the have to wait 6 more months. And with the have to wait 6 more months. And with the pressure of the film crew and all that pressure of the film crew and all that pressure of the film crew and all that stuff knowing that there are all these stuff knowing that there are all these stuff knowing that there are all these people like working and waiting for you. people like working and waiting for you. people like working and waiting for you. You're kind of like, well, I would at You're kind of like, well, I would at You're kind of like, well, I would at least try to get this done. It's like least try to get this done. It's like least try to get this done. It's like all these people are waiting on me. all these people are waiting on me. all these people are waiting on me. But as it turns out I just didn't quite But as it turns out I just didn't quite But as it turns out I just didn't quite have it yet. And then when I ultimately have it yet. And then when I ultimately have it yet. And then when I ultimately did do it in the spring I was much did do it in the spring I was much did do it in the spring I was much better prepared, felt way better, the better prepared, felt way better, the better prepared, felt way better, the whole experience worked out better. So whole experience worked out better. So whole experience worked out better. So now in retrospect I'm like, oh, I'm glad now in retrospect I'm like, oh, I'm glad now in retrospect I'm like, oh, I'm glad that it played out that way cuz that it played out that way cuz that it played out that way cuz you know, it was it was better. But at you know, it was it was better. But at you know, it was it was better. But at the time I was you know, I was like, oh the time I was you know, I was like, oh the time I was you know, I was like, oh god, I failed on this thing and all god, I failed on this thing and all god, I failed on this thing and all these people are watching. It's these people are watching. It's these people are watching. It's embarrassing. It's you know, it's you embarrassing. It's you know, it's you embarrassing. It's you know, it's you know, it's all very stressful at know, it's all very stressful at know, it's all very stressful at the time. Yeah, the external pressures the time. Yeah, the external pressures the time. Yeah, the external pressures have to be, you know, pretty have to be, you know, pretty have to be, you know, pretty mighty when yeah, when especially when mighty when yeah, when especially when mighty when yeah, when especially when they're your friends. I guess one they're your friends. I guess one they're your friends. I guess one could imagine like when it's could imagine like when it's could imagine like when it's just business you can just be like, just business you can just be like, just business you can just be like, well, it's just business. But yeah, you well, it's just business. But yeah, you well, it's just business. But yeah, you had a lot of friends up there with you. had a lot of friends up there with you. had a lot of friends up there with you. &gt;&gt; For me the thing is that if I'm going &gt;&gt; For me the thing is that if I'm going &gt;&gt; For me the thing is that if I'm going to go climb the wall, you know, I start to go climb the wall, you know, I start to go climb the wall, you know, I start climbing at 4:30 in the morning or 5:00 climbing at 4:30 in the morning or 5:00 climbing at 4:30 in the morning or 5:00 or something. So that means some of my or something. So that means some of my or something. So that means some of my friends to get in position at the top of friends to get in position at the top of friends to get in position at the top of the wall are getting up at like 1:00 in the wall are getting up at like 1:00 in the wall are getting up at like 1:00 in the morning and then hiking to the top the morning and then hiking to the top the morning and then hiking to the top of the mountain with a heavy backpack. of the mountain with a heavy backpack. of the mountain with a heavy backpack. And if you're asking a bunch of your And if you're asking a bunch of your And if you're asking a bunch of your buddies to go hiking at 1:00 in the buddies to go hiking at 1:00 in the buddies to go hiking at 1:00 in the morning, like you better live up to your morning, like you better live up to your morning, like you better live up to your end of the thing, you know, like end of the thing, you know, like end of the thing, you know, like if you say you're going to do something if you say you're going to do something if you say you're going to do something you better actually do the thing cuz you better actually do the thing cuz you better actually do the thing cuz your friends obviously your friends obviously your friends obviously no one's complaining. No one is no one's complaining. No one is no one's complaining. No one is pressuring me. No one's pressuring me. No one's pressuring me. No one's but at the same time you don't want to but at the same time you don't want to but at the same time you don't want to bail. Like bail. Like bail. Like it's like it's pretty embarrassing if it's like it's pretty embarrassing if it's like it's pretty embarrassing if you tell someone you're going to do you tell someone you're going to do you tell someone you're going to do something and then you just can't do it. something and then you just can't do it. something and then you just can't do it. Well, they certainly wanted the outcome Well, they certainly wanted the outcome Well, they certainly wanted the outcome to be only one way and to be only one way and to be only one way and &gt;&gt; Yeah, and they were all super &gt;&gt; Yeah, and they were all super &gt;&gt; Yeah, and they were all super positive and supportive and it's all positive and supportive and it's all positive and supportive and it's all great, but you still can't help but feel great, but you still can't help but feel great, but you still can't help but feel that pressure. that pressure. that pressure. &gt;&gt; Sure. Well, it certainly worked out. I'm &gt;&gt; Sure. Well, it certainly worked out. I'm &gt;&gt; Sure. Well, it certainly worked out. I'm curious on a scale of 1 to 10, 10 being curious on a scale of 1 to 10, 10 being curious on a scale of 1 to 10, 10 being a total certainty, a total certainty, a total certainty, um along that trajectory uh when you um along that trajectory uh when you um along that trajectory uh when you completed it, uh were there any phases completed it, uh were there any phases completed it, uh were there any phases where um where um where um you felt you had to improvise against you felt you had to improvise against you felt you had to improvise against the original plan? You mean on the day the original plan? You mean on the day the original plan? You mean on the day of the actual climb? of the actual climb? of the actual climb? &gt;&gt; day of the actual completion of the &gt;&gt; day of the actual completion of the &gt;&gt; day of the actual completion of the free solo on El free solo on El free solo on El &gt;&gt; No, on the day I was 100% everything &gt;&gt; No, on the day I was 100% everything &gt;&gt; No, on the day I was 100% everything was perfect. I knew exactly what to do. was perfect. I knew exactly what to do. was perfect. I knew exactly what to do. It was all amazing. Um but it took a It was all amazing. Um but it took a It was all amazing. Um but it took a really long time to get to get there, really long time to get to get there, really long time to get to get there, you know, it's like you know, it's like you know, it's like literally years of building up to it literally years of building up to it literally years of building up to it and then months of preparation and then months of preparation and then months of preparation and everything. But no, on the day it was it everything. But no, on the day it was it everything. But no, on the day it was it was perfect. was perfect. was perfect. I'd like to take a quick break and thank I'd like to take a quick break and thank I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor Joovv. Joovv makes our sponsor Joovv. Joovv makes our sponsor Joovv. Joovv makes medical-grade red light therapy devices. medical-grade red light therapy devices. medical-grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have Now, if there's one thing that I have Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light it is the incredible impact that light it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in can have on our biology. Now, in can have on our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and addition to sunlight, red light and addition to sunlight, red light and near-infrared light sources have been near-infrared light sources have been near-infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on shown to have positive effects on shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular improving numerous aspects of cellular improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health, including faster and organ health, including faster and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health, muscle recovery, improved skin health, muscle recovery, improved skin health, and wound healing, improvements in acne, and wound healing, improvements in acne, and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even reduced pain and inflammation, even reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving mitochondrial function, and improving mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. What sets Joovv lights vision itself. What sets Joovv lights vision itself. What sets Joovv lights apart and why they're my preferred red apart and why they're my preferred red apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use light therapy device is that they use light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and specific wavelengths of red light and specific wavelengths of red light and near-infrared light in combination to near-infrared light in combination to near-infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellular trigger the optimal cellular trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv whole body panel about three to four whole body panel about three to four whole body panel about three to four times a week, and I use the Joovv times a week, and I use the Joovv times a week, and I use the Joovv handheld light both at home and when I handheld light both at home and when I handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to try Joovv, you travel. If you'd like to try Joovv, you travel. If you'd like to try Joovv, you can go to joovv.com/huberman. Joovv is offering an exclusive discount Joovv is offering an exclusive discount Joovv is offering an exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off Joovv products. Again, that's $400 off Joovv products. Again, that's $400 off Joovv products. Again, that's joovv.com/huberman to get up joovv.com/huberman to get up joovv.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. Today's episode is also to $400 off. Today's episode is also to $400 off. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I've doing weekly therapy online. I've doing weekly therapy online. I've doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years. Initially, I for well over 30 years. Initially, I for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition didn't have a choice. It was a condition didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in school, but of being allowed to stay in school, but of being allowed to stay in school, but pretty soon I realized that therapy is pretty soon I realized that therapy is pretty soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to an extremely important component to an extremely important component to overall health. There are essentially overall health. There are essentially overall health. There are essentially three things that make up great therapy. three things that make up great therapy. three things that make up great therapy. First of all, it provides the First of all, it provides the First of all, it provides the opportunity to have a really good opportunity to have a really good opportunity to have a really good rapport with somebody that you can rapport with somebody that you can rapport with somebody that you can really trust and talk to about really trust and talk to about really trust and talk to about essentially any issue that you want. essentially any issue that you want. essentially any issue that you want. Second of all, it can provide support in Second of all, it can provide support in Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or directed guidance or of course both. And directed guidance or of course both. And directed guidance or of course both. And third, expert therapy should provide you third, expert therapy should provide you third, expert therapy should provide you useful insights. Insights that can help useful insights. Insights that can help useful insights. Insights that can help you improve in your work life, your you improve in your work life, your you improve in your work life, your relationships, and in your relationship relationships, and in your relationship relationships, and in your relationship with yourself. With BetterHelp, they with yourself. With BetterHelp, they with yourself. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy for you to find an make it very easy for you to find an make it very easy for you to find an expert therapist who you resonate with expert therapist who you resonate with expert therapist who you resonate with and that can provide those three and that can provide those three and that can provide those three benefits that come from expert therapy. benefits that come from expert therapy. benefits that come from expert therapy. Also, because BetterHelp therapy is done Also, because BetterHelp therapy is done Also, because BetterHelp therapy is done entirely online, it's very time entirely online, it's very time entirely online, it's very time efficient and easy to fit into a busy efficient and easy to fit into a busy efficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. There's no commuting to a schedule. There's no commuting to a schedule. There's no commuting to a therapist's office or sitting in a therapist's office or sitting in a therapist's office or sitting in a waiting room, looking for parking, any waiting room, looking for parking, any waiting room, looking for parking, any of that. You just hop online and you do of that. You just hop online and you do of that. You just hop online and you do your session. If you'd like to try your session. If you'd like to try your session. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. When you climb, um, I'm curious where When you climb, um, I'm curious where When you climb, um, I'm curious where your mental horizon is. I can make up your mental horizon is. I can make up your mental horizon is. I can make up a story as a non-climber that your a story as a non-climber that your a story as a non-climber that your mental horizon is always on just the mental horizon is always on just the mental horizon is always on just the next uh next uh next uh the next maneuver. Just getting further the next maneuver. Just getting further the next maneuver. Just getting further up and further over. Sometimes, of up and further over. Sometimes, of up and further over. Sometimes, of course, you have to go down and up. Um, course, you have to go down and up. Um, course, you have to go down and up. Um, but that your sort of um time but that your sort of um time but that your sort of um time binning and your space binning is binning and your space binning is binning and your space binning is very close. Um, but do you ever go very close. Um, but do you ever go very close. Um, but do you ever go into states where you're uh sort of in into states where you're uh sort of in into states where you're uh sort of in automaticity? I mean, we hear about automaticity? I mean, we hear about automaticity? I mean, we hear about flow, right? But where you find yourself flow, right? But where you find yourself flow, right? But where you find yourself kind of maneuvering as opposed to um kind of maneuvering as opposed to um kind of maneuvering as opposed to um being hyper strategic about what's being hyper strategic about what's being hyper strategic about what's happening in the next 5 seconds, 10 happening in the next 5 seconds, 10 happening in the next 5 seconds, 10 seconds? &gt;&gt; that the aspiration is to be in that, &gt;&gt; that the aspiration is to be in that, &gt;&gt; that the aspiration is to be in that, you know, flow state, whatever you want you know, flow state, whatever you want you know, flow state, whatever you want to call it, but um to call it, but um to call it, but um you know, actually, I think even in the you know, actually, I think even in the you know, actually, I think even in the film there's some quotes from me saying film there's some quotes from me saying film there's some quotes from me saying autopilot and things like I'm you know, autopilot and things like I'm you know, autopilot and things like I'm you know, I'm aspiring to be on autopilot. So, I'm aspiring to be on autopilot. So, I'm aspiring to be on autopilot. So, I'm aspiring to not be thinking too much aspiring to not be thinking too much aspiring to not be thinking too much about it. And and that's for me at least about it. And and that's for me at least about it. And and that's for me at least why it required so much practice was to why it required so much practice was to why it required so much practice was to be able to do something almost by be able to do something almost by be able to do something almost by rote, you know, by through rote, you know, by through rote, you know, by through repetition, just to do the thing that repetition, just to do the thing that repetition, just to do the thing that you've practiced you've practiced you've practiced without having to think about it. Cuz I without having to think about it. Cuz I without having to think about it. Cuz I think once you start thinking about it think once you start thinking about it think once you start thinking about it too much you're just more prone to too much you're just more prone to too much you're just more prone to not just make errors, but just get not just make errors, but just get not just make errors, but just get too get caught up in your own mind and get caught up in your own mind and get caught up in your own mind and I don't know. I mean, the aspiration I don't know. I mean, the aspiration I don't know. I mean, the aspiration was just to do the thing. was just to do the thing. was just to do the thing. Like no thinking about it, no Like no thinking about it, no Like no thinking about it, no hesitation, you know, no hesitation, you know, no hesitation, you know, no emotional uh emotional uh emotional uh you know, affect around it to just do you know, affect around it to just do you know, affect around it to just do it. Is the kinesthetic aspect of it big? In Is the kinesthetic aspect of it big? In Is the kinesthetic aspect of it big? In other words, are you feeling your way other words, are you feeling your way other words, are you feeling your way through it as well as um using vision? through it as well as um using vision? through it as well as um using vision? Um I mean, I imagine that these things Um I mean, I imagine that these things Um I mean, I imagine that these things start to blend. start to blend. start to blend. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I've actually never been asked &gt;&gt; Yeah, I've actually never been asked &gt;&gt; Yeah, I've actually never been asked something quite like that. In some ways something quite like that. In some ways something quite like that. In some ways I mean, the kinesthetic aspect is I mean, the kinesthetic aspect is I mean, the kinesthetic aspect is maybe the whole thing. Like I mean, it maybe the whole thing. Like I mean, it maybe the whole thing. Like I mean, it is kind of like dancing or something is kind of like dancing or something is kind of like dancing or something where you are just flowing over stone. I where you are just flowing over stone. I where you are just flowing over stone. I mean, obviously you're looking around mean, obviously you're looking around mean, obviously you're looking around and you're looking at your footholds and you're looking at your footholds and you're looking at your footholds and you're sort of placing your feet you're sort of placing your feet you're sort of placing your feet correctly that way. But but really correctly that way. But but really correctly that way. But but really you're just doing sequences. You're just you're just doing sequences. You're just you're just doing sequences. You're just flowing. Like your body is moving. I flowing. Like your body is moving. I flowing. Like your body is moving. I mean, it I think when you climb well and mean, it I think when you climb well and mean, it I think when you climb well and particularly when you've rehearsed and particularly when you've rehearsed and particularly when you've rehearsed something and you know the climb something and you know the climb something and you know the climb really well, it feels like jogging or really well, it feels like jogging or really well, it feels like jogging or swimming or sort of other elemental swimming or sort of other elemental swimming or sort of other elemental movement patterns where it's just like movement patterns where it's just like movement patterns where it's just like your body doing what it's meant to do your body doing what it's meant to do your body doing what it's meant to do and it feels great, you know, it's like and it feels great, you know, it's like and it feels great, you know, it's like it's really nice. it's really nice. it's really nice. Do you ever surprise yourself still? Do you ever surprise yourself still? Do you ever surprise yourself still? Like that uh Like that uh Like that uh in training things, you know, I'm in training things, you know, I'm in training things, you know, I'm surprised that worked out and then and surprised that worked out and then and surprised that worked out and then and then stick with that kinesthetic sense. then stick with that kinesthetic sense. then stick with that kinesthetic sense. I've um been listening to an amazing I've um been listening to an amazing I've um been listening to an amazing book by Twyla Tharp. She's a book by Twyla Tharp. She's a book by Twyla Tharp. She's a choreographer. She was a ballerina, she choreographer. She was a ballerina, she choreographer. She was a ballerina, she choreographer and she said that um choreographer and she said that um choreographer and she said that um what distinguishes, you know, sort of what distinguishes, you know, sort of what distinguishes, you know, sort of virtuosity from mastery is that when you virtuosity from mastery is that when you virtuosity from mastery is that when you start to surprise yourself. And I think start to surprise yourself. And I think start to surprise yourself. And I think you're certainly in that category of you're certainly in that category of you're certainly in that category of virtuoso. Um how often does surprise virtuoso. Um how often does surprise virtuoso. Um how often does surprise come about? For me personally, that's come about? For me personally, that's come about? For me personally, that's maybe my favorite moment in climbing is maybe my favorite moment in climbing is maybe my favorite moment in climbing is when you surprise yourself. Um and this when you surprise yourself. Um and this when you surprise yourself. Um and this isn't so much with free soloing because isn't so much with free soloing because isn't so much with free soloing because with free soloing, you don't want to be with free soloing, you don't want to be with free soloing, you don't want to be surprised. But, uh, but with a but with surprised. But, uh, but with a but with surprised. But, uh, but with a but with a rope on, you know, you have moments a rope on, you know, you have moments a rope on, you know, you have moments all the time where you're sure you're all the time where you're sure you're all the time where you're sure you're about to fall because you're, you know, about to fall because you're, you know, about to fall because you're, you know, up against your physical limits or up against your physical limits or up against your physical limits or whatever, and then you stick a move that whatever, and then you stick a move that whatever, and then you stick a move that you were sure you weren't going to. Um, you were sure you weren't going to. Um, you were sure you weren't going to. Um, and you know, it doesn't happen that and you know, it doesn't happen that and you know, it doesn't happen that often, but when it does, you're like, often, but when it does, you're like, often, but when it does, you're like, "Oh, I exceeded my own expectations." "Oh, I exceeded my own expectations." "Oh, I exceeded my own expectations." It's like it's like the best feeling, It's like it's like the best feeling, It's like it's like the best feeling, you know. It happens from time to time. you know. It happens from time to time. you know. It happens from time to time. In some ways, actually, I In some ways, actually, I In some ways, actually, I was telling one of my friends, I think I was telling one of my friends, I think I was telling one of my friends, I think that might be, uh, one of the ways that might be, uh, one of the ways that might be, uh, one of the ways in which I see aging. You know, like as in which I see aging. You know, like as in which I see aging. You know, like as I'm getting older as a climber, I think I'm getting older as a climber, I think I'm getting older as a climber, I think I surprise myself less often. You know, I surprise myself less often. You know, I surprise myself less often. You know, I think it's like a 24-year-old, you I think it's like a 24-year-old, you I think it's like a 24-year-old, you just don't know your own limitations just don't know your own limitations just don't know your own limitations that much, and you frequently surprise that much, and you frequently surprise that much, and you frequently surprise yourself where I'm like, "Wow, I really yourself where I'm like, "Wow, I really yourself where I'm like, "Wow, I really outdid myself. I really did something outdid myself. I really did something outdid myself. I really did something that I was sure I couldn't do, but I that I was sure I couldn't do, but I that I was sure I couldn't do, but I managed to do it." And now, as a recent managed to do it." And now, as a recent managed to do it." And now, as a recent 40-year-old, you know, like that happens 40-year-old, you know, like that happens 40-year-old, you know, like that happens from time to time, for sure, but not all from time to time, for sure, but not all from time to time, for sure, but not all the time, you know, it's like the time, you know, it's like the time, you know, it's like And now, occasionally, I have things And now, occasionally, I have things And now, occasionally, I have things where I was like, "Oh, I was sure I where I was like, "Oh, I was sure I where I was like, "Oh, I was sure I could do that." And then I failed, could do that." And then I failed, could do that." And then I failed, you know, and you're kind of like, "Oh, you know, and you're kind of like, "Oh, you know, and you're kind of like, "Oh, you can blame conditions, you can blame you can blame conditions, you can blame you can blame conditions, you can blame whatever." But, you're kind of like, whatever." But, you're kind of like, whatever." But, you're kind of like, "Oh, I really thought I would do that." "Oh, I really thought I would do that." "Oh, I really thought I would do that." And I And I fell off anyway, and you're And I And I fell off anyway, and you're And I And I fell off anyway, and you're like, "Damn it." What is the role of like, "Damn it." What is the role of like, "Damn it." What is the role of aging in climbing, uh, traditionally and aging in climbing, uh, traditionally and aging in climbing, uh, traditionally and how you're experiencing it? Like there how you're experiencing it? Like there how you're experiencing it? Like there fields of science like mathematics fields of science like mathematics fields of science like mathematics where that the stereotype is, uh, you where that the stereotype is, uh, you where that the stereotype is, uh, you know, it's a young person's game. And know, it's a young person's game. And know, it's a young person's game. And then there fields like biology, which is then there fields like biology, which is then there fields like biology, which is a bit more incremental and people can a bit more incremental and people can a bit more incremental and people can have fantastic discoveries and long have fantastic discoveries and long have fantastic discoveries and long careers. The those are academic, uh, careers. The those are academic, uh, careers. The those are academic, uh, cerebral, uh, um, endeavors. But, you cerebral, uh, um, endeavors. But, you cerebral, uh, um, endeavors. But, you know, we have our understanding of this know, we have our understanding of this know, we have our understanding of this for every sport. Uh, for climbing, for every sport. Uh, for climbing, for every sport. Uh, for climbing, what's the lore for, um, climbing and what's the lore for, um, climbing and what's the lore for, um, climbing and for free soloists in particular? That for free soloists in particular? That for free soloists in particular? That it's an old man's game, it's a young it's an old man's game, it's a young it's an old man's game, it's a young man's game? Woman's game, excuse me. I man's game? Woman's game, excuse me. I man's game? Woman's game, excuse me. I don't I don't think anybody calls free don't I don't think anybody calls free don't I don't think anybody calls free soloing an old man's game. But, um, but soloing an old man's game. But, um, but soloing an old man's game. But, um, but no, but I no, but I no, but I It could be. But, no, I think in It could be. But, no, I think in It could be. But, no, I think in general, climbing has more longevity general, climbing has more longevity general, climbing has more longevity than most sports just because it's than most sports just because it's than most sports just because it's relatively low impact on your body. It's relatively low impact on your body. It's relatively low impact on your body. It's very technique and like very technique and like very technique and like movement-focused, and so it's not just movement-focused, and so it's not just movement-focused, and so it's not just pure physical strength. That said, I pure physical strength. That said, I pure physical strength. That said, I mean, climbing is in the Olympics now, mean, climbing is in the Olympics now, mean, climbing is in the Olympics now, and the winning the Olympics are all and the winning the Olympics are all and the winning the Olympics are all sort of 18 to 23-ish, you know, sort of sort of 18 to 23-ish, you know, sort of sort of 18 to 23-ish, you know, sort of same as gymnastics type of range. So, I same as gymnastics type of range. So, I same as gymnastics type of range. So, I think at the most elite levels of think at the most elite levels of think at the most elite levels of climbing performance, it's kind of climbing performance, it's kind of climbing performance, it's kind of similar to gymnastics, probably. similar to gymnastics, probably. similar to gymnastics, probably. But then to do interesting new things on But then to do interesting new things on But then to do interesting new things on real rock outdoors, I think there's a real rock outdoors, I think there's a real rock outdoors, I think there's a much wider latitude. You know, it's like much wider latitude. You know, it's like much wider latitude. You know, it's like And then even into your 50s and 60s, And then even into your 50s and 60s, And then even into your 50s and 60s, there are plenty of climbers who are there are plenty of climbers who are there are plenty of climbers who are leading expeditions to new places, leading expeditions to new places, leading expeditions to new places, developing new climbs, you know, you developing new climbs, you know, you developing new climbs, you know, you know, doing things that are noteworthy know, doing things that are noteworthy know, doing things that are noteworthy and sort of meaningful for the climbing and sort of meaningful for the climbing and sort of meaningful for the climbing community, even though they're not community, even though they're not community, even though they're not necessarily cutting-edge physically. necessarily cutting-edge physically. necessarily cutting-edge physically. So, I think there's a lot of So, I think there's a lot of So, I think there's a lot of a lot of opportunity for climbing, more a lot of opportunity for climbing, more a lot of opportunity for climbing, more than most sports. than most sports. than most sports. And I think actually the other big And I think actually the other big And I think actually the other big thing with climbing is that in so many thing with climbing is that in so many thing with climbing is that in so many other sports, I think ball sports, you other sports, I think ball sports, you other sports, I think ball sports, you know, NBA, NFL, baseball, whatever, it's know, NBA, NFL, baseball, whatever, it's know, NBA, NFL, baseball, whatever, it's kind of like if you don't make the team, kind of like if you don't make the team, kind of like if you don't make the team, then you're done then you're done then you're done playing forever. Like you'll literally playing forever. Like you'll literally playing forever. Like you'll literally never play football again if you're not never play football again if you're not never play football again if you're not a professional football player. a professional football player. a professional football player. Whereas with climbing, even if you're Whereas with climbing, even if you're Whereas with climbing, even if you're not playing at the highest level, you not playing at the highest level, you not playing at the highest level, you can still go climb all the time, and you can still go climb all the time, and you can still go climb all the time, and you can still do cool climbs, you can still can still do cool climbs, you can still can still do cool climbs, you can still do things that matter, you can help do things that matter, you can help do things that matter, you can help teach, you can do whatever. And so, you teach, you can do whatever. And so, you teach, you can do whatever. And so, you can kind of like stay in the game much, can kind of like stay in the game much, can kind of like stay in the game much, much longer. much longer. much longer. You mentioned that climbing's in the You mentioned that climbing's in the You mentioned that climbing's in the Olympics now. We see a lot of sports Olympics now. We see a lot of sports Olympics now. We see a lot of sports like skateboarding, climbing now in the like skateboarding, climbing now in the like skateboarding, climbing now in the Olympics, and these were sports that Olympics, and these were sports that Olympics, and these were sports that traditionally were done, you know, traditionally were done, you know, traditionally were done, you know, people just go to go to where these people just go to go to where these people just go to go to where these things were done, and it wasn't always things were done, and it wasn't always things were done, and it wasn't always recorded because there wasn't social recorded because there wasn't social recorded because there wasn't social media back then. Well, more of the that media back then. Well, more of the that media back then. Well, more of the that there weren't smartphones, there weren't there weren't smartphones, there weren't there weren't smartphones, there weren't cameras, you know. It's like it's cameras, you know. It's like it's cameras, you know. It's like it's not even about the social, it's about not even about the social, it's about not even about the social, it's about the whether or not you can record it easily. whether or not you can record it easily. whether or not you can record it easily. &gt;&gt; Mhm. But So, um I'm guessing there's a &gt;&gt; Mhm. But So, um I'm guessing there's a &gt;&gt; Mhm. But So, um I'm guessing there's a big influx of young kids getting into big influx of young kids getting into big influx of young kids getting into this now. Do you see the sport this now. Do you see the sport this now. Do you see the sport progressing faster? And I'm also curious progressing faster? And I'm also curious progressing faster? And I'm also curious about the culture, whether or not, about the culture, whether or not, about the culture, whether or not, you know, like anytime a sport um is you know, like anytime a sport um is you know, like anytime a sport um is in the Olympics, the thing is like, "Oh, in the Olympics, the thing is like, "Oh, in the Olympics, the thing is like, "Oh, it's kind of {quote} sold out. Now it's kind of {quote} sold out. Now it's kind of {quote} sold out. Now it's going to change. It's going to become going to change. It's going to become going to change. It's going to become more commercial." So, what's the culture more commercial." So, what's the culture more commercial." So, what's the culture within climbing about um about this big within climbing about um about this big within climbing about um about this big expansion? What are your thoughts? I expansion? What are your thoughts? I expansion? What are your thoughts? I mean, personally, I'm way into it. I mean, personally, I'm way into it. I mean, personally, I'm way into it. I mean, I was a kid that got into climbing mean, I was a kid that got into climbing mean, I was a kid that got into climbing in the climbing gym, and it's in the climbing gym, and it's in the climbing gym, and it's changed my life for the better, you changed my life for the better, you changed my life for the better, you know, like I love climbing. in it's know, like I love climbing. in it's know, like I love climbing. in it's great. You know, I can certainly see the great. You know, I can certainly see the great. You know, I can certainly see the sort of commercial influx from the sort of commercial influx from the sort of commercial influx from the Olympics or sort of like more mainstream Olympics or sort of like more mainstream Olympics or sort of like more mainstream adoption of climbing. But that's kind of adoption of climbing. But that's kind of adoption of climbing. But that's kind of great cuz I mean great cuz I mean great cuz I mean most of my friends are sort of climbing most of my friends are sort of climbing most of my friends are sort of climbing industry adjacent professionals in some industry adjacent professionals in some industry adjacent professionals in some ways, you know, like they make they're ways, you know, like they make they're ways, you know, like they make they're like coaches or dieticians or setters. like coaches or dieticians or setters. like coaches or dieticians or setters. Like they make the climbs that Like they make the climbs that Like they make the climbs that people climb on. people climb on. people climb on. And so basically the bigger the industry And so basically the bigger the industry And so basically the bigger the industry gets the more people like that can make gets the more people like that can make gets the more people like that can make a living doing the thing they love to do a living doing the thing they love to do a living doing the thing they love to do even if they're not necessarily even if they're not necessarily even if they're not necessarily sponsored professionals at the highest sponsored professionals at the highest sponsored professionals at the highest level. So I'm kind of like, you know, a level. So I'm kind of like, you know, a level. So I'm kind of like, you know, a broadening industry is kind of good broadening industry is kind of good broadening industry is kind of good for everybody. for everybody. for everybody. And mostly I mean climbing's awesome. And mostly I mean climbing's awesome. And mostly I mean climbing's awesome. Like if people enjoy you know, it's like Like if people enjoy you know, it's like Like if people enjoy you know, it's like why not get into climbing? It's like why not get into climbing? It's like why not get into climbing? It's like certainly I mean I think it's better certainly I mean I think it's better certainly I mean I think it's better than most other fitness modalities, you than most other fitness modalities, you than most other fitness modalities, you know, it's like oh why do CrossFit when know, it's like oh why do CrossFit when know, it's like oh why do CrossFit when you can go rock climbing? It's way you can go rock climbing? It's way you can go rock climbing? It's way cooler. I mean it certainly seems I mean it certainly seems I mean it certainly seems &gt;&gt; fun. That's for sure. And you can do it &gt;&gt; fun. That's for sure. And you can do it &gt;&gt; fun. That's for sure. And you can do it indoors or outdoors. There probably indoors or outdoors. There probably indoors or outdoors. There probably certain aspects you wouldn't want to do certain aspects you wouldn't want to do certain aspects you wouldn't want to do alone for safety reasons, but alone for safety reasons, but alone for safety reasons, but I think when people ask like what do you I think when people ask like what do you I think when people ask like what do you worry about with climbing culture and worry about with climbing culture and worry about with climbing culture and all that kind of stuff like with the all that kind of stuff like with the all that kind of stuff like with the Olympics and the Olympics and the Olympics and the mainstream appeal. Kind of like, you the mainstream appeal. Kind of like, you the mainstream appeal. Kind of like, you know, if somebody wants to be a climber know, if somebody wants to be a climber know, if somebody wants to be a climber and only go to the climbing gym in a in and only go to the climbing gym in a in and only go to the climbing gym in a in a major city for their entire life like a major city for their entire life like a major city for their entire life like that's great. Like if they just want to that's great. Like if they just want to that's great. Like if they just want to climb plastic the rest of their life climb plastic the rest of their life climb plastic the rest of their life that's still better than going to that's still better than going to that's still better than going to CrossFit or doing whatever else. I'm CrossFit or doing whatever else. I'm CrossFit or doing whatever else. I'm like that's cool. Like you don't have to like that's cool. Like you don't have to like that's cool. Like you don't have to go climb El Cap to be a climber. I'm go climb El Cap to be a climber. I'm go climb El Cap to be a climber. I'm kind of like people who can do whatever kind of like people who can do whatever kind of like people who can do whatever they want and I think I think that's they want and I think I think that's they want and I think I think that's great for the sport. And and you are great for the sport. And and you are great for the sport. And and you are seeing standards rise seeing standards rise seeing standards rise very quickly right now sort of as a very quickly right now sort of as a very quickly right now sort of as a result. Just like better access to gyms, result. Just like better access to gyms, result. Just like better access to gyms, more kids getting into it. You just see more kids getting into it. You just see more kids getting into it. You just see talent rise faster. talent rise faster. talent rise faster. I come across social media accounts of I come across social media accounts of I come across social media accounts of parkour kids every once in a while doing parkour kids every once in a while doing parkour kids every once in a while doing absolutely insane stuff in urban absolutely insane stuff in urban absolutely insane stuff in urban terrains usually. What's the crossover terrains usually. What's the crossover terrains usually. What's the crossover if any between parkour and climbing if any between parkour and climbing if any between parkour and climbing of the sort that you do? There's a of the sort that you do? There's a of the sort that you do? There's a little bit, not that much, but little bit, not that much, but little bit, not that much, but climbers often like competition climbing climbers often like competition climbing climbers often like competition climbing like bouldering which is in the Olympics like bouldering which is in the Olympics like bouldering which is in the Olympics has definitely taken a slight turn towards definitely taken a slight turn towards definitely taken a slight turn towards parkourish sorts of moves like big run parkourish sorts of moves like big run parkourish sorts of moves like big run and jumps and like crazy swings and jumps and like crazy swings and jumps and like crazy swings and things like that. things like that. things like that. And so some old school climbers complain And so some old school climbers complain And so some old school climbers complain that it's like gotten a little too that it's like gotten a little too that it's like gotten a little too jumpy, that type of bouldering. Um jumpy, that type of bouldering. Um jumpy, that type of bouldering. Um but I'm kind of into it. I mean it's I but I'm kind of into it. I mean it's I but I'm kind of into it. I mean it's I don't know. This is all very like inside don't know. This is all very like inside don't know. This is all very like inside baseball. Like how do you separate like baseball. Like how do you separate like baseball. Like how do you separate like basically the highest level competitors basically the highest level competitors basically the highest level competitors are all very strong. So then how do are all very strong. So then how do are all very strong. So then how do you separate these different competitors you separate these different competitors you separate these different competitors who are all climbing at an elite level. who are all climbing at an elite level. who are all climbing at an elite level. And one of the ways is complicated And one of the ways is complicated And one of the ways is complicated movement like that, like running jumps movement like that, like running jumps movement like that, like running jumps and coordination and things like that. and coordination and things like that. and coordination and things like that. So I don't know. I mean I think it's So I don't know. I mean I think it's So I don't know. I mean I think it's cool. Um I've actually met cool. Um I've actually met cool. Um I've actually met like a couple of professional parkour like a couple of professional parkour like a couple of professional parkour athletes who also climb. athletes who also climb. athletes who also climb. Uh and they are really good at a very and they are really good at a very and they are really good at a very particular sorts of things where you're particular sorts of things where you're particular sorts of things where you're like it's I mean it's amazing to see. like it's I mean it's amazing to see. like it's I mean it's amazing to see. Yeah, I mean I find a lot of what they Yeah, I mean I find a lot of what they Yeah, I mean I find a lot of what they do terrifying but also awesome. I can't do terrifying but also awesome. I can't do terrifying but also awesome. I can't help myself but watch and uh just the help myself but watch and uh just the help myself but watch and uh just the motivation to work it out too. Like it motivation to work it out too. Like it motivation to work it out too. Like it in you know because some of these are in you know because some of these are in you know because some of these are truly make or break or make or die are truly make or break or make or die are truly make or break or make or die um at least in the in the form they um at least in the in the form they um at least in the in the form they put to social media. So I'm always put to social media. So I'm always put to social media. So I'm always curious like what goes into that. And curious like what goes into that. And curious like what goes into that. And you know having grown up skateboarding I you know having grown up skateboarding I you know having grown up skateboarding I mean you go around a city and you see mean you go around a city and you see mean you go around a city and you see stuff you know like oh that would be stuff you know like oh that would be stuff you know like oh that would be awesome. And so I mean just looking at a awesome. And so I mean just looking at a awesome. And so I mean just looking at a landscape natural or urban landscape natural or urban landscape natural or urban landscape in a completely different way. I see a in a completely different way. I see a in a completely different way. I see a lot of parallels with climbing and lot of parallels with climbing and lot of parallels with climbing and parkour. And also you know I think of uh parkour. And also you know I think of uh parkour. And also you know I think of uh you at you know certainly at the level you at you know certainly at the level you at you know certainly at the level and kind of parallel with a guy like and kind of parallel with a guy like and kind of parallel with a guy like Tony Hawk who's been in the sport of Tony Hawk who's been in the sport of Tony Hawk who's been in the sport of skateboarding for a very long time. He's skateboarding for a very long time. He's skateboarding for a very long time. He's a amazing ambassador for the sport as a amazing ambassador for the sport as a amazing ambassador for the sport as it's gone through its various like you it's gone through its various like you it's gone through its various like you know peaks and valleys now in the know peaks and valleys now in the know peaks and valleys now in the Olympics. So I think climbing and Olympics. So I think climbing and Olympics. So I think climbing and sports like skateboarding and surfing sports like skateboarding and surfing sports like skateboarding and surfing have a lot in common in this way have a lot in common in this way have a lot in common in this way subculture but then also gets popular. subculture but then also gets popular. subculture but then also gets popular. Yeah, but they're kind of niche and then Yeah, but they're kind of niche and then Yeah, but they're kind of niche and then they become kind of mainstream. But then they become kind of mainstream. But then they become kind of mainstream. But then even once they're mainstream they're even once they're mainstream they're even once they're mainstream they're still kind of cool, you know, like still kind of cool, you know, like still kind of cool, you know, like skateboarding. It's like definitely not skateboarding. It's like definitely not skateboarding. It's like definitely not like full punk rock anymore but you're like full punk rock anymore but you're like full punk rock anymore but you're like it's pretty cool, you know, like it's pretty cool, you know, like it's pretty cool, you know, like skateboarding still. And it's not that skateboarding still. And it's not that skateboarding still. And it's not that common still, you know, and that's the common still, you know, and that's the common still, you know, and that's the thing with climbing is I'm kind of like thing with climbing is I'm kind of like thing with climbing is I'm kind of like yeah, climbing's growing, it's becoming yeah, climbing's growing, it's becoming yeah, climbing's growing, it's becoming more mainstream. It's just never going more mainstream. It's just never going more mainstream. It's just never going to be you know soccer or something. You to be you know soccer or something. You to be you know soccer or something. You know what I mean? Like it's always going know what I mean? Like it's always going know what I mean? Like it's always going to be slightly niche, slightly to be slightly niche, slightly to be slightly niche, slightly countercultural cuz it's just you countercultural cuz it's just you countercultural cuz it's just you it's just a smaller thing. Like it's just a smaller thing. Like it's just a smaller thing. Like it's just not playing basketball or just not playing basketball or just not playing basketball or something. Yeah, I'm intrigued by um the training Yeah, I'm intrigued by um the training Yeah, I'm intrigued by um the training aspects and the some of the fitness aspects and the some of the fitness aspects and the some of the fitness aspects. I agree that it um having only aspects. I agree that it um having only aspects. I agree that it um having only done it a little bit, I mean, I've been done it a little bit, I mean, I've been done it a little bit, I mean, I've been to a climbing gym once or twice. to a climbing gym once or twice. to a climbing gym once or twice. &gt;&gt; going to ask you. So, is it Yeah, I've &gt;&gt; going to ask you. So, is it Yeah, I've &gt;&gt; going to ask you. So, is it Yeah, I've gone up and down the wall a few times. gone up and down the wall a few times. gone up and down the wall a few times. I've belayed for people a few times, but I've belayed for people a few times, but I've belayed for people a few times, but I haven't by no means um you know, uh I haven't by no means um you know, uh I haven't by no means um you know, uh skilled at it. It'd be fun to get skilled at it. It'd be fun to get skilled at it. It'd be fun to get into cuz I Happy birthday, by the way. into cuz I Happy birthday, by the way. into cuz I Happy birthday, by the way. Just turned 40. I'm turning uh 50 soon Just turned 40. I'm turning uh 50 soon Just turned 40. I'm turning uh 50 soon and um I think more about um I'm happy and um I think more about um I'm happy and um I think more about um I'm happy with my strength and endurance, but I with my strength and endurance, but I with my strength and endurance, but I like I think more about mobility now. like I think more about mobility now. like I think more about mobility now. Mhm. And also Climbing is great for Mhm. And also Climbing is great for Mhm. And also Climbing is great for that. Climbing is great for that and that. Climbing is great for that and that. Climbing is great for that and there's a lot of interesting literature there's a lot of interesting literature there's a lot of interesting literature on brain longevity and just maintaining on brain longevity and just maintaining on brain longevity and just maintaining your cognition and the strength of the your cognition and the strength of the your cognition and the strength of the your of your distal body. So, toes and your of your distal body. So, toes and your of your distal body. So, toes and fingers, believe it or not. It's a fingers, believe it or not. It's a fingers, believe it or not. It's a correlate. Like my toe strength correlate. Like my toe strength correlate. Like my toe strength &gt;&gt; Isn't that I've always thought that's &gt;&gt; Isn't that I've always thought that's &gt;&gt; Isn't that I've always thought that's just a correlation, but that's not just a correlation, but that's not just a correlation, but that's not because Yeah, I'm like because grip because Yeah, I'm like because grip because Yeah, I'm like because grip strength is just a proxy for all like it strength is just a proxy for all like it strength is just a proxy for all like it means that you use your body a lot and means that you use your body a lot and means that you use your body a lot and so therefore you're probably so therefore you're probably so therefore you're probably you know, like when I read those things you know, like when I read those things you know, like when I read those things about like if you have strong grip, it about like if you have strong grip, it about like if you have strong grip, it means this and this and this. I'm like, means this and this and this. I'm like, means this and this and this. I'm like, "No, if you have a strong grip, it means "No, if you have a strong grip, it means "No, if you have a strong grip, it means that you do stuff all the time." And so, that you do stuff all the time." And so, that you do stuff all the time." And so, as a result of doing stuff all the time, as a result of doing stuff all the time, as a result of doing stuff all the time, you're probably sharper than you're probably sharper than you're probably sharper than somebody who doesn't do stuff all the somebody who doesn't do stuff all the somebody who doesn't do stuff all the time. That's right. So, it's a time. That's right. So, it's a time. That's right. So, it's a correlate. Um at the same time, the correlate. Um at the same time, the correlate. Um at the same time, the motor neurons that control like trunk motor neurons that control like trunk motor neurons that control like trunk movements and contraction of the trunk movements and contraction of the trunk movements and contraction of the trunk muscles, like as you go out from the muscles, like as you go out from the muscles, like as you go out from the midline, they are they're in layers in midline, they are they're in layers in midline, they are they're in layers in the spinal cord. So, they're literally the spinal cord. So, they're literally the spinal cord. So, they're literally like the mus- the motor neurons that like the mus- the motor neurons that like the mus- the motor neurons that control like the core sit closer to control like the core sit closer to control like the core sit closer to the sit closer to in the spinal cord to the sit closer to in the spinal cord to the sit closer to in the spinal cord to the midline. And then, you know, across midline. And then, you know, across midline. And then, you know, across evolution like you know, we evolved from evolution like you know, we evolved from evolution like you know, we evolved from animals with fins and f- and wings and animals with fins and f- and wings and animals with fins and f- and wings and some of the same genes are used and some of the same genes are used and some of the same genes are used and eventually you get motor neurons that eventually you get motor neurons that eventually you get motor neurons that control like fine motor movements like control like fine motor movements like control like fine motor movements like this. And it is true that for some this. And it is true that for some this. And it is true that for some reason the motor neurons that control reason the motor neurons that control reason the motor neurons that control the distal body, so toes and the distal body, so toes and the distal body, so toes and fingers, calves and forearms, are more fingers, calves and forearms, are more fingers, calves and forearms, are more vulnerable to age-related degeneration vulnerable to age-related degeneration vulnerable to age-related degeneration than the ones for the for the core. So, than the ones for the for the core. So, than the ones for the for the core. So, by So, it is possible, we don't know by So, it is possible, we don't know by So, it is possible, we don't know yet, that by maintaining strength of the yet, that by maintaining strength of the yet, that by maintaining strength of the of the distal body that you can actually of the distal body that you can actually of the distal body that you can actually um preserve um preserve um preserve motor neuron and cognitive function. motor neuron and cognitive function. motor neuron and cognitive function. There is more of a There is more of a There is more of a And you're set. And you're set. And you're set. And that's why I was curious how And that's why I was curious how And that's why I was curious how climbers, provided they don't fall and climbers, provided they don't fall and climbers, provided they don't fall and kill themselves, how they age. And kill themselves, how they age. And kill themselves, how they age. And there's other things here, too, because there's other things here, too, because there's other things here, too, because like in some sports, like football and like in some sports, like football and like in some sports, like football and rugby, people are getting their head rugby, people are getting their head rugby, people are getting their head hit a lot. So head hit a lot. So head hit a lot. So &gt;&gt; That doesn't You don't tend to age well. &gt;&gt; That doesn't You don't tend to age well. &gt;&gt; That doesn't You don't tend to age well. But I always thought of climbers, you But I always thought of climbers, you But I always thought of climbers, you know, my time up in Yosemite, I'd see know, my time up in Yosemite, I'd see know, my time up in Yosemite, I'd see young guys like you and then I'd see young guys like you and then I'd see young guys like you and then I'd see these like old like these old climbers. these like old like these old climbers. these like old like these old climbers. I was like, man, these guys are in I was like, man, these guys are in I was like, man, these guys are in incredible shape. They're lean, they're incredible shape. They're lean, they're incredible shape. They're lean, they're alive, they seem cognitively fresh. alive, they seem cognitively fresh. alive, they seem cognitively fresh. So it seems like it's a sport where So it seems like it's a sport where So it seems like it's a sport where people hold onto their faculties pretty people hold onto their faculties pretty people hold onto their faculties pretty well. Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think well. Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think well. Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think um you know, it's hard to say cuz there um you know, it's hard to say cuz there um you know, it's hard to say cuz there just aren't that many super old just aren't that many super old just aren't that many super old climbers. And then a lot of the ones climbers. And then a lot of the ones climbers. And then a lot of the ones that come to mind, like sort of famous that come to mind, like sort of famous that come to mind, like sort of famous old climbers, you know, I mean, they die old climbers, you know, I mean, they die old climbers, you know, I mean, they die the same way as that everybody the same way as that everybody the same way as that everybody dies, you know, like cancer or heart dies, you know, like cancer or heart dies, you know, like cancer or heart disease or whatever, but like in their disease or whatever, but like in their disease or whatever, but like in their late 80s or whatever. Um late 80s or whatever. Um late 80s or whatever. Um No, I'm I mean, I think climbing is No, I'm I mean, I think climbing is No, I'm I mean, I think climbing is a great way to age. I mean, I have a great way to age. I mean, I have a great way to age. I mean, I have a bunch of friends who are sort of 50s and bunch of friends who are sort of 50s and bunch of friends who are sort of 50s and 60s who are very fit. Like actually I 60s who are very fit. Like actually I 60s who are very fit. Like actually I mean, the it comes to mind is a this mean, the it comes to mind is a this mean, the it comes to mind is a this friend of mine who's a philosophy friend of mine who's a philosophy friend of mine who's a philosophy professor at UNLV at the university, professor at UNLV at the university, professor at UNLV at the university, but he's incredibly jacked and I think but he's incredibly jacked and I think but he's incredibly jacked and I think he's 64 now. I think he just became the he's 64 now. I think he just became the he's 64 now. I think he just became the oldest person to climb a certain grade, oldest person to climb a certain grade, oldest person to climb a certain grade, like 5.14, which is like kind of an like 5.14, which is like kind of an like 5.14, which is like kind of an elite rock climbing grade. But I think elite rock climbing grade. But I think elite rock climbing grade. But I think he's maybe the oldest person to have he's maybe the oldest person to have he's maybe the oldest person to have done that now. done that now. done that now. But um but he once told me he said to me But um but he once told me he said to me But um but he once told me he said to me that he was at some hotel pool, like in that he was at some hotel pool, like in that he was at some hotel pool, like in middle America, like some conference or middle America, like some conference or middle America, like some conference or something, and some kid asked if he something, and some kid asked if he something, and some kid asked if he could touch his abs cuz he'd never seen could touch his abs cuz he'd never seen could touch his abs cuz he'd never seen He was like, are they real? You know, He was like, are they real? You know, He was like, are they real? You know, like real cuz he's like real cuz he's like real cuz he's like Yeah, when he's like that. Yeah, he's Yeah, when he's like that. Yeah, he's Yeah, when he's like that. Yeah, he's like a 48-year-old professor who's like a 48-year-old professor who's like a 48-year-old professor who's like shredded and some kid in the pool shredded and some kid in the pool shredded and some kid in the pool was like, can I touch those? Is that was like, can I touch those? Is that was like, can I touch those? Is that real? You know, like never seen a thing real? You know, like never seen a thing real? You know, like never seen a thing like that. You know, it says a lot about like that. You know, it says a lot about like that. You know, it says a lot about him and about the state of our country him and about the state of our country him and about the state of our country right now. There's a right now. There's a right now. There's a crisis of obesity that's very crisis of obesity that's very crisis of obesity that's very serious. It goes beyond aesthetics. serious. It goes beyond aesthetics. serious. It goes beyond aesthetics. Um yeah, I've thought about getting Um yeah, I've thought about getting Um yeah, I've thought about getting into climbing. I mean, it it's um into climbing. I mean, it it's um into climbing. I mean, it it's um The problem I had is I tried to just The problem I had is I tried to just The problem I had is I tried to just raw strength it. I just tried to pull up raw strength it. I just tried to pull up raw strength it. I just tried to pull up my weight. Obviously, that's my weight. Obviously, that's my weight. Obviously, that's foolish It's you gas out really fast. foolish It's you gas out really fast. foolish It's you gas out really fast. Yeah, that's a very common thing for Yeah, that's a very common thing for Yeah, that's a very common thing for adults. I mean especially men, adults. I mean especially men, adults. I mean especially men, especially somebody like who's already especially somebody like who's already especially somebody like who's already fit. And so you try to bring the tool fit. And so you try to bring the tool fit. And so you try to bring the tool you already have to it and you're like, you already have to it and you're like, you already have to it and you're like, "No, you got to drive with your legs, "No, you got to drive with your legs, "No, you got to drive with your legs, good technique, mobility, like good technique, mobility, like good technique, mobility, like you know, you know, you know, I like to say that anybody who tries I like to say that anybody who tries I like to say that anybody who tries climbing should think of it as climbing should think of it as climbing should think of it as climbing a really steep staircase where a really steep staircase where a really steep staircase where it's like you're still walking up the it's like you're still walking up the it's like you're still walking up the stairs and you're using the handrail to stairs and you're using the handrail to stairs and you're using the handrail to for balance. But you're not pulling for balance. But you're not pulling for balance. But you're not pulling yourself up the handrail. And most of yourself up the handrail. And most of yourself up the handrail. And most of climbing is basically a steep staircase. climbing is basically a steep staircase. climbing is basically a steep staircase. You know, I mean especially outdoors and You know, I mean especially outdoors and You know, I mean especially outdoors and in climbing gyms is a little bit in climbing gyms is a little bit in climbing gyms is a little bit different cuz the wall is actually different cuz the wall is actually different cuz the wall is actually vertical. But outdoors the wall is vertical. But outdoors the wall is vertical. But outdoors the wall is almost always a little bit less than almost always a little bit less than almost always a little bit less than vertical. So it's like basically you're vertical. So it's like basically you're vertical. So it's like basically you're on a very steep and technical on a very steep and technical on a very steep and technical staircase and then you're using the staircase and then you're using the staircase and then you're using the handrail like the handholds to keep you handrail like the handholds to keep you handrail like the handholds to keep you balanced on the wall. But your legs balanced on the wall. But your legs balanced on the wall. But your legs should always be driving you. I still should always be driving you. I still should always be driving you. I still haven't done Half Dome and um Never? haven't done Half Dome and um Never? haven't done Half Dome and um Never? You've done Clouds Rest a bunch of You've done Clouds Rest a bunch of You've done Clouds Rest a bunch of &gt;&gt; Rest a bunch of times, run Clouds Rest, &gt;&gt; Rest a bunch of times, run Clouds Rest, &gt;&gt; Rest a bunch of times, run Clouds Rest, wrecked Clouds Rest in it. But wrecked Clouds Rest in it. But wrecked Clouds Rest in it. But um Half Dome has those cables. Yeah, um Half Dome has those cables. Yeah, um Half Dome has those cables. Yeah, yeah, it I never was organized enough to yeah, it I never was organized enough to yeah, it I never was organized enough to do the sign-up early enough in the do the sign-up early enough in the do the sign-up early enough in the season. &gt;&gt; don't just do it after the permits. &gt;&gt; don't just do it after the permits. &gt;&gt; don't just do it after the permits. Oh. &gt;&gt; You know, you know the cables stay up &gt;&gt; You know, you know the cables stay up &gt;&gt; You know, you know the cables stay up all year. So when it like when it's out all year. So when it like when it's out all year. So when it like when it's out of season, they take the uprights down, of season, they take the uprights down, of season, they take the uprights down, but the cables just sit there and you but the cables just sit there and you but the cables just sit there and you can do it anytime. It's actually way can do it anytime. It's actually way can do it anytime. It's actually way better to do it post like after the better to do it post like after the better to do it post like after the season cuz there's no permit and there season cuz there's no permit and there season cuz there's no permit and there are no people. And it's like super are no people. And it's like super are no people. And it's like super chill. Okay, I definitely want to do it. chill. Okay, I definitely want to do it. chill. Okay, I definitely want to do it. &gt;&gt; do it do it off season. It's way better. &gt;&gt; do it do it off season. It's way better. &gt;&gt; do it do it off season. It's way better. &gt;&gt; my biggest concern is not that I'm going &gt;&gt; my biggest concern is not that I'm going &gt;&gt; my biggest concern is not that I'm going to fall, is that someone above me is to fall, is that someone above me is to fall, is that someone above me is going to fall. Are you really strong going to fall. Are you really strong going to fall. Are you really strong enough to just glance them off, you enough to just glance them off, you enough to just glance them off, you know, just like shrug them aside? Uh know, just like shrug them aside? Uh know, just like shrug them aside? Uh possibly. I did hear a lot of possibly. I did hear a lot of possibly. I did hear a lot of &gt;&gt; Ideally stop them. Yeah, ideally stop &gt;&gt; Ideally stop them. Yeah, ideally stop &gt;&gt; Ideally stop them. Yeah, ideally stop them. Um them. Um them. Um yeah, I'd love to do it. I've been going yeah, I'd love to do it. I've been going yeah, I'd love to do it. I've been going to Yosemite since I was in my teens. I to Yosemite since I was in my teens. I to Yosemite since I was in my teens. I love it up there. It's it's I wouldn't love it up there. It's it's I wouldn't love it up there. It's it's I wouldn't say it's my second home, but it's say it's my second home, but it's say it's my second home, but it's heaven. I mean it's as you know. And um heaven. I mean it's as you know. And um heaven. I mean it's as you know. And um actually one of the reasons I'm excited actually one of the reasons I'm excited actually one of the reasons I'm excited to talk to you among others is that I to talk to you among others is that I to talk to you among others is that I would like more people to get into the would like more people to get into the would like more people to get into the national parks um national parks um national parks um and really enjoy them cuz they're we and really enjoy them cuz they're we and really enjoy them cuz they're we have so many gems in Yosemite. The high have so many gems in Yosemite. The high have so many gems in Yosemite. The high country in Tuolumne Meadows to me is country in Tuolumne Meadows to me is country in Tuolumne Meadows to me is like is heaven on earth. No, Yosemite like is heaven on earth. No, Yosemite like is heaven on earth. No, Yosemite I mean is a I mean is a I mean is a crown jewel. I mean it's the I think crown jewel. I mean it's the I think crown jewel. I mean it's the I think it's the best national park in the it's the best national park in the it's the best national park in the country. Yeah, people forget it's only country. Yeah, people forget it's only country. Yeah, people forget it's only about a 4-hour drive from the Bay Area about a 4-hour drive from the Bay Area about a 4-hour drive from the Bay Area or from Los Angeles. It's pretty quick. or from Los Angeles. It's pretty quick. or from Los Angeles. It's pretty quick. You go through a bunch of different You go through a bunch of different You go through a bunch of different landscapes and then boom, suddenly landscapes and then boom, suddenly landscapes and then boom, suddenly you're there. Yeah, and it's like you're there. Yeah, and it's like you're there. Yeah, and it's like paradise. It's incredible. paradise. It's incredible. paradise. It's incredible. I'm curious about I'm curious about I'm curious about things in free soloing that as a things in free soloing that as a things in free soloing that as a uninformed spectator, we think, "Oh, you uninformed spectator, we think, "Oh, you uninformed spectator, we think, "Oh, you know, that's the hardest part. That's know, that's the hardest part. That's know, that's the hardest part. That's the most difficult thing." But I That's the most difficult thing." But I That's the most difficult thing." But I imagine um imagine um imagine um in inside of the sport like any uh that in inside of the sport like any uh that in inside of the sport like any uh that there are things that are very difficult there are things that are very difficult there are things that are very difficult and maybe even perilous that we're not and maybe even perilous that we're not and maybe even perilous that we're not aware of. Like what are some of the aware of. Like what are some of the aware of. Like what are some of the non-obvious aspects of free soloing if non-obvious aspects of free soloing if non-obvious aspects of free soloing if they exist? Um because I always think, they exist? Um because I always think, they exist? Um because I always think, "Okay, you know, if "Okay, you know, if "Okay, you know, if I can imagine, "Oh, that's super tough." I can imagine, "Oh, that's super tough." I can imagine, "Oh, that's super tough." But that might be the easier or But that might be the easier or But that might be the easier or uh less tough. Usually they're these uh less tough. Usually they're these uh less tough. Usually they're these kind of hidden um I don't want to call kind of hidden um I don't want to call kind of hidden um I don't want to call them hidden dangers, but hidden dangers them hidden dangers, but hidden dangers them hidden dangers, but hidden dangers in a sport. What are some things in a sport. What are some things in a sport. What are some things that the observer wouldn't be that the observer wouldn't be that the observer wouldn't be aware of? aware of? aware of? Yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure Yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure Yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure what the hidden dangers are. I would say what the hidden dangers are. I would say what the hidden dangers are. I would say though that the obvious visual though that the obvious visual though that the obvious visual dangers like for a non-climber just dangers like for a non-climber just dangers like for a non-climber just watching free soloing, mhm, I think they watching free soloing, mhm, I think they watching free soloing, mhm, I think they generally misperceive all the dangers generally misperceive all the dangers generally misperceive all the dangers and risks involved. You know, they just and risks involved. You know, they just and risks involved. You know, they just see it and they're like, "That's crazy. see it and they're like, "That's crazy. see it and they're like, "That's crazy. That's whatever." You know, and like That's whatever." You know, and like That's whatever." You know, and like whatever they're bringing to it is whatever they're bringing to it is whatever they're bringing to it is probably not the actual case. probably not the actual case. probably not the actual case. Just because Just because Just because it's hard to visually tell what's it's hard to visually tell what's it's hard to visually tell what's challenging in climbing. You know, challenging in climbing. You know, challenging in climbing. You know, you're like, "That's a vertical wall." you're like, "That's a vertical wall." you're like, "That's a vertical wall." But if it's like a nice crack going up a But if it's like a nice crack going up a But if it's like a nice crack going up a vertical wall, that's actually quite vertical wall, that's actually quite vertical wall, that's actually quite easy and secure climbing. easy and secure climbing. easy and secure climbing. But then some of the other stuff, you But then some of the other stuff, you But then some of the other stuff, you know, if they're really small holes know, if they're really small holes know, if they're really small holes you're trusting your feet, I don't know. you're trusting your feet, I don't know. you're trusting your feet, I don't know. I mean, it's It's just really hard to I mean, it's It's just really hard to I mean, it's It's just really hard to judge that stuff visually. Like you have judge that stuff visually. Like you have judge that stuff visually. Like you have to do it to experience it. But I to do it to experience it. But I to do it to experience it. But I think that think that think that honestly the whole perception of that honestly the whole perception of that honestly the whole perception of risk around free soloing is maybe risk around free soloing is maybe risk around free soloing is maybe slightly misperceived by people. So with slightly misperceived by people. So with slightly misperceived by people. So with climbing in general, like if you go climbing in general, like if you go climbing in general, like if you go climbing with a rope, climbing with a rope, climbing with a rope, uh like if you're a traditional climber, uh like if you're a traditional climber, uh like if you're a traditional climber, like you're climbing with a rope and like you're climbing with a rope and like you're climbing with a rope and gear and you're going to climb Half gear and you're going to climb Half gear and you're going to climb Half Dome, let's say. When you start climbing Dome, let's say. When you start climbing Dome, let's say. When you start climbing from the ground, you go some distance from the ground, you go some distance from the ground, you go some distance before you put your first piece of gear before you put your first piece of gear before you put your first piece of gear in cuz that's just kind of the nature of in cuz that's just kind of the nature of in cuz that's just kind of the nature of climbing. You go for a ways and you put climbing. You go for a ways and you put climbing. You go for a ways and you put in some gear, you clip your rope into in some gear, you clip your rope into in some gear, you clip your rope into it, and then you're protected, and then it, and then you're protected, and then it, and then you're protected, and then for whatever distance you're going, for whatever distance you're going, for whatever distance you're going, you're essentially free soloing to that you're essentially free soloing to that you're essentially free soloing to that point. You know, like there's always point. You know, like there's always point. You know, like there's always risk involved in climbing, because even risk involved in climbing, because even risk involved in climbing, because even if you have a rope on, depending on how if you have a rope on, depending on how if you have a rope on, depending on how far you're going above your last piece far you're going above your last piece far you're going above your last piece of gear, and you know, what the terrain of gear, and you know, what the terrain of gear, and you know, what the terrain is like, and whether or not the rock is like, and whether or not the rock is like, and whether or not the rock is good, and all these other factors, good, and all these other factors, good, and all these other factors, you know, you're more or less safe. And you know, you're more or less safe. And you know, you're more or less safe. And so, I think people look at free soloing so, I think people look at free soloing so, I think people look at free soloing as like this binary, like if you don't as like this binary, like if you don't as like this binary, like if you don't have a rope, that's dangerous. And have a rope, that's dangerous. And have a rope, that's dangerous. And you're kind of like, well, anytime you're kind of like, well, anytime you're kind of like, well, anytime you're climbing, there are dangers, or you're climbing, there are dangers, or you're climbing, there are dangers, or there could be, and you're constantly there could be, and you're constantly there could be, and you're constantly evaluating those and trying to evaluating those and trying to evaluating those and trying to mitigate them. mitigate them. mitigate them. And so, I think that's the big And so, I think that's the big And so, I think that's the big misperception, because easy free soloing misperception, because easy free soloing misperception, because easy free soloing is probably like if I if I'm somebody, is probably like if I if I'm somebody, is probably like if I if I'm somebody, you know, who's like an expert rock you know, who's like an expert rock you know, who's like an expert rock climber or whatever, I've been climbing climber or whatever, I've been climbing climber or whatever, I've been climbing 30 years. If I'm on an easy free solo, 30 years. If I'm on an easy free solo, 30 years. If I'm on an easy free solo, that's almost certainly safer than a that's almost certainly safer than a that's almost certainly safer than a very hard very hard very hard certain types of hard climbing with a certain types of hard climbing with a certain types of hard climbing with a rope on. rope on. rope on. You know, and most of my scariest You know, and most of my scariest You know, and most of my scariest experiences as a climber actually have experiences as a climber actually have experiences as a climber actually have been with a rope on, because with a been with a rope on, because with a been with a rope on, because with a rope, you're much more willing to push rope, you're much more willing to push rope, you're much more willing to push yourself into unknown terrain, cuz yourself into unknown terrain, cuz yourself into unknown terrain, cuz you're kind of like, surely there'll be you're kind of like, surely there'll be you're kind of like, surely there'll be something good just around the corner. something good just around the corner. something good just around the corner. And so, you keep going around the And so, you keep going around the And so, you keep going around the corner, and you keep not getting any corner, and you keep not getting any corner, and you keep not getting any good gear, and you're like, holy good gear, and you're like, holy good gear, and you're like, holy it's getting scarier and scarier. Are we it's getting scarier and scarier. Are we it's getting scarier and scarier. Are we allowed to curse? allowed to curse? allowed to curse? &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So, you &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So, you &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So, you know, like know, like know, like &gt;&gt; Even at each other, if you want to curse &gt;&gt; Even at each other, if you want to curse &gt;&gt; Even at each other, if you want to curse at me. Yeah, perfect. But so, a lot of at me. Yeah, perfect. But so, a lot of at me. Yeah, perfect. But so, a lot of my scariest experiences have been with a my scariest experiences have been with a my scariest experiences have been with a rope on, because you're kind of like, rope on, because you're kind of like, rope on, because you're kind of like, I'm sure it'll get better, I'm sure I'm sure it'll get better, I'm sure I'm sure it'll get better, I'm sure it'll get better, and it keeps getting it'll get better, and it keeps getting it'll get better, and it keeps getting worse and worse, and then pretty soon, worse and worse, and then pretty soon, worse and worse, and then pretty soon, you're in some position where you're in some position where you're in some position where you're definitely going to die if you fall, but definitely going to die if you fall, but definitely going to die if you fall, but you never would have climbed into that you never would have climbed into that you never would have climbed into that position if you didn't have a rope on, position if you didn't have a rope on, position if you didn't have a rope on, cuz you're just so much more cuz you're just so much more cuz you're just so much more conservative when you're ropeless. And conservative when you're ropeless. And conservative when you're ropeless. And when you're ropeless, you're kind of when you're ropeless, you're kind of when you're ropeless, you're kind of like, if something seems wrong, you just like, if something seems wrong, you just like, if something seems wrong, you just go down. go down. go down. You know, cuz you're just not going to You know, cuz you're just not going to You know, cuz you're just not going to push that far. push that far. push that far. I saw the movie Meru. And that was I saw the movie Meru. And that was I saw the movie Meru. And that was pretty intense. Um that I mean, that's pretty intense. Um that I mean, that's pretty intense. Um that I mean, that's an example of pushing really freaking an example of pushing really freaking an example of pushing really freaking far with a rope on. You know, it's like far with a rope on. You know, it's like far with a rope on. You know, it's like because you have a rope, you're willing because you have a rope, you're willing because you have a rope, you're willing to just keep pushing into the unknown, to just keep pushing into the unknown, to just keep pushing into the unknown, pushing into the unknown. But then you pushing into the unknown. But then you pushing into the unknown. But then you wind up in a position where you're like, wind up in a position where you're like, wind up in a position where you're like, this is pretty freaking extreme, you this is pretty freaking extreme, you this is pretty freaking extreme, you know? It's like I mean, you saw the know? It's like I mean, you saw the know? It's like I mean, you saw the film, it's all totally insane. film, it's all totally insane. film, it's all totally insane. Yeah, it is insane, and I feel like ice Yeah, it is insane, and I feel like ice Yeah, it is insane, and I feel like ice and snow bring a whole other dimension. and snow bring a whole other dimension. and snow bring a whole other dimension. Yeah, I think that um Yeah, I think that um Yeah, I think that um in your sport, in free soloing like the in your sport, in free soloing like the in your sport, in free soloing like the idea from the spectator side is you the idea from the spectator side is you the idea from the spectator side is you know like these guys like one fall and know like these guys like one fall and know like these guys like one fall and they're and they're dead, right? Um I've they're and they're dead, right? Um I've they're and they're dead, right? Um I've heard you say before that's actually not heard you say before that's actually not heard you say before that's actually not true. I mean yeah, it's kind of true in true. I mean yeah, it's kind of true in true. I mean yeah, it's kind of true in that Yeah, like yeah, it's true that in that Yeah, like yeah, it's true that in that Yeah, like yeah, it's true that in most places if you fall off you're going most places if you fall off you're going most places if you fall off you're going to die. But like when I started free to die. But like when I started free to die. But like when I started free soloing as a as a kid, not that I soloing as a as a kid, not that I soloing as a as a kid, not that I like started and then only did that, but like started and then only did that, but like started and then only did that, but on my first free solo is when I was on my first free solo is when I was on my first free solo is when I was young in back of my mind it would be like if in back of my mind it would be like if in back of my mind it would be like if you slip you'll die. You know, and the you slip you'll die. You know, and the you slip you'll die. You know, and the reality is that there are tons of places reality is that there are tons of places reality is that there are tons of places where your foot can slip and nothing where your foot can slip and nothing where your foot can slip and nothing else moves. You know, like your hands else moves. You know, like your hands else moves. You know, like your hands are locked on, you're holding on tight, are locked on, you're holding on tight, are locked on, you're holding on tight, and your foot slipped and you're just and your foot slipped and you're just and your foot slipped and you're just going to like oh my foot slipped and you going to like oh my foot slipped and you going to like oh my foot slipped and you keep climbing and it's no big deal. keep climbing and it's no big deal. keep climbing and it's no big deal. Um I mean there are also some places Um I mean there are also some places Um I mean there are also some places where if your foot slips you're going to where if your foot slips you're going to where if your foot slips you're going to die for sure. And the key is die for sure. And the key is die for sure. And the key is differentiating between those. differentiating between those. differentiating between those. But I think when I started, you know, it But I think when I started, you know, it But I think when I started, you know, it was like if anything happens you'll die. was like if anything happens you'll die. was like if anything happens you'll die. And as you do it more you're actually And as you do it more you're actually And as you do it more you're actually like no, I mean a lot of things can happen no, I mean a lot of things can happen no, I mean a lot of things can happen and it'll be fine. You just have to make and it'll be fine. You just have to make and it'll be fine. You just have to make sure that the wrong thing doesn't happen sure that the wrong thing doesn't happen sure that the wrong thing doesn't happen at the wrong time. at the wrong time. at the wrong time. I was surprised to hear you say that uh I was surprised to hear you say that uh I was surprised to hear you say that uh yes, free soloists die, but oftentimes yes, free soloists die, but oftentimes yes, free soloists die, but oftentimes they die not free soloing. They die they die not free soloing. They die they die not free soloing. They die doing other things. Uh I'm fascinated by doing other things. Uh I'm fascinated by doing other things. Uh I'm fascinated by this not through a morbid fascination, this not through a morbid fascination, this not through a morbid fascination, but for a number of reasons. So uh maybe but for a number of reasons. So uh maybe but for a number of reasons. So uh maybe you could elaborate on that a little you could elaborate on that a little you could elaborate on that a little bit. &gt;&gt; Yeah, there's a there's a quote in the &gt;&gt; Yeah, there's a there's a quote in the &gt;&gt; Yeah, there's a there's a quote in the film Free Solo where a friend of mine film Free Solo where a friend of mine film Free Solo where a friend of mine Tommy Caldwell, who's a very well-known Tommy Caldwell, who's a very well-known Tommy Caldwell, who's a very well-known climber, says something like all the climber, says something like all the climber, says something like all the people who are big free soloists are people who are big free soloists are people who are big free soloists are dead now. And it kind of implies like dead now. And it kind of implies like dead now. And it kind of implies like you know, free soloing is dangerous and you know, free soloing is dangerous and you know, free soloing is dangerous and they all died soloing. But the reality they all died soloing. But the reality they all died soloing. But the reality is that basically none of them died is that basically none of them died is that basically none of them died soloing. Like one or two soloists have soloing. Like one or two soloists have soloing. Like one or two soloists have died soloing. Though my preferred died soloing. Though my preferred died soloing. Though my preferred statistic is that no one has ever died statistic is that no one has ever died statistic is that no one has ever died doing something cutting edge. So like no doing something cutting edge. So like no doing something cutting edge. So like no one has ever died pushing the envelope one has ever died pushing the envelope one has ever died pushing the envelope like doing something extreme. There've like doing something extreme. There've like doing something extreme. There've been a couple free soloists who have been a couple free soloists who have been a couple free soloists who have died free soloing easy terrain, like died free soloing easy terrain, like died free soloing easy terrain, like just out doing something casual and just out doing something casual and just out doing something casual and maybe a hold breaks or maybe something maybe a hold breaks or maybe something maybe a hold breaks or maybe something happens, like it's impossible to know happens, like it's impossible to know happens, like it's impossible to know what because they die. Um what because they die. Um what because they die. Um but then the bulk of other people who but then the bulk of other people who but then the bulk of other people who are sort of known for free soloing have are sort of known for free soloing have are sort of known for free soloing have died either in parachuting accidents died either in parachuting accidents died either in parachuting accidents like wingsuiting or base jumping. Or a like wingsuiting or base jumping. Or a like wingsuiting or base jumping. Or a one got swept out to sea by a rogue one got swept out to sea by a rogue one got swept out to sea by a rogue wave, it's kind of freak thing. wave, it's kind of freak thing. wave, it's kind of freak thing. Um one died in a car accident, you know, Um one died in a car accident, you know, Um one died in a car accident, you know, just like things like you know, it's just like things like you know, it's just like things like you know, it's basically just ways that people die. basically just ways that people die. basically just ways that people die. So, all that to say it's not clear that free all that to say it's not clear that free all that to say it's not clear that free soloing is the most dangerous. We have a soloing is the most dangerous. We have a soloing is the most dangerous. We have a friend um who unfortunately is dead now, friend um who unfortunately is dead now, friend um who unfortunately is dead now, Ken Block, who was a famous rally car Ken Block, who was a famous rally car Ken Block, who was a famous rally car driver and um driver and um driver and um did uh with our photographer here at the did uh with our photographer here at the did uh with our photographer here at the podcast, Mike Blaback, and film podcast, Mike Blaback, and film podcast, Mike Blaback, and film crews with DC, did uh he developed he crews with DC, did uh he developed he crews with DC, did uh he developed he was one of the founders of DC, like DC was one of the founders of DC, like DC was one of the founders of DC, like DC shoes, DC clothing etc. Uh rally car. Um shoes, DC clothing etc. Uh rally car. Um shoes, DC clothing etc. Uh rally car. Um unfortunately he died in a snowmobiling unfortunately he died in a snowmobiling unfortunately he died in a snowmobiling accident. So, something very like accident. So, something very like accident. So, something very like kind of conventional for his daily life. kind of conventional for his daily life. kind of conventional for his daily life. He lived out in Utah and He lived out in Utah and He lived out in Utah and you know, um obviously a huge tragedy. you know, um obviously a huge tragedy. you know, um obviously a huge tragedy. Um and then you go look at kind of Um and then you go look at kind of Um and then you go look at kind of people who do quote-unquote extreme people who do quote-unquote extreme people who do quote-unquote extreme sports, for lack of a better term, and sports, for lack of a better term, and sports, for lack of a better term, and you find that um it's fairly common for you find that um it's fairly common for you find that um it's fairly common for people who are at the peak of their of a people who are at the peak of their of a people who are at the peak of their of a of a field, of a sport, to um die doing of a field, of a sport, to um die doing of a field, of a sport, to um die doing something else that they really enjoy. something else that they really enjoy. something else that they really enjoy. And you kind of wonder like, are they And you kind of wonder like, are they And you kind of wonder like, are they um pushing themselves, or is it that um pushing themselves, or is it that um pushing themselves, or is it that they're just too a little too they're just too a little too they're just too a little too relaxed? Cuz as you said, rarely do free relaxed? Cuz as you said, rarely do free relaxed? Cuz as you said, rarely do free soloists die like in soloists die like in soloists die like in the most difficult aspects of the climb. the most difficult aspects of the climb. the most difficult aspects of the climb. So, maybe it's that letting go of the So, maybe it's that letting go of the So, maybe it's that letting go of the mental engagement. Like there's a change mental engagement. Like there's a change mental engagement. Like there's a change in the threshold of what they consider in the threshold of what they consider in the threshold of what they consider dangerous. So, unless they need to be dangerous. So, unless they need to be dangerous. So, unless they need to be locked in, there's just some lack of locked in, there's just some lack of locked in, there's just some lack of attention to detail. This is my way of attention to detail. This is my way of attention to detail. This is my way of trying to save your life, basically. trying to save your life, basically. trying to save your life, basically. &gt;&gt; I appreciate it. Anything you're doing &gt;&gt; I appreciate it. Anything you're doing &gt;&gt; I appreciate it. Anything you're doing besides free soloing, be very, very besides free soloing, be very, very besides free soloing, be very, very careful, please. Reign it in. Yeah, we careful, please. Reign it in. Yeah, we careful, please. Reign it in. Yeah, we need to No, I mean, I also would suspect need to No, I mean, I also would suspect need to No, I mean, I also would suspect that all of the people that we're that all of the people that we're that all of the people that we're talking about are all just a little talking about are all just a little talking about are all just a little they're just bigger risk takers in they're just bigger risk takers in they're just bigger risk takers in general. They're just more willing to do general. They're just more willing to do general. They're just more willing to do things like drive quickly and you know, things like drive quickly and you know, things like drive quickly and you know, do whatever. do whatever. do whatever. Um just more willing to take risk in their just more willing to take risk in their just more willing to take risk in their life and I suppose sooner or later life and I suppose sooner or later life and I suppose sooner or later those things catch up with you, or they those things catch up with you, or they those things catch up with you, or they can. Yeah. Though that said, with free can. Yeah. Though that said, with free can. Yeah. Though that said, with free soloing, two of the world's best free soloing, two of the world's best free soloing, two of the world's best free soloists from the previous generations soloists from the previous generations soloists from the previous generations are still alive, you know, older men are still alive, you know, older men are still alive, you know, older men just living their best lives, doing just living their best lives, doing just living their best lives, doing their thing. Still free soloing? their thing. Still free soloing? their thing. Still free soloing? Yeah, um maybe not at like a super high Yeah, um maybe not at like a super high Yeah, um maybe not at like a super high level, Maybe not pushing themselves level, Maybe not pushing themselves level, Maybe not pushing themselves hard, but yeah, like certainly could. hard, but yeah, like certainly could. hard, but yeah, like certainly could. So, man and Peter Croft, he's a Canadian but man and Peter Croft, he's a Canadian but man and Peter Croft, he's a Canadian but has lived in the US forever. He was like has lived in the US forever. He was like has lived in the US forever. He was like my childhood hero growing up and he's an my childhood hero growing up and he's an my childhood hero growing up and he's an incredible soul. Actually, there's a incredible soul. Actually, there's a incredible soul. Actually, there's a film with him or a scene with him in film with him or a scene with him in film with him or a scene with him in the film Free Solo. He's kind of like a the film Free Solo. He's kind of like a the film Free Solo. He's kind of like a They kind of frame him as like a mentor They kind of frame him as like a mentor They kind of frame him as like a mentor figure though honestly he wasn't a figure though honestly he wasn't a figure though honestly he wasn't a mentor cuz I was too afraid to ever even mentor cuz I was too afraid to ever even mentor cuz I was too afraid to ever even talk to him cuz he was like such a talk to him cuz he was like such a talk to him cuz he was like such a personal hero. But I mean he's such a personal hero. But I mean he's such a personal hero. But I mean he's such a He's incredible. He's super nice guy. He's incredible. He's super nice guy. He's incredible. He's super nice guy. And so I'm And so I'm And so I'm we're both sponsored by The North Face we're both sponsored by The North Face we're both sponsored by The North Face now so we're friends we're on the same now so we're friends we're on the same now so we're friends we're on the same team and so I've like hung out with him team and so I've like hung out with him team and so I've like hung out with him at events and things and I was having at events and things and I was having at events and things and I was having dinner with him once and I was kind of dinner with him once and I was kind of dinner with him once and I was kind of like, "Oh, at what point did you kind of like, "Oh, at what point did you kind of like, "Oh, at what point did you kind of end the cutting-edge free soloing?" And end the cutting-edge free soloing?" And end the cutting-edge free soloing?" And he was like, "Oh, actually I did a he was like, "Oh, actually I did a he was like, "Oh, actually I did a couple of my hardest solos like in terms couple of my hardest solos like in terms couple of my hardest solos like in terms of grades like not necessarily the most of grades like not necessarily the most of grades like not necessarily the most cutting-edge but kind of the hardest cutting-edge but kind of the hardest cutting-edge but kind of the hardest grades like within the last several grades like within the last several grades like within the last several years." And I was like, "Really?" And years." And I was like, "Really?" And years." And I was like, "Really?" And he'd still, you know, he's still just he'd still, you know, he's still just he'd still, you know, he's still just like kind of doing stuff and fit and like kind of doing stuff and fit and like kind of doing stuff and fit and he's psyched and he's psyched and he's psyched and he's got to be and he's got to be and he's got to be I don't know. I don't want to offend him I don't know. I don't want to offend him I don't know. I don't want to offend him but he's got to be like mid-50s or like but he's got to be like mid-50s or like but he's got to be like mid-50s or like maybe 60. Like, you know, he's Awesome. maybe 60. Like, you know, he's Awesome. maybe 60. Like, you know, he's Awesome. &gt;&gt; He's uh yeah, and he's still incredible. &gt;&gt; He's uh yeah, and he's still incredible. &gt;&gt; He's uh yeah, and he's still incredible. He's still climbing all the time. And He's still climbing all the time. And He's still climbing all the time. And even on his rest days he goes down into even on his rest days he goes down into even on his rest days he goes down into the same climbing areas to hang out with the same climbing areas to hang out with the same climbing areas to hang out with his friends and chitchat and like take his friends and chitchat and like take his friends and chitchat and like take his dog to the cliff and stuff. his dog to the cliff and stuff. his dog to the cliff and stuff. So, you know, I look at somebody like So, you know, I look at somebody like So, you know, I look at somebody like him who's basically made an entire life him who's basically made an entire life him who's basically made an entire life of free soloing and I'm kind of like, of free soloing and I'm kind of like, of free soloing and I'm kind of like, "You know, if you do it carefully, you "You know, if you do it carefully, you "You know, if you do it carefully, you know, make good decisions, you know, make good decisions, you know, make good decisions, I don't think it has to be sketchy." How I don't think it has to be sketchy." How I don't think it has to be sketchy." How awesome is it that you're friends and awesome is it that you're friends and awesome is it that you're friends and co-workers with one of your childhood co-workers with one of your childhood co-workers with one of your childhood heroes? &gt;&gt; Oh, it's the best. That's actually I &gt;&gt; Oh, it's the best. That's actually I &gt;&gt; Oh, it's the best. That's actually I think one of the best things about being think one of the best things about being think one of the best things about being a professional climber. It's so many of a professional climber. It's so many of a professional climber. It's so many of the people that I was the people that I was the people that I was that I looked up to as a kid, you know, that I looked up to as a kid, you know, that I looked up to as a kid, you know, are now our friends and peers and things are now our friends and peers and things are now our friends and peers and things and you're like, "Oh, it's so great." and you're like, "Oh, it's so great." and you're like, "Oh, it's so great." Wow, that's awesome. Wow, that's awesome. Wow, that's awesome. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, you get to like hang out &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, you get to like hang out &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, you get to like hang out with your heroes and you're like, "Oh, with your heroes and you're like, "Oh, with your heroes and you're like, "Oh, it turns out they're actually really it turns out they're actually really it turns out they're actually really nice guys." nice guys." nice guys." &gt;&gt; Yeah, no, it's amazing. There's some &gt;&gt; Yeah, no, it's amazing. There's some &gt;&gt; Yeah, no, it's amazing. There's some young kid out there now thinking the same. kid out there now thinking the same. kid out there now thinking the same. He's like, "I'm too afraid to go up to He's like, "I'm too afraid to go up to He's like, "I'm too afraid to go up to Alex and say hello." Uh and uh They Alex and say hello." Uh and uh They Alex and say hello." Uh and uh They should just say hello. Yeah. I don't should just say hello. Yeah. I don't should just say hello. Yeah. I don't know about know about know about maybe working together, maybe working together, maybe working together, right? Yeah, totally. I mean in the same right? Yeah, totally. I mean in the same right? Yeah, totally. I mean in the same way that I was like so afraid ever talk way that I was like so afraid ever talk way that I was like so afraid ever talk to Peter when I was young and then to Peter when I was young and then to Peter when I was young and then ultimately now he's just another nice ultimately now he's just another nice ultimately now he's just another nice guy and we're friends. We climb guy and we're friends. We climb guy and we're friends. We climb together. It's great. Sort of like, together. It's great. Sort of like, together. It's great. Sort of like, yeah, anybody should just say hi. You yeah, anybody should just say hi. You yeah, anybody should just say hi. You know, it's like if they're at the if know, it's like if they're at the if know, it's like if they're at the if we're at the cliff, like come chat. You we're at the cliff, like come chat. You we're at the cliff, like come chat. You know, it's like we're all doing the same know, it's like we're all doing the same know, it's like we're all doing the same thing. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for more than 13 years now. I AG1 for more than 13 years now. I AG1 for more than 13 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been drinking it every day since. For been drinking it every day since. For been drinking it every day since. For the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same original flavor. They've updated the original flavor. They've updated the original flavor. They've updated the formulation, but the flavor has always formulation, but the flavor has always formulation, but the flavor has always remained the same. And now, for the remained the same. And now, for the remained the same. And now, for the first time, AG1 is available in three first time, AG1 is available in three first time, AG1 is available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and new flavors: berry, citrus, and new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. All the flavors include the tropical. All the flavors include the tropical. All the flavors include the highest quality ingredients in exactly highest quality ingredients in exactly highest quality ingredients in exactly the right doses to together provide the right doses to together provide the right doses to together provide support for your gut microbiome, support for your gut microbiome, support for your gut microbiome, support for your immune health, and support for your immune health, and support for your immune health, and support for better energy and more. So, now you can better energy and more. So, now you can better energy and more. So, now you can find the flavor of AG1 that you like the find the flavor of AG1 that you like the find the flavor of AG1 that you like the most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially when I mix original flavor, especially when I mix original flavor, especially when I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon it with water and a little bit of lemon it with water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. That's how I've been or lime juice. That's how I've been or lime juice. That's how I've been doing it for basically 13 years. Now, I doing it for basically 13 years. Now, I doing it for basically 13 years. Now, I really enjoy the new berry flavor in really enjoy the new berry flavor in really enjoy the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great and I don't particular. It tastes great and I don't particular. It tastes great and I don't have to add any lemon or lime juice. I have to add any lemon or lime juice. I have to add any lemon or lime juice. I just mix it up with water. If you'd like just mix it up with water. If you'd like just mix it up with water. If you'd like to try AG1 and these new flavors, you to try AG1 and these new flavors, you to try AG1 and these new flavors, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that includes five free travel packs and a includes five free travel packs and a includes five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2. Again, go free bottle of vitamin D3K2. Again, go free bottle of vitamin D3K2. Again, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to drinkag1.com/huberman to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit of five to claim the special welcome kit of five to claim the special welcome kit of five free travel packs and a free bottle of free travel packs and a free bottle of free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2. vitamin D3K2. vitamin D3K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Maui Nui Venison. Maui Nui Venison. Maui Nui Venison. Maui Nui Venison is the most Maui Nui Venison is the most Maui Nui Venison is the most nutrient-dense and delicious red meat nutrient-dense and delicious red meat nutrient-dense and delicious red meat available. It's also ethically sourced. available. It's also ethically sourced. available. It's also ethically sourced. Maui Nui hunts and harvests wild axis Maui Nui hunts and harvests wild axis Maui Nui hunts and harvests wild axis deer on the island of Maui. This solves deer on the island of Maui. This solves deer on the island of Maui. This solves the problem of managing an invasive the problem of managing an invasive the problem of managing an invasive species while also creating an species while also creating an species while also creating an extraordinary source of protein. As I've extraordinary source of protein. As I've extraordinary source of protein. As I've discussed on this podcast before, most discussed on this podcast before, most discussed on this podcast before, most people should aim for getting 1 g of people should aim for getting 1 g of people should aim for getting 1 g of quality protein per pound of body weight quality protein per pound of body weight quality protein per pound of body weight each day. This allows for optimal muscle each day. This allows for optimal muscle each day. This allows for optimal muscle protein synthesis, while also helping to protein synthesis, while also helping to protein synthesis, while also helping to reduce appetite and support proper reduce appetite and support proper reduce appetite and support proper metabolic health. Given Maui Nui's metabolic health. Given Maui Nui's metabolic health. Given Maui Nui's exceptional protein to calorie ratio, exceptional protein to calorie ratio, exceptional protein to calorie ratio, this protein target is achievable this protein target is achievable this protein target is achievable without having to eat too many calories. without having to eat too many calories. without having to eat too many calories. Their venison delivers 21 g of protein Their venison delivers 21 g of protein Their venison delivers 21 g of protein with only 107 g per serving, which is an with only 107 g per serving, which is an with only 107 g per serving, which is an ideal ratio for those of us concerned ideal ratio for those of us concerned ideal ratio for those of us concerned with maintaining or increasing muscle with maintaining or increasing muscle with maintaining or increasing muscle mass while supporting health. They have mass while supporting health. They have mass while supporting health. They have venison steaks, ground venison, and venison steaks, ground venison, and venison steaks, ground venison, and venison bone broth. I personally love venison bone broth. I personally love venison bone broth. I personally love all of them. In fact, I probably eat a all of them. In fact, I probably eat a all of them. In fact, I probably eat a Maui Nui venison burger pretty much Maui Nui venison burger pretty much Maui Nui venison burger pretty much every day. And if I don't do that, I eat every day. And if I don't do that, I eat every day. And if I don't do that, I eat one of their steaks. And sometimes I one of their steaks. And sometimes I one of their steaks. And sometimes I also consume their bone broth. And if also consume their bone broth. And if also consume their bone broth. And if you're on the go, they have Maui Nui you're on the go, they have Maui Nui you're on the go, they have Maui Nui venison sticks, which have 10 g of venison sticks, which have 10 g of venison sticks, which have 10 g of protein per stick with just 55 calories. protein per stick with just 55 calories. protein per stick with just 55 calories. I eat at least one of those a day to I eat at least one of those a day to I eat at least one of those a day to meet my protein requirements. Right now, meet my protein requirements. Right now, meet my protein requirements. Right now, Maui Nui is offering Huberman podcast Maui Nui is offering Huberman podcast Maui Nui is offering Huberman podcast listeners a limited collection of my listeners a limited collection of my listeners a limited collection of my favorite cuts and products. It's perfect favorite cuts and products. It's perfect favorite cuts and products. It's perfect for anyone looking to improve their diet for anyone looking to improve their diet for anyone looking to improve their diet with delicious, high-quality protein. with delicious, high-quality protein. with delicious, high-quality protein. Supplies are limited, so go to Supplies are limited, so go to Supplies are limited, so go to mauinuivenison.com/huberman to get access to this high-quality meat to get access to this high-quality meat to get access to this high-quality meat today. Again, that's today. Again, that's today. Again, that's mauinuivenison.com/huberman. Do most climbers, um, as they're coming Do most climbers, um, as they're coming Do most climbers, um, as they're coming up, if they have aspirations to be, up, if they have aspirations to be, up, if they have aspirations to be, you know, great free soloists or you know, great free soloists or you know, great free soloists or other types of climbers, um, do they other types of climbers, um, do they other types of climbers, um, do they tend to work and do other things or is tend to work and do other things or is tend to work and do other things or is this like a you're like all in, you're this like a you're like all in, you're this like a you're like all in, you're it's lifestyle, you live in a you're it's lifestyle, you live in a you're it's lifestyle, you live in a van? I mean, uh, you can do that also van? I mean, uh, you can do that also van? I mean, uh, you can do that also after achieving, um, some degree of after achieving, um, some degree of after achieving, um, some degree of financial success. We know you've done financial success. We know you've done financial success. We know you've done that, we can talk about that, but is it that, we can talk about that, but is it that, we can talk about that, but is it the kind of thing where you have to give the kind of thing where you have to give the kind of thing where you have to give up other aspects of life in order to get up other aspects of life in order to get up other aspects of life in order to get really, really good at it? That's an really, really good at it? That's an really, really good at it? That's an interesting question. interesting question. interesting question. I'm not totally sure because in some I'm not totally sure because in some I'm not totally sure because in some ways, so it depends what you mean by ways, so it depends what you mean by ways, so it depends what you mean by achieving success as a climber because achieving success as a climber because achieving success as a climber because if you're trying to climb the hardest if you're trying to climb the hardest if you're trying to climb the hardest grades or go to the Olympics or things grades or go to the Olympics or things grades or go to the Olympics or things like that, in some ways you're almost like that, in some ways you're almost like that, in some ways you're almost better off, uh, being a university better off, uh, being a university better off, uh, being a university student or something, like having a student or something, like having a student or something, like having a structured schedule that in some ways structured schedule that in some ways structured schedule that in some ways limits the amount of that you can climb limits the amount of that you can climb limits the amount of that you can climb because you know, I don't know enough about you know, I don't know enough about you know, I don't know enough about other sports but I suspect this is other sports but I suspect this is other sports but I suspect this is akin to like powerlifting or something akin to like powerlifting or something akin to like powerlifting or something where it's like if you're trying to be where it's like if you're trying to be where it's like if you're trying to be really strong, you kind of only really strong, you kind of only really strong, you kind of only need to do a little bit every couple need to do a little bit every couple need to do a little bit every couple days and then recover. And so for a sort days and then recover. And so for a sort days and then recover. And so for a sort of elite physical training for climbing, of elite physical training for climbing, of elite physical training for climbing, you really only need, you know, say you really only need, you know, say you really only need, you know, say three or four hour sessions four or five three or four hour sessions four or five three or four hour sessions four or five days a week and then it's like what do days a week and then it's like what do days a week and then it's like what do you do with the rest of your time? And you do with the rest of your time? And you do with the rest of your time? And so like you might as well have a job or so like you might as well have a job or so like you might as well have a job or and so a lot of my friends who like and so a lot of my friends who like and so a lot of my friends who like write code for a living or you know, do write code for a living or you know, do write code for a living or you know, do things like that are very strong things like that are very strong things like that are very strong climbers because of the climbers because of the climbers because of the schedule that allows the structure. schedule that allows the structure. schedule that allows the structure. Um that said, I think if you want to be Um that said, I think if you want to be Um that said, I think if you want to be a great free soloist or like a big a great free soloist or like a big a great free soloist or like a big adventure climber, you're probably adventure climber, you're probably adventure climber, you're probably better off living in a van and just better off living in a van and just better off living in a van and just doing the thing non-stop doing the thing non-stop doing the thing non-stop because for that you're not trying to have that for that you're not trying to have that for that you're not trying to have that peak muscular performance, you're trying peak muscular performance, you're trying peak muscular performance, you're trying to just learn a skill and do something to just learn a skill and do something to just learn a skill and do something all the time and so then like hours of all the time and so then like hours of all the time and so then like hours of practice I think matter more. practice I think matter more. practice I think matter more. Anyway. Maybe we can talk a little bit Anyway. Maybe we can talk a little bit Anyway. Maybe we can talk a little bit about recovery as long as you're talking about recovery as long as you're talking about recovery as long as you're talking about, you know, number of hours that about, you know, number of hours that about, you know, number of hours that one puts in. one puts in. one puts in. Um I'm sure your recovery looks different I'm sure your recovery looks different I'm sure your recovery looks different than it used to. than it used to. than it used to. Um but what do you do to recover Um but what do you do to recover Um but what do you do to recover between sessions? Are you big believer between sessions? Are you big believer between sessions? Are you big believer in sauna, cold? Is it Is it just in sauna, cold? Is it Is it just in sauna, cold? Is it Is it just basically sleep? No, like push my basically sleep? No, like push my basically sleep? No, like push my three-year-old on the swings, you know, three-year-old on the swings, you know, three-year-old on the swings, you know, like that's how I recover. So I like that's how I recover. So I like that's how I recover. So I like play with the kids on the swings and play with the kids on the swings and play with the kids on the swings and I try to I mean I you know, I and I try to I mean I you know, I and I try to I mean I you know, I try to eat relatively well. I try to try to eat relatively well. I try to try to eat relatively well. I try to sleep enough. Like I do all the basics sleep enough. Like I do all the basics sleep enough. Like I do all the basics for recovery. But um but no, I mean I for recovery. But um but no, I mean I for recovery. But um but no, I mean I basically just survive in between. basically just survive in between. basically just survive in between. I was actually just joking with somebody I was actually just joking with somebody I was actually just joking with somebody that I think you know, as a as a that I think you know, as a as a that I think you know, as a as a 24-year-old living by myself in a van 24-year-old living by myself in a van 24-year-old living by myself in a van I would have crazy days of climbing and I would have crazy days of climbing and I would have crazy days of climbing and then on a rest day I would like binge then on a rest day I would like binge then on a rest day I would like binge watch an entire season of some show watch an entire season of some show watch an entire season of some show while eating an entire flat of Oreos while eating an entire flat of Oreos while eating an entire flat of Oreos just like never even leave the bed of my just like never even leave the bed of my just like never even leave the bed of my van and then the next day go out and van and then the next day go out and van and then the next day go out and like do a speed record on something or like do a speed record on something or like do a speed record on something or just be like I'm so psyched. You just be like I'm so psyched. You just be like I'm so psyched. You know, and now I'm like I'm definitely know, and now I'm like I'm definitely know, and now I'm like I'm definitely not doing that now not doing that now not doing that now or at least or at least or at least No, I haven't done that in forever cuz I No, I haven't done that in forever cuz I No, I haven't done that in forever cuz I don't have the time and I don't have I don't have the time and I don't have I don't have the time and I don't have uh Yeah, so I think now it takes a little Yeah, so I think now it takes a little Yeah, so I think now it takes a little more effort to recover more effort to recover more effort to recover and it's just a little slower probably. and it's just a little slower probably. and it's just a little slower probably. So, all So, all So, all &gt;&gt; hard to say though because a lot of &gt;&gt; hard to say though because a lot of &gt;&gt; hard to say though because a lot of that's just having kids and just that's just having kids and just that's just having kids and just having different demands of time and having different demands of time and having different demands of time and life. But it sounds like climbers are life. But it sounds like climbers are life. But it sounds like climbers are pretty uh grassroots in their in are pretty uh grassroots in their in are pretty uh grassroots in their in their training and techniques. Like, you their training and techniques. Like, you their training and techniques. Like, you know, in a lot of other areas Yeah, I know, in a lot of other areas Yeah, I know, in a lot of other areas Yeah, I mean, I was living in a van. I was mean, I was living in a van. I was mean, I was living in a van. I was basically like, basically like, basically like, you know, super low overhead, no you know, super low overhead, no you know, super low overhead, no team, no support. I'm just living in a team, no support. I'm just living in a team, no support. I'm just living in a car doing the thing nonstop for car doing the thing nonstop for car doing the thing nonstop for you know, a decade. you know, a decade. you know, a decade. And so, that's a pretty scrappy approach And so, that's a pretty scrappy approach And so, that's a pretty scrappy approach and I think that in the years since and I think that in the years since and I think that in the years since then, climbing has professionalized a then, climbing has professionalized a then, climbing has professionalized a little bit and there's a little more little bit and there's a little more little bit and there's a little more money, there's a little more support and money, there's a little more support and money, there's a little more support and there's just a higher level of there's just a higher level of there's just a higher level of competition, I think. Um competition, I think. Um competition, I think. Um it'd be harder to it'd be harder to it'd be harder to achieve things doing just that now. I to achieve things doing just that now. I to achieve things doing just that now. I think you'd have to have a little more think you'd have to have a little more think you'd have to have a little more of a plan. of a plan. of a plan. Yeah, I can't help but sense that Yeah, I can't help but sense that Yeah, I can't help but sense that hyperbaric chambers and red light and hyperbaric chambers and red light and hyperbaric chambers and red light and massage guns and all that are going to massage guns and all that are going to massage guns and all that are going to be making their way into the climbing be making their way into the climbing be making their way into the climbing culture. &gt;&gt; for sure are there. Yeah, massage &gt;&gt; for sure are there. Yeah, massage &gt;&gt; for sure are there. Yeah, massage guns are there. massage guns are there. massage guns are there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I try to like roll out or &gt;&gt; Yeah. I try to like roll out or &gt;&gt; Yeah. I try to like roll out or whatever. Even when I was living in my whatever. Even when I was living in my whatever. Even when I was living in my van, I would stretch and roll out and do van, I would stretch and roll out and do van, I would stretch and roll out and do those types of things cuz you just kind those types of things cuz you just kind those types of things cuz you just kind of have to stay supple. Yeah, how do you of have to stay supple. Yeah, how do you of have to stay supple. Yeah, how do you feel? How's your body feel? How's your body feel? How's your body feel? Well, I mean, right now I think pretty Well, I mean, right now I think pretty Well, I mean, right now I think pretty good. I don't know. Yeah, when I'm um I good. I don't know. Yeah, when I'm um I good. I don't know. Yeah, when I'm um I live in Las Vegas. When I'm at home, I live in Las Vegas. When I'm at home, I live in Las Vegas. When I'm at home, I try to uh see this bodyworker in town try to uh see this bodyworker in town try to uh see this bodyworker in town once a week. Pat, sweet Pat, he's the once a week. Pat, sweet Pat, he's the once a week. Pat, sweet Pat, he's the man. And so, uh man. And so, uh man. And so, uh you know, I think of that as kind of you know, I think of that as kind of you know, I think of that as kind of like a basic just taking care of you like a basic just taking care of you like a basic just taking care of you know, making it's like an oil change. know, making it's like an oil change. know, making it's like an oil change. It's like making sure the engine runs It's like making sure the engine runs It's like making sure the engine runs smoothly. Mhm. And and I think smoothly. Mhm. And and I think smoothly. Mhm. And and I think as a result of bodywork like that, I as a result of bodywork like that, I as a result of bodywork like that, I haven't had any major like overuse haven't had any major like overuse haven't had any major like overuse injuries in years. So, like that's injuries in years. So, like that's injuries in years. So, like that's pretty good for me. Awesome. that's pretty good for me. Awesome. that's pretty good for me. Awesome. Yeah, I'm maybe it's just because it's Yeah, I'm maybe it's just because it's Yeah, I'm maybe it's just because it's uh historically it was what I knew, but uh historically it was what I knew, but uh historically it was what I knew, but I'm seeing so many parallels with I'm seeing so many parallels with I'm seeing so many parallels with skateboarding where like there was this skateboarding where like there was this skateboarding where like there was this time when no skateboarders lifted time when no skateboarders lifted time when no skateboarders lifted weights or did any kind of fitness. Then weights or did any kind of fitness. Then weights or did any kind of fitness. Then that started to happen. Actually, Danny that started to happen. Actually, Danny that started to happen. Actually, Danny Way who jumped the Great Wall of China, Way who jumped the Great Wall of China, Way who jumped the Great Wall of China, he was kind of the first person in he was kind of the first person in he was kind of the first person in skateboarding to like he would do like skateboarding to like he would do like skateboarding to like he would do like neck training cuz he had broken his neck training cuz he had broken his neck training cuz he had broken his neck surfing in Newport. And he was doing surfing in Newport. And he was doing surfing in Newport. And he was doing like these um you know like the where like these um you know like the where like these um you know like the where you like swing the ball above your head. you like swing the ball above your head. you like swing the ball above your head. He was doing core work, and I remember He was doing core work, and I remember He was doing core work, and I remember back then thinking I sort of left back then thinking I sort of left back then thinking I sort of left skateboarding at that point. And I was skateboarding at that point. And I was skateboarding at that point. And I was thinking like skateboarders are thinking like skateboarders are thinking like skateboarders are just like really have a problem with just like really have a problem with just like really have a problem with this because it wasn't consistent with this because it wasn't consistent with this because it wasn't consistent with the culture. Now there are a lot of guys the culture. Now there are a lot of guys the culture. Now there are a lot of guys who work out and take care of their who work out and take care of their who work out and take care of their bodies, but bodies, but bodies, but there are still a lot of guys who there are still a lot of guys who there are still a lot of guys who absolutely kill it. They're incredible, absolutely kill it. They're incredible, absolutely kill it. They're incredible, and their energy drink is like a beer, and their energy drink is like a beer, and their energy drink is like a beer, and their uh quote unquote neutropic is and their uh quote unquote neutropic is and their uh quote unquote neutropic is cigarettes, and they murder it. cigarettes, and they murder it. cigarettes, and they murder it. They're super good. And and so I like They're super good. And and so I like They're super good. And and so I like these sports where it's like you can't these sports where it's like you can't these sports where it's like you can't get around just investing a massive get around just investing a massive get around just investing a massive number of hours doing it. And then there number of hours doing it. And then there number of hours doing it. And then there you can either take the kind of rock you can either take the kind of rock you can either take the kind of rock and roll track into it, or you can take and roll track into it, or you can take and roll track into it, or you can take the kind of self-care track, and the kind of self-care track, and the kind of self-care track, and sometimes people cross over, but you sometimes people cross over, but you sometimes people cross over, but you know it works either way. It really know it works either way. It really know it works either way. It really does. Climbing still has that exact same does. Climbing still has that exact same does. Climbing still has that exact same thing going on where you can kind of go thing going on where you can kind of go thing going on where you can kind of go either way. I do think though that the either way. I do think though that the either way. I do think though that the self-care track will obviously win out self-care track will obviously win out self-care track will obviously win out long-term. I mean that's the thing with long-term. I mean that's the thing with long-term. I mean that's the thing with climbing being in the Olympics and just climbing being in the Olympics and just climbing being in the Olympics and just the professionalism all that. I mean the professionalism all that. I mean the professionalism all that. I mean obviously self-care is better for you obviously self-care is better for you obviously self-care is better for you long-term. It's like you know everybody long-term. It's like you know everybody long-term. It's like you know everybody knows that. That said, you still see a knows that. That said, you still see a knows that. That said, you still see a lot of very provision climbers who yeah lot of very provision climbers who yeah lot of very provision climbers who yeah exactly just kind of party, go hard. I exactly just kind of party, go hard. I exactly just kind of party, go hard. I mean cuz so much of climbing just comes mean cuz so much of climbing just comes mean cuz so much of climbing just comes down to the effort when you're doing the down to the effort when you're doing the down to the effort when you're doing the thing. Like if you go climbing several thing. Like if you go climbing several thing. Like if you go climbing several days a week and you try your absolute days a week and you try your absolute days a week and you try your absolute hardest every time you're climbing, hardest every time you're climbing, hardest every time you're climbing, you're going to get pretty freaking you're going to get pretty freaking you're going to get pretty freaking good. You know, whether you do red light good. You know, whether you do red light good. You know, whether you do red light therapy or like any other weird other therapy or like any other weird other therapy or like any other weird other stuff or not. So it's like I mean it stuff or not. So it's like I mean it stuff or not. So it's like I mean it really just comes down to your effort really just comes down to your effort really just comes down to your effort doing the thing. So yeah, I mean you doing the thing. So yeah, I mean you doing the thing. So yeah, I mean you could live in a I mean a lot of climbers could live in a I mean a lot of climbers could live in a I mean a lot of climbers especially in the past lived on a diet especially in the past lived on a diet especially in the past lived on a diet of you know cigarettes and coffee and of you know cigarettes and coffee and of you know cigarettes and coffee and freaking beer. And you know you can and freaking beer. And you know you can and freaking beer. And you know you can you can you can get by that way. Yeah, you can you can get by that way. Yeah, you can you can get by that way. Yeah, the 1970s, 80s approach. It's not ideal. the 1970s, 80s approach. It's not ideal. the 1970s, 80s approach. It's not ideal. It's not ideal. A friend of mine Tom It's not ideal. A friend of mine Tom It's not ideal. A friend of mine Tom Bilyeu, he is Bilyeu, he is Bilyeu, he is very successful in business. He also has very successful in business. He also has very successful in business. He also has a podcast. He was saying to me the other a podcast. He was saying to me the other a podcast. He was saying to me the other day. He goes, "Yeah, basically when day. He goes, "Yeah, basically when day. He goes, "Yeah, basically when young people ask me you know how to get young people ask me you know how to get young people ask me you know how to get good at whatever business or anything." good at whatever business or anything." good at whatever business or anything." He just tells them, He just tells them, He just tells them, "Um work as if smartphones didn't exist. work as if smartphones didn't exist. work as if smartphones didn't exist. Meaning when you're bored go work on the Meaning when you're bored go work on the Meaning when you're bored go work on the thing. When you don't have any like if thing. When you don't have any like if thing. When you don't have any like if you get rid I'm not encouraging people you get rid I'm not encouraging people you get rid I'm not encouraging people get rid of their smartphone, but I'm get rid of their smartphone, but I'm get rid of their smartphone, but I'm curious about your relationship to curious about your relationship to curious about your relationship to technology because I think nowadays even technology because I think nowadays even technology because I think nowadays even though there are people training for the though there are people training for the though there are people training for the Olympics and whatnot that it is very Olympics and whatnot that it is very Olympics and whatnot that it is very hard to disengage from pressures of hard to disengage from pressures of hard to disengage from pressures of sponsors, pressures of just sheer sponsors, pressures of just sheer sponsors, pressures of just sheer communications, right? Um and if you're communications, right? Um and if you're communications, right? Um and if you're coming up this idea that you always have coming up this idea that you always have coming up this idea that you always have to be in contact with people. You limits to be in contact with people. You limits to be in contact with people. You limits the total number of reps that you're the total number of reps that you're the total number of reps that you're that you get physically but also that you get physically but also that you get physically but also mentally. Cuz I imagine there was a lot mentally. Cuz I imagine there was a lot mentally. Cuz I imagine there was a lot of time sitting back in bed and thinking of time sitting back in bed and thinking of time sitting back in bed and thinking about climbing. about climbing. about climbing. Just like I used to sit back in bed and Just like I used to sit back in bed and Just like I used to sit back in bed and think about experiments and you know think about experiments and you know think about experiments and you know when I was in graduate school now I'd when I was in graduate school now I'd when I was in graduate school now I'd probably that phones didn't exist I'd probably that phones didn't exist I'd probably that phones didn't exist I'd probably be on my phone. I used to think probably be on my phone. I used to think probably be on my phone. I used to think about experiments and figures and what about experiments and figures and what about experiments and figures and what would this work and that work. So what would this work and that work. So what would this work and that work. So what are your thoughts on kind of a mental are your thoughts on kind of a mental are your thoughts on kind of a mental engagement separate from climbing? No, I engagement separate from climbing? No, I engagement separate from climbing? No, I think that's definitely a big think that's definitely a big think that's definitely a big thing. I mean I think I've thought thing. I mean I think I've thought thing. I mean I think I've thought in the past that in some ways I feel in the past that in some ways I feel in the past that in some ways I feel kind of lucky that I came up when I did kind of lucky that I came up when I did kind of lucky that I came up when I did in climbing where it's like sort of in climbing where it's like sort of in climbing where it's like sort of pre-smartphone, pre-social, pre you pre-smartphone, pre-social, pre you pre-smartphone, pre-social, pre you know, you just live in your car and you know, you just live in your car and you know, you just live in your car and you do the thing and that's it and do the thing and that's it and do the thing and that's it and that's your whole lifestyle. that's your whole lifestyle. that's your whole lifestyle. I mean currently, you know, I have all I mean currently, you know, I have all I mean currently, you know, I have all the social media the social media the social media accounts and things but I don't have any accounts and things but I don't have any accounts and things but I don't have any of the apps on my phone. I have a friend of the apps on my phone. I have a friend of the apps on my phone. I have a friend that manages it for me. I like send all that manages it for me. I like send all that manages it for me. I like send all the content to her where she posts stuff the content to her where she posts stuff the content to her where she posts stuff and so it's a nice way to sort of and so it's a nice way to sort of and so it's a nice way to sort of disconnect myself from scrolling disconnect myself from scrolling disconnect myself from scrolling aimlessly. I don't really have the time anymore I don't really have the time anymore I don't really have the time anymore anyway, you know, it's like I'd rather anyway, you know, it's like I'd rather anyway, you know, it's like I'd rather play with my kids than for sure play with my kids than for sure play with my kids than for sure scroll. You know, it's like You know, it's like You know, it's like but no, I mean that's tough. I but no, I mean that's tough. I but no, I mean that's tough. I mean I think it'd be hard to be a kid now I think it'd be hard to be a kid now I think it'd be hard to be a kid now growing up like thinking that that's the growing up like thinking that that's the growing up like thinking that that's the norm that you like have to be connected norm that you like have to be connected norm that you like have to be connected that you have to be capturing that you have to be capturing that you have to be capturing everything, you know, documenting and everything, you know, documenting and everything, you know, documenting and then sharing it and posting and just all then sharing it and posting and just all then sharing it and posting and just all the stuff. the stuff. the stuff. I've always felt like the thing about I've always felt like the thing about I've always felt like the thing about being a professional climber is that you being a professional climber is that you being a professional climber is that you just have to be a good climber. Like just have to be a good climber. Like just have to be a good climber. Like first and foremost the key to being a first and foremost the key to being a first and foremost the key to being a professional climber is being able to professional climber is being able to professional climber is being able to climb really well. And like the most climb really well. And like the most climb really well. And like the most important thing is doing the thing. important thing is doing the thing. important thing is doing the thing. And I just think when you get caught up And I just think when you get caught up And I just think when you get caught up in all the posting, sharing, in all the posting, sharing, in all the posting, sharing, streaming, all the whatever, that's not streaming, all the whatever, that's not streaming, all the whatever, that's not doing the thing. You know, but it's doing the thing. You know, but it's doing the thing. You know, but it's easy to conflate them and it's I don't easy to conflate them and it's I don't easy to conflate them and it's I don't know. Yeah, no, I think it'd be really hard. Yeah, no, I think it'd be really hard. Yeah, no, I think it'd be really hard. Yeah, I agree completely. And and the Yeah, I agree completely. And and the Yeah, I agree completely. And and the hidden secret is that if you want hidden secret is that if you want hidden secret is that if you want something interesting to show on social something interesting to show on social something interesting to show on social media, the key is to not be on social media, the key is to not be on social media, the key is to not be on social media so you have something to bring to media so you have something to bring to media so you have something to bring to it. &gt;&gt; Totally. It's just so hard to actually &gt;&gt; Totally. It's just so hard to actually &gt;&gt; Totally. It's just so hard to actually be good at something and it's And then be good at something and it's And then be good at something and it's And then this is goes back to what we were just this is goes back to what we were just this is goes back to what we were just talking about with free soloing and talking about with free soloing and talking about with free soloing and perceived risk and all that kind of perceived risk and all that kind of perceived risk and all that kind of stuff. It's just really easy to make stuff. It's just really easy to make stuff. It's just really easy to make something look rad soloing-wise. Like, something look rad soloing-wise. Like, something look rad soloing-wise. Like, you know, I could climb I could climb you know, I could climb I could climb you know, I could climb I could climb the outside of this building and it the outside of this building and it the outside of this building and it would like look insane. It would get would like look insane. It would get would like look insane. It would get tons of likes. People would think it's tons of likes. People would think it's tons of likes. People would think it's cool. But it's not cutting edge. It's cool. But it's not cutting edge. It's cool. But it's not cutting edge. It's not cool. It's not even hard. Like it's not cool. It's not even hard. Like it's not cool. It's not even hard. Like it's not it's not it's not it's whatever. But to actually do it's whatever. But to actually do it's whatever. But to actually do something that's cutting edge or something that's cutting edge or something that's cutting edge or newsworthy in climbing newsworthy in climbing newsworthy in climbing it's pretty freaking hard, you it's pretty freaking hard, you it's pretty freaking hard, you know? And and the challenge with know? And and the challenge with know? And and the challenge with social and with public, all that kind of social and with public, all that kind of social and with public, all that kind of stuff, is that it's just so easy to stuff, is that it's just so easy to stuff, is that it's just so easy to I don't want to say to fake it because I don't want to say to fake it because I don't want to say to fake it because it's not like people are out there like it's not like people are out there like it's not like people are out there like trying to be duplicitous or like to trying to be duplicitous or like to trying to be duplicitous or like to trick you, but it's just you can get the trick you, but it's just you can get the trick you, but it's just you can get the same splash with none of the effort, you same splash with none of the effort, you same splash with none of the effort, you know, and through social stuff, know, and through social stuff, know, and through social stuff, I think. I think. I think. You're like, "Oh, I just did something You're like, "Oh, I just did something You're like, "Oh, I just did something easy and people thought it was amazing. easy and people thought it was amazing. easy and people thought it was amazing. Let's call that good." And you're like, Let's call that good." And you're like, Let's call that good." And you're like, "Well, that's just not good cuz it's "Well, that's just not good cuz it's "Well, that's just not good cuz it's easy. It's freaking, you know, it's like easy. It's freaking, you know, it's like easy. It's freaking, you know, it's like it's not cutting edge. It's not rad." I it's not cutting edge. It's not rad." I it's not cutting edge. It's not rad." I mean, you clearly go after big mean, you clearly go after big mean, you clearly go after big goals. I mean, it's a it's a goals. I mean, it's a it's a goals. I mean, it's a it's a giant goal. I think it really stands giant goal. I think it really stands giant goal. I think it really stands and I know you've been told this many and I know you've been told this many and I know you've been told this many times before. So, um if it embarrasses times before. So, um if it embarrasses times before. So, um if it embarrasses you in a positive way, then great. Um I you in a positive way, then great. Um I you in a positive way, then great. Um I mean, it stands as perhaps at least mean, it stands as perhaps at least mean, it stands as perhaps at least one of the most impressive physical one of the most impressive physical one of the most impressive physical feats i- in history because the feats i- in history because the feats i- in history because the risk-consequence uh scenario there was risk-consequence uh scenario there was risk-consequence uh scenario there was you fall, you can potentially die. There you fall, you can potentially die. There you fall, you can potentially die. There may have been moments along the along may have been moments along the along may have been moments along the along the climb where the climb where the climb where &gt;&gt; moments, yeah. &gt;&gt; moments, yeah. &gt;&gt; moments, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, moments &gt;&gt; Yeah, moments &gt;&gt; Yeah, moments &gt;&gt; right above a ledge where you're like, &gt;&gt; right above a ledge where you're like, &gt;&gt; right above a ledge where you're like, "Oh, wow." "Oh, wow." "Oh, wow." &gt;&gt; so okay. So, and it's and it's so like &gt;&gt; so okay. So, and it's and it's so like &gt;&gt; so okay. So, and it's and it's so like you to point out those moments as you to point out those moments as you to point out those moments as opposed to all the other moments. It opposed to all the other moments. It opposed to all the other moments. It really speaks to your mindset. Um but I really speaks to your mindset. Um but I really speaks to your mindset. Um but I think that going after big things, I think that going after big things, I think that going after big things, I mean, you know, uh mean, you know, uh mean, you know, uh you know, you know, you know, building rockets to go to the moon. I remember rockets to go to the moon. I remember rockets to go to the moon. I remember when I was a kid, Dean Weymouth had to when I was a kid, Dean Weymouth had to when I was a kid, Dean Weymouth had to jump the Great Wall of China to do it jump the Great Wall of China to do it jump the Great Wall of China to do it live. Someone had died trying it on a live. Someone had died trying it on a live. Someone had died trying it on a mountain bike. I remember think I mountain bike. I remember think I mountain bike. I remember think I watched it on a little screen this big watched it on a little screen this big watched it on a little screen this big and I was like, and I was like, and I was like, I've known that guy since we're out of I've known that guy since we're out of I've known that guy since we're out of touch now, but touch now, but touch now, but for the most part, but since for the most part, but since for the most part, but since he was like 13 and he was always going he was like 13 and he was always going he was like 13 and he was always going after big things, jumping out of helicopters, big things, jumping out of helicopters, big things, jumping out of helicopters, you know, jumping the Great Wall of you know, jumping the Great Wall of you know, jumping the Great Wall of China, like, you know, and then there China, like, you know, and then there China, like, you know, and then there are people who just push themselves. And are people who just push themselves. And are people who just push themselves. And so what I wonder is on a daily so what I wonder is on a daily so what I wonder is on a daily basis, when you climb, when you climb, when you climb, um do you ever just climb for fun? do you ever just climb for fun? do you ever just climb for fun? When you climb, are you always working When you climb, are you always working When you climb, are you always working on something? And on something? And on something? And there's this famous scene in Free Solo there's this famous scene in Free Solo there's this famous scene in Free Solo like more or less immediately after you got more or less immediately after you got more or less immediately after you got down from the climb, your finger down from the climb, your finger down from the climb, your finger boarding again and like you're boarding again and like you're boarding again and like you're training and you're enjoying your training and you're enjoying your training and you're enjoying your routine, which by the way is consistent with which by the way is consistent with which by the way is consistent with keeping the dopamine flowing for process keeping the dopamine flowing for process keeping the dopamine flowing for process as opposed to like the postpartum as opposed to like the postpartum as opposed to like the postpartum depression that many people experience depression that many people experience depression that many people experience after a big feat is completed, selling a after a big feat is completed, selling a after a big feat is completed, selling a big company, etc. You avoid all that by big company, etc. You avoid all that by big company, etc. You avoid all that by doing exactly what you're doing. But doing exactly what you're doing. But doing exactly what you're doing. But then how quickly did your mind pivot to then how quickly did your mind pivot to then how quickly did your mind pivot to like, okay, what's next? Uh in the like, okay, what's next? Uh in the like, okay, what's next? Uh in the domain of climbing because I realize domain of climbing because I realize domain of climbing because I realize you've had two children, you have you've had two children, you have you've had two children, you have got other aspects of your life, but like got other aspects of your life, but like got other aspects of your life, but like where's your mind in terms of where you where's your mind in terms of where you where's your mind in terms of where you want to take your life and your want to take your life and your want to take your life and your climbing? Yeah, on the one hand I set big goals, I Yeah, on the one hand I set big goals, I Yeah, on the one hand I set big goals, I guess, you know, something like El Cap. guess, you know, something like El Cap. guess, you know, something like El Cap. But the thing is I would actually say But the thing is I would actually say But the thing is I would actually say that's more of the outgrowth of setting that's more of the outgrowth of setting that's more of the outgrowth of setting consistent little goals like all the consistent little goals like all the consistent little goals like all the time. Like I basically always have a time. Like I basically always have a time. Like I basically always have a running to-do list of like what am I running to-do list of like what am I running to-do list of like what am I doing to- morrow? What am I doing today? doing to- morrow? What am I doing today? doing to- morrow? What am I doing today? What am I trying to do this week? And What am I trying to do this week? And What am I trying to do this week? And that extends to climbing as well with that extends to climbing as well with that extends to climbing as well with like what are all the little things I like what are all the little things I like what are all the little things I can be doing? Like what are the little can be doing? Like what are the little can be doing? Like what are the little things I can tick this week? You know, I things I can tick this week? You know, I things I can tick this week? You know, I have my climbing journal goes back to have my climbing journal goes back to have my climbing journal goes back to 2005 or six or something. So basically 2005 or six or something. So basically 2005 or six or something. So basically everything I've ever climbed is everything I've ever climbed is everything I've ever climbed is logged with you know, difficulty and logged with you know, difficulty and logged with you know, difficulty and times and whatever. And so I'm times and whatever. And so I'm times and whatever. And so I'm constantly trying to tick things as a constantly trying to tick things as a constantly trying to tick things as a climber, you know, just like to do new climber, you know, just like to do new climber, you know, just like to do new climbs that I haven't done before. And climbs that I haven't done before. And climbs that I haven't done before. And so I mean I think so I mean I think so I mean I think like actually my day climbing like actually my day climbing like actually my day climbing yesterday could be a good example of yesterday could be a good example of yesterday could be a good example of this. So, yesterday my wife and I this. So, yesterday my wife and I this. So, yesterday my wife and I dropped off our older daughter at dropped off our older daughter at dropped off our older daughter at school, went to the cliff, uh did a day school, went to the cliff, uh did a day school, went to the cliff, uh did a day of sport climbing, uh and then picked up of sport climbing, uh and then picked up of sport climbing, uh and then picked up our daughter on the way home. It's like our daughter on the way home. It's like our daughter on the way home. It's like a perfect day like that where you can a perfect day like that where you can a perfect day like that where you can kind of like make it all work. kind of like make it all work. kind of like make it all work. And I'm not going to be able to go to that I'm not going to be able to go to that I'm not going to be able to go to that cliff very often this season just cliff very often this season just cliff very often this season just because of travel and work and life, because of travel and work and life, because of travel and work and life, basically. And so, I don't want to basically. And so, I don't want to basically. And so, I don't want to have any big project there because I have any big project there because I have any big project there because I just won't have time to do it. You know, just won't have time to do it. You know, just won't have time to do it. You know, I'm trying to set my goals appropriately I'm trying to set my goals appropriately I'm trying to set my goals appropriately where I'm like, "Oh, there's no point where I'm like, "Oh, there's no point where I'm like, "Oh, there's no point trying to do something that would take trying to do something that would take trying to do something that would take me a month or two to achieve if I only me a month or two to achieve if I only me a month or two to achieve if I only have 3 days." have 3 days." have 3 days." And so, I had a goal for that day of And so, I had a goal for that day of And so, I had a goal for that day of trying to do this very particular little trying to do this very particular little trying to do this very particular little combination of routes that I hadn't done combination of routes that I hadn't done combination of routes that I hadn't done before. It's just something new, before. It's just something new, before. It's just something new, something interesting. It's not that something interesting. It's not that something interesting. It's not that hard. But, then we got there and it was hard. But, then we got there and it was hard. But, then we got there and it was it was like the worst conditions. It was it was like the worst conditions. It was it was like the worst conditions. It was like 86° when we parked the car. And so, like 86° when we parked the car. And so, like 86° when we parked the car. And so, you know, it's like you're trying to you know, it's like you're trying to you know, it's like you're trying to work out in like horrendously hot. And work out in like horrendously hot. And work out in like horrendously hot. And it was also that kind of monsoony, so it was also that kind of monsoony, so it was also that kind of monsoony, so it was very humid. So, we got to the wall was very humid. So, we got to the wall was very humid. So, we got to the wall and it's like disgusting. And I was kind and it's like disgusting. And I was kind and it's like disgusting. And I was kind of like, "Well, you know, it's a of like, "Well, you know, it's a of like, "Well, you know, it's a training day. Like, whatever." And so, I training day. Like, whatever." And so, I training day. Like, whatever." And so, I tried to do this new combination of tried to do this new combination of tried to do this new combination of routes. Ultimately, I failed on it. I routes. Ultimately, I failed on it. I routes. Ultimately, I failed on it. I fell at the very freaking top of the fell at the very freaking top of the fell at the very freaking top of the wall. I was like so maxed. And didn't do wall. I was like so maxed. And didn't do wall. I was like so maxed. And didn't do it. Uh I'll probably get a chance to go it. Uh I'll probably get a chance to go it. Uh I'll probably get a chance to go back on Monday and hope and I'll for back on Monday and hope and I'll for back on Monday and hope and I'll for sure do it then. Um sure do it then. Um sure do it then. Um but, you know, it's like a very small but, you know, it's like a very small but, you know, it's like a very small goal. Like, this isn't cutting-edge like goal. Like, this isn't cutting-edge like goal. Like, this isn't cutting-edge like big. This isn't This isn't even cool at big. This isn't This isn't even cool at big. This isn't This isn't even cool at all. Like, my friends won't even care. all. Like, my friends won't even care. all. Like, my friends won't even care. You like they'll think it's stupid. But, You like they'll think it's stupid. But, You like they'll think it's stupid. But, but it's nice for me to have a reason but it's nice for me to have a reason but it's nice for me to have a reason for me to try my hardest for that for me to try my hardest for that for me to try my hardest for that particular day of climbing. particular day of climbing. particular day of climbing. And I think that the big goals come as a And I think that the big goals come as a And I think that the big goals come as a result of all these little things. You result of all these little things. You result of all these little things. You know, like if day by day you're know, like if day by day you're know, like if day by day you're constantly doing something that's a constantly doing something that's a constantly doing something that's a little bit new, a little bit different, little bit new, a little bit different, little bit new, a little bit different, a little bit harder, you know, whatever a little bit harder, you know, whatever a little bit harder, you know, whatever seems like the appropriate challenge for seems like the appropriate challenge for seems like the appropriate challenge for that day. that day. that day. I think that I think that I think that looking back at 20 years of climbing looking back at 20 years of climbing looking back at 20 years of climbing outside nonstop, that the big things outside nonstop, that the big things outside nonstop, that the big things have just come as a natural outgrowth of have just come as a natural outgrowth of have just come as a natural outgrowth of all these little things. You do like all these little things. You do like all these little things. You do like enough little things all the time and enough little things all the time and enough little things all the time and then every once in a while something big then every once in a while something big then every once in a while something big happens. And so, And so, And so, I don't know. Like, you know, but I have I don't know. Like, you know, but I have I don't know. Like, you know, but I have to-do lists going back like years of to-do lists going back like years of to-do lists going back like years of like goals and all these aspirations. like goals and all these aspirations. like goals and all these aspirations. And you know, some years I only do half And you know, some years I only do half And you know, some years I only do half of them. Some years I do a third of them. Some years I do a third of them. Some years I do a third of them. And then, you know, something like them. And then, you know, something like them. And then, you know, something like free soloing El Cap sat on a list like free soloing El Cap sat on a list like free soloing El Cap sat on a list like that literally for years and it kept that literally for years and it kept that literally for years and it kept floating to the next year, to the next floating to the next year, to the next floating to the next year, to the next year. Cuz you get into Yosemite, you year. Cuz you get into Yosemite, you year. Cuz you get into Yosemite, you look at the wall and you're like, nah, look at the wall and you're like, nah, look at the wall and you're like, nah, that's not you know, you're like totally that's not you know, you're like totally that's not you know, you're like totally out of the question. And so, you just out of the question. And so, you just out of the question. And so, you just like punt to the next year. And so, like punt to the next year. And so, like punt to the next year. And so, yeah, I mean, sometimes the goals don't yeah, I mean, sometimes the goals don't yeah, I mean, sometimes the goals don't happen, sometimes they do, but you kind happen, sometimes they do, but you kind happen, sometimes they do, but you kind of just have to let it play out, you of just have to let it play out, you of just have to let it play out, you know, it's more like the day-to-day know, it's more like the day-to-day know, it's more like the day-to-day little challenges. I love how little challenges. I love how little challenges. I love how matter-of-fact you are about it. You are matter-of-fact you are about it. You are matter-of-fact you are about it. You are wired different. wired different. wired different. &gt;&gt; You think? I mean, Um well, maybe not. I &gt;&gt; You think? I mean, Um well, maybe not. I &gt;&gt; You think? I mean, Um well, maybe not. I mean, because um like and this is a mean, because um like and this is a mean, because um like and this is a vastly um less uh high-risk, vastly um less uh high-risk, vastly um less uh high-risk, high-consequence endeavor, but like um high-consequence endeavor, but like um high-consequence endeavor, but like um public speaking doesn't make me it public speaking doesn't make me it public speaking doesn't make me it doesn't raise my level of cortisol or doesn't raise my level of cortisol or doesn't raise my level of cortisol or autonomic arousal at all, cuz I've done autonomic arousal at all, cuz I've done autonomic arousal at all, cuz I've done so much of it, right? so much of it, right? so much of it, right? &gt;&gt; well practiced, yeah. &gt;&gt; well practiced, yeah. &gt;&gt; well practiced, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, just yeah, so um sometimes &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, just yeah, so um sometimes &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, just yeah, so um sometimes I'll, you know, I'll think like, oh, I'm I'll, you know, I'll think like, oh, I'm I'll, you know, I'll think like, oh, I'm like a little more keyed up than I want like a little more keyed up than I want like a little more keyed up than I want to be and I'll I know how to calm myself to be and I'll I know how to calm myself to be and I'll I know how to calm myself down. &gt;&gt; actually I feel the same way with public &gt;&gt; actually I feel the same way with public &gt;&gt; actually I feel the same way with public speaking now, but that's after years of speaking now, but that's after years of speaking now, but that's after years of practice, cuz it used to be it used to practice, cuz it used to be it used to practice, cuz it used to be it used to be so stressful for me. Like so, yeah, be so stressful for me. Like so, yeah, be so stressful for me. Like so, yeah, no, I was I was so shy. no, I was I was so shy. no, I was I was so shy. &gt;&gt; does work like everyone else's. &gt;&gt; does work like everyone else's. &gt;&gt; does work like everyone else's. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I mean, exactly. That's why I &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I mean, exactly. That's why I &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I mean, exactly. That's why I hate all this stuff. It's like, oh, hate all this stuff. It's like, oh, hate all this stuff. It's like, oh, you're just wired differently. Cuz I'm you're just wired differently. Cuz I'm you're just wired differently. Cuz I'm like, no, I know that, you know, like like, no, I know that, you know, like like, no, I know that, you know, like yeah, public like speaking in front of a yeah, public like speaking in front of a yeah, public like speaking in front of a class in school was like mortifying. But class in school was like mortifying. But class in school was like mortifying. But now, after years of doing keynote now, after years of doing keynote now, after years of doing keynote speeches to like giant groups, I'm sort speeches to like giant groups, I'm sort speeches to like giant groups, I'm sort of like, no, it's super chill. But, of like, no, it's super chill. But, of like, no, it's super chill. But, you know, that's all learned. you know, that's all learned. you know, that's all learned. &gt;&gt; Yeah, forgive me for saying you're wired &gt;&gt; Yeah, forgive me for saying you're wired &gt;&gt; Yeah, forgive me for saying you're wired different. I think that, you know, when different. I think that, you know, when different. I think that, you know, when you did free solo, there were a number you did free solo, there were a number you did free solo, there were a number of news programs that like took of news programs that like took of news programs that like took advantage of the fact they put you in a advantage of the fact they put you in a advantage of the fact they put you in a brain scanner, you know, this is my brain scanner, you know, this is my brain scanner, you know, this is my field of neuroscience, you know, his field of neuroscience, you know, his field of neuroscience, you know, his amygdala might not be activated the same amygdala might not be activated the same amygdala might not be activated the same way as other people's, but I would have way as other people's, but I would have way as other people's, but I would have thought, and I think it's the case now, thought, and I think it's the case now, thought, and I think it's the case now, you confirmed, that it's really you confirmed, that it's really you confirmed, that it's really domain specific. Like you've done so domain specific. Like you've done so domain specific. Like you've done so much climbing, you have so many reps much climbing, you have so many reps much climbing, you have so many reps there, that you're familiar with the there, that you're familiar with the there, that you're familiar with the contingencies. And so, it's not that you contingencies. And so, it's not that you contingencies. And so, it's not that you can't experience fear, it's that you're can't experience fear, it's that you're can't experience fear, it's that you're not placing yourself into truly fearful not placing yourself into truly fearful not placing yourself into truly fearful circumstances climbing. But, the fact circumstances climbing. But, the fact circumstances climbing. But, the fact that public speaking was an issue means that public speaking was an issue means that public speaking was an issue means that your threat sensors and the that your threat sensors and the that your threat sensors and the amygdala and related circuits work amygdala and related circuits work amygdala and related circuits work perfectly fine. perfectly fine. perfectly fine. &gt;&gt; With that particular like scanning an &gt;&gt; With that particular like scanning an &gt;&gt; With that particular like scanning an fMRI, you know, they show you a bunch of fMRI, you know, they show you a bunch of fMRI, you know, they show you a bunch of black mark pictures and it's like black mark pictures and it's like black mark pictures and it's like whether or not that triggers the fear whether or not that triggers the fear whether or not that triggers the fear response. And I was like, well, response. And I was like, well, response. And I was like, well, obviously looking at pictures isn't obviously looking at pictures isn't obviously looking at pictures isn't going to trigger my fear response. But going to trigger my fear response. But going to trigger my fear response. But I'm like, had they thrown a snake into I'm like, had they thrown a snake into I'm like, had they thrown a snake into the fMRI with me, like that would have the fMRI with me, like that would have the fMRI with me, like that would have triggered my fear response, you know, if triggered my fear response, you know, if triggered my fear response, you know, if there were like giant spiders like there were like giant spiders like there were like giant spiders like crawling over me, like that would crawling over me, like that would crawling over me, like that would probably would, too. And so, I was like, probably would, too. And so, I was like, probably would, too. And so, I was like, no, obviously I feel fear. I just I'm no, obviously I feel fear. I just I'm no, obviously I feel fear. I just I'm just not afraid of black and white just not afraid of black and white just not afraid of black and white photos, you know. photos, you know. photos, you know. &gt;&gt; Right. That's what they used? Oh, yeah, &gt;&gt; Right. That's what they used? Oh, yeah, &gt;&gt; Right. That's what they used? Oh, yeah, like angry faces and that kind of the like angry faces and that kind of the like angry faces and that kind of the faces. &gt;&gt; Um uh it wasn't even faces. It was like &gt;&gt; Um uh it wasn't even faces. It was like &gt;&gt; Um uh it wasn't even faces. It was like random stuff, like, I don't know, like a random stuff, like, I don't know, like a random stuff, like, I don't know, like a gun and then like a light socket, you gun and then like a light socket, you gun and then like a light socket, you know, some things that are like neutral, know, some things that are like neutral, know, some things that are like neutral, some things that are some things that are some things that are &gt;&gt; should have designed the experiment. My &gt;&gt; should have designed the experiment. My &gt;&gt; should have designed the experiment. My lab used to work on fear. Yeah, I'm not lab used to work on fear. Yeah, I'm not lab used to work on fear. Yeah, I'm not trying to be disparaging of the trying to be disparaging of the trying to be disparaging of the research. My lab used to work on fear. research. My lab used to work on fear. research. My lab used to work on fear. We use VR. That's how I met Michael We use VR. That's how I met Michael We use VR. That's how I met Michael Muller, our friend in common. He Muller, our friend in common. He Muller, our friend in common. He took me down to Guadalupe. We did two times. Uh we went down there 2016 two times. Uh we went down there 2016 two times. Uh we went down there 2016 and 2017 uh doing cage exit diving with and 2017 uh doing cage exit diving with and 2017 uh doing cage exit diving with great whites filming with uh to get the great whites filming with uh to get the great whites filming with uh to get the VR. And I'll tell you in real life VR. And I'll tell you in real life VR. And I'll tell you in real life it's a hell of a lot scarier than it is it's a hell of a lot scarier than it is it's a hell of a lot scarier than it is Totally than in VR. But uh along the Totally than in VR. But uh along the Totally than in VR. But uh along the lines of, you know, dying when you're lines of, you know, dying when you're lines of, you know, dying when you're doing the other thing, uh not that the doing the other thing, uh not that the doing the other thing, uh not that the main thing, the cage exit part ended up main thing, the cage exit part ended up main thing, the cage exit part ended up being a lot safer. I had an air failure being a lot safer. I had an air failure being a lot safer. I had an air failure while in the cage. I was on that hookah while in the cage. I was on that hookah while in the cage. I was on that hookah line, and I was alone in the cage when line, and I was alone in the cage when line, and I was alone in the cage when it happened. And I'll tell you that was it happened. And I'll tell you that was it happened. And I'll tell you that was a lot more terrifying than being out of a lot more terrifying than being out of a lot more terrifying than being out of the cage with the sharks cuz when you're the cage with the sharks cuz when you're the cage with the sharks cuz when you're out of the cage you you're on scuba, and out of the cage you you're on scuba, and out of the cage you you're on scuba, and you have some degree of control over, you have some degree of control over, you have some degree of control over, you know, you can shoot for the surface. you know, you can shoot for the surface. you know, you can shoot for the surface. When you're in the cage and you run out When you're in the cage and you run out When you're in the cage and you run out of air and you're alone, you're just of air and you're alone, you're just of air and you're alone, you're just terrified and you're hosed, no terrified and you're hosed, no terrified and you're hosed, no pun intended. You're not hosed at all. pun intended. You're not hosed at all. pun intended. You're not hosed at all. So, you know, it speaks to this thing So, you know, it speaks to this thing So, you know, it speaks to this thing that like when there's this big scary that like when there's this big scary that like when there's this big scary thing and you're really locked in, you thing and you're really locked in, you thing and you're really locked in, you often miss the more trivial-seeming often miss the more trivial-seeming often miss the more trivial-seeming but real danger that's close up. but real danger that's close up. but real danger that's close up. &gt;&gt; But this is I think one of the thing one &gt;&gt; But this is I think one of the thing one &gt;&gt; But this is I think one of the thing one of the real values of climbing is I of the real values of climbing is I of the real values of climbing is I think that as a climber you spend all think that as a climber you spend all think that as a climber you spend all your time thinking about risk and your time thinking about risk and your time thinking about risk and managing risk and mitigating risk and managing risk and mitigating risk and managing risk and mitigating risk and all these kind of things. And so, I all these kind of things. And so, I all these kind of things. And so, I think that um think that um think that um I don't want to like toot my own horn I don't want to like toot my own horn I don't want to like toot my own horn too much, but I do feel good at too much, but I do feel good at too much, but I do feel good at evaluating risks like that, you know, evaluating risks like that, you know, evaluating risks like that, you know, like what is the actual dangerous thing? like what is the actual dangerous thing? like what is the actual dangerous thing? Like, what's sketchy about the Like, what's sketchy about the Like, what's sketchy about the situation? And it just often isn't the situation? And it just often isn't the situation? And it just often isn't the thing that people are looking at. You thing that people are looking at. You thing that people are looking at. You know, and that's what I was talking know, and that's what I was talking know, and that's what I was talking about earlier with like people watching about earlier with like people watching about earlier with like people watching video free soloing or whatever else are video free soloing or whatever else are video free soloing or whatever else are like that's sketchy and I'm like well, like that's sketchy and I'm like well, like that's sketchy and I'm like well, you know, might be in some ways but you know, might be in some ways but you know, might be in some ways but probably not for all the reasons that probably not for all the reasons that probably not for all the reasons that you're thinking. You know what I mean? you're thinking. You know what I mean? you're thinking. You know what I mean? Like the obvious visual thing is Like the obvious visual thing is Like the obvious visual thing is probably not the big challenge. probably not the big challenge. probably not the big challenge. And it sounds a little cliche, but And it sounds a little cliche, but And it sounds a little cliche, but you're doing what you love. You know, you're doing what you love. You know, you're doing what you love. You know, it's interesting. I think one of it's interesting. I think one of it's interesting. I think one of the biggest risks that um I think about the biggest risks that um I think about the biggest risks that um I think about now um as I get older is as I get older is as I get older is the non-daily lethal risk of, you know, non-daily lethal risk of, you know, non-daily lethal risk of, you know, grinding it out in a job you don't like grinding it out in a job you don't like grinding it out in a job you don't like and then, you know, one day you wake up and then, you know, one day you wake up and then, you know, one day you wake up and you're like and you're like and you're like wow, there's no time machine. wow, there's no time machine. wow, there's no time machine. Like I can't go back and get that Like I can't go back and get that Like I can't go back and get that vitality and that time. vitality and that time. vitality and that time. &gt;&gt; doing? Yeah, and that's where I &gt;&gt; doing? Yeah, and that's where I &gt;&gt; doing? Yeah, and that's where I think this idea of, you know, doing think this idea of, you know, doing think this idea of, you know, doing what you love really counts. Whether or what you love really counts. Whether or what you love really counts. Whether or not you have to live in a van and do not you have to live in a van and do not you have to live in a van and do nothing else or whether or not you can nothing else or whether or not you can nothing else or whether or not you can also go to school, you know, but doing also go to school, you know, but doing also go to school, you know, but doing something that you love very doing something that you love very doing something that you love very much. &gt;&gt; way you're going to die. Either way &gt;&gt; way you're going to die. Either way &gt;&gt; way you're going to die. Either way you're going to die. you're going to die. you're going to die. &gt;&gt; you may as well die having done a lot of &gt;&gt; you may as well die having done a lot of &gt;&gt; you may as well die having done a lot of things you're really excited about than things you're really excited about than things you're really excited about than die regretting all the things you didn't die regretting all the things you didn't die regretting all the things you didn't do. Totally. do. Totally. do. Totally. &gt;&gt; I think that actually that &gt;&gt; I think that actually that &gt;&gt; I think that actually that exact mindset really helped inform my exact mindset really helped inform my exact mindset really helped inform my whole climbing journey in a way. It's whole climbing journey in a way. It's whole climbing journey in a way. It's like my father died when I when I like my father died when I when I like my father died when I when I was 19 and he died of a heart attack was 19 and he died of a heart attack was 19 and he died of a heart attack unexpectedly just freak thing running unexpectedly just freak thing running unexpectedly just freak thing running through an airport uh at age 55. through an airport uh at age 55. through an airport uh at age 55. And you know, and I think for a young for a you know, and I think for a young for a you know, and I think for a young for a teenager that makes an impression where teenager that makes an impression where teenager that makes an impression where you're sort of like oh, like this could you're sort of like oh, like this could you're sort of like oh, like this could end at any moment. And actually in both end at any moment. And actually in both end at any moment. And actually in both my grandfathers had just died like at my grandfathers had just died like at my grandfathers had just died like at roughly the same time. So I think for an roughly the same time. So I think for an roughly the same time. So I think for an impressionable, you know, teen you're impressionable, you know, teen you're impressionable, you know, teen you're sort of like oh, everybody dies. Like do sort of like oh, everybody dies. Like do sort of like oh, everybody dies. Like do you get to do all the things that you get to do all the things that you get to do all the things that you want to do before you go? want to do before you go? want to do before you go? And and I think my father and my father And and I think my father and my father And and I think my father and my father was a community college professor taught was a community college professor taught was a community college professor taught language and uh language and uh language and uh you know, he ostensibly lived a you know, he ostensibly lived a you know, he ostensibly lived a risk-free life, you know, like risk-free life, you know, like risk-free life, you know, like relatively sedentary. I mean he traveled relatively sedentary. I mean he traveled relatively sedentary. I mean he traveled widely. Like he was great, but by widely. Like he was great, but by widely. Like he was great, but by any risk perception thing you'd be like any risk perception thing you'd be like any risk perception thing you'd be like oh, he's a professor. Like he's oh, he's a professor. Like he's oh, he's a professor. Like he's fine. And yet he still died young he's fine. And yet he still died young he's fine. And yet he still died young and probably would have preferred to do and probably would have preferred to do and probably would have preferred to do a lot of other things before he went. a lot of other things before he went. a lot of other things before he went. I'm sort of like, you know, it's just a I'm sort of like, you know, it's just a I'm sort of like, you know, it's just a reminder that you got to you got to do reminder that you got to you got to do reminder that you got to you got to do all these things. all these things. all these things. Yeah, I wanted to talk to you about your Yeah, I wanted to talk to you about your Yeah, I wanted to talk to you about your philosophy on death and time and philosophy on death and time and philosophy on death and time and kind of life arc and you've already kind of life arc and you've already kind of life arc and you've already started. So, thank you started. So, thank you started. So, thank you for that because I would say for that because I would say for that because I would say most of my friends who started families most of my friends who started families most of my friends who started families young are people who these are male friends are people who these are male friends are people who these are male friends whose dads died young. And so, they had whose dads died young. And so, they had whose dads died young. And so, they had this very keen sense of the finite this very keen sense of the finite this very keen sense of the finite duration of life. And you know, Steve duration of life. And you know, Steve duration of life. And you know, Steve Jobs talked about this. So, like you're Jobs talked about this. So, like you're Jobs talked about this. So, like you're you know, very and he died young. He you know, very and he died young. He you know, very and he died young. He seemed to have some sense of how long he seemed to have some sense of how long he seemed to have some sense of how long he was going to live and really wanted to was going to live and really wanted to was going to live and really wanted to pack things in. And I don't know why pack things in. And I don't know why pack things in. And I don't know why that was. He was adopted, so I don't that was. He was adopted, so I don't that was. He was adopted, so I don't know if he even knew how long his know if he even knew how long his know if he even knew how long his parents lived, etc. But barring accident parents lived, etc. But barring accident parents lived, etc. But barring accident or injury, or injury, or injury, you know, we don't really know when you know, we don't really know when you know, we don't really know when we're going to die. But sometimes I we're going to die. But sometimes I we're going to die. But sometimes I think we get the sense based on think we get the sense based on think we get the sense based on relatives. And you know, I can remember relatives. And you know, I can remember relatives. And you know, I can remember a time in my life when I of course I a time in my life when I of course I a time in my life when I of course I knew I was going to die, but I lived in knew I was going to die, but I lived in knew I was going to die, but I lived in a way that I just I felt like I had all a way that I just I felt like I had all a way that I just I felt like I had all the time in the world despite pursuing the time in the world despite pursuing the time in the world despite pursuing things. And I think with each passing things. And I think with each passing things. And I think with each passing year, I'm like, oh wow, like the walls year, I'm like, oh wow, like the walls year, I'm like, oh wow, like the walls Yeah, like it's winding down. Yeah, like Yeah, like it's winding down. Yeah, like Yeah, like it's winding down. Yeah, like we got to get the show on the road. we got to get the show on the road. we got to get the show on the road. And I've done things I wanted to do, but And I've done things I wanted to do, but And I've done things I wanted to do, but it's interesting that it's interesting that it's interesting that um uh you know, it's uh you know, it's uh you know, it's it does seem that like having a parent it does seem that like having a parent it does seem that like having a parent die has a has a profound impact die has a has a profound impact die has a has a profound impact on where you set that horizon. You on where you set that horizon. You on where you set that horizon. You realize like today is part of an arc realize like today is part of an arc realize like today is part of an arc that has an end point. And we know that, that has an end point. And we know that, that has an end point. And we know that, but we often don't live into that but we often don't live into that but we often don't live into that realization. Yeah, no, I totally agree with that. I Yeah, no, I totally agree with that. I Yeah, no, I totally agree with that. I mean and I you say we know that, but I mean and I you say we know that, but I mean and I you say we know that, but I actually think that we don't talk about actually think that we don't talk about actually think that we don't talk about that enough. You know what I mean? I that enough. You know what I mean? I that enough. You know what I mean? I think most people live with a little too think most people live with a little too think most people live with a little too much open end cuz nobody wants to talk much open end cuz nobody wants to talk much open end cuz nobody wants to talk about death. Nobody wants to talk about, about death. Nobody wants to talk about, about death. Nobody wants to talk about, you know, like the consequences of like you know, like the consequences of like you know, like the consequences of like cuz people think it's morbid or it's cuz people think it's morbid or it's cuz people think it's morbid or it's just not. But thing is like we're all just not. But thing is like we're all just not. But thing is like we're all going to freaking die. going to freaking die. going to freaking die. You know, it's like are we going to be You know, it's like are we going to be You know, it's like are we going to be proud of what we did before we died? proud of what we did before we died? proud of what we did before we died? Like I don't know. Like I don't know. Like I don't know. I mean I mean I mean yeah. We'll see. It's like kind of yeah. We'll see. It's like kind of yeah. We'll see. It's like kind of cliche to be like, oh, better to die cliche to be like, oh, better to die cliche to be like, oh, better to die young and you know, burn brightly and young and you know, burn brightly and young and you know, burn brightly and all that kind of stuff. But you know, to all that kind of stuff. But you know, to all that kind of stuff. But you know, to some extent I think there's I think some extent I think there's I think some extent I think there's I think there's a middle ground where you're there's a middle ground where you're there's a middle ground where you're like it's better to like it's better to like it's better to try hard and do things that you're try hard and do things that you're try hard and do things that you're proud of and proud of and proud of and you know, either way you're going to you know, either way you're going to you know, either way you're going to die. I agree. I mean, I think there is die. I agree. I mean, I think there is die. I agree. I mean, I think there is something interesting to this 27 effect, something interesting to this 27 effect, something interesting to this 27 effect, you know, it's so many like rock and you know, it's so many like rock and you know, it's so many like rock and roll musicians die at 27. roll musicians die at 27. roll musicians die at 27. &gt;&gt; It's their quarter life crisis. &gt;&gt; It's their quarter life crisis. &gt;&gt; It's their quarter life crisis. &gt;&gt; Yeah, quarter life crisis. I've never &gt;&gt; Yeah, quarter life crisis. I've never &gt;&gt; Yeah, quarter life crisis. I've never heard of the quarter life crisis. You heard of the quarter life crisis. You heard of the quarter life crisis. You never heard of quarter like all my never heard of quarter like all my never heard of quarter like all my friends have gone through a quarter life friends have gone through a quarter life friends have gone through a quarter life crisis. &gt;&gt; Oh, really? Yeah, kind of. &gt;&gt; Oh, really? Yeah, kind of. &gt;&gt; Oh, really? Yeah, kind of. &gt;&gt; that when does that happen? Well, like &gt;&gt; that when does that happen? Well, like &gt;&gt; that when does that happen? Well, like 25, you know, 27. 25, you know, 27. 25, you know, 27. &gt;&gt; Interesting. No, I was just so focused &gt;&gt; Interesting. No, I was just so focused &gt;&gt; Interesting. No, I was just so focused on becoming a neuroscientist. I didn't on becoming a neuroscientist. I didn't on becoming a neuroscientist. I didn't know what else I would do besides that know what else I would do besides that know what else I would do besides that at 25. I think I was just so locked in, at 25. I think I was just so locked in, at 25. I think I was just so locked in, but I've always been a little bit but I've always been a little bit but I've always been a little bit obsessive. Have you always been a little obsessive. Have you always been a little obsessive. Have you always been a little bit like whatever you're into, you're bit like whatever you're into, you're bit like whatever you're into, you're into? I guess it's been climbing. into? I guess it's been climbing. into? I guess it's been climbing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I was just lucky &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I was just lucky &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I was just lucky to get into climbing when I was 10. So, to get into climbing when I was 10. So, to get into climbing when I was 10. So, it's just something that I've just been it's just something that I've just been it's just something that I've just been into forever. So, did you play Legos as into forever. So, did you play Legos as into forever. So, did you play Legos as a kid or did you have any a kid or did you have any a kid or did you have any &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I was psycho about my Legos. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I was psycho about my Legos. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I was psycho about my Legos. &gt;&gt; psycho about Legos. &gt;&gt; psycho about Legos. &gt;&gt; psycho about Legos. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, psycho. Like I didn't have a &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, psycho. Like I didn't have a &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, psycho. Like I didn't have a bed in my room because I had Legos bed in my room because I had Legos bed in my room because I had Legos covered across the whole floor. covered across the whole floor. covered across the whole floor. Basically, I slept in a corner and I Basically, I slept in a corner and I Basically, I slept in a corner and I just had Legos all over. Awesome. just had Legos all over. Awesome. just had Legos all over. Awesome. &gt;&gt; Kind of psycho. Do you see some of this &gt;&gt; Kind of psycho. Do you see some of this &gt;&gt; Kind of psycho. Do you see some of this in your kids? in your kids? in your kids? Not quite that yet, but they're pretty Not quite that yet, but they're pretty Not quite that yet, but they're pretty young, so it's hard to tell. But, um young, so it's hard to tell. But, um young, so it's hard to tell. But, um yeah, we'll see we'll see. We'll see. I yeah, we'll see we'll see. We'll see. I yeah, we'll see we'll see. We'll see. I kind of think you know, kind of think you know, kind of think you know, it's all about having personality. Like it's all about having personality. Like it's all about having personality. Like do a thing, do it well, like get excited do a thing, do it well, like get excited do a thing, do it well, like get excited about things. I mean, there's just so about things. I mean, there's just so about things. I mean, there's just so many people on Earth and they all do many people on Earth and they all do many people on Earth and they all do different things. Like you might as well different things. Like you might as well different things. Like you might as well be the person to do be the person to do be the person to do that one particular thing and just like that one particular thing and just like that one particular thing and just like really do it. really do it. really do it. No, I agree. That's the juice. I mean, No, I agree. That's the juice. I mean, No, I agree. That's the juice. I mean, I mean, I think for some of us like I mean, I think for some of us like I mean, I think for some of us like I just know from my own life experience I just know from my own life experience I just know from my own life experience I like I thought I was certainly I just I like I thought I was certainly I just I like I thought I was certainly I just get into skateboarding. Many of my get into skateboarding. Many of my get into skateboarding. Many of my friends became professional friends became professional friends became professional skateboarders. Got really good at or skateboarders. Got really good at or skateboarders. Got really good at or worked in the industry. And early on I worked in the industry. And early on I worked in the industry. And early on I was getting hurt and I realized I'm not was getting hurt and I realized I'm not was getting hurt and I realized I'm not very good at this. And then when I very good at this. And then when I very good at this. And then when I finally plugged into academics and finally plugged into academics and finally plugged into academics and learning I was like this is the thing. learning I was like this is the thing. learning I was like this is the thing. &gt;&gt; loved it and it and then eventually I &gt;&gt; loved it and it and then eventually I &gt;&gt; loved it and it and then eventually I pivoted to this thing which I didn't pivoted to this thing which I didn't pivoted to this thing which I didn't anticipate, but I do think that going anticipate, but I do think that going anticipate, but I do think that going all in on something all in on something all in on something is a is a is a it provides a really wonderful feedback it provides a really wonderful feedback it provides a really wonderful feedback loop that one can like you feel makes loop that one can like you feel makes loop that one can like you feel makes you feel alive. Yeah, you're like doing you feel alive. Yeah, you're like doing you feel alive. Yeah, you're like doing a thing. You're excited about a thing. You're excited about a thing. You're excited about &gt;&gt; Especially when it's hard. Especially &gt;&gt; Especially when it's hard. Especially &gt;&gt; Especially when it's hard. Especially when it's hard. I've literally spent my when it's hard. I've literally spent my when it's hard. I've literally spent my whole life basically like all in on whole life basically like all in on whole life basically like all in on climbing and I'm still I just I just climbing and I'm still I just I just climbing and I'm still I just I just love going rock climbing. You know, it's love going rock climbing. You know, it's love going rock climbing. You know, it's like I mean, I think that's really the like I mean, I think that's really the like I mean, I think that's really the goal of parenting is to help your the goal of parenting is to help your the goal of parenting is to help your kid find something that they're that kid find something that they're that kid find something that they're that psyched about. Like something that they psyched about. Like something that they psyched about. Like something that they can commit to and something that will can commit to and something that will can commit to and something that will drive them, something they're passionate drive them, something they're passionate drive them, something they're passionate about. And so, about. And so, about. And so, you know, I mean, we'll see with you know, I mean, we'll see with you know, I mean, we'll see with our kids, but it's like the idea is just our kids, but it's like the idea is just our kids, but it's like the idea is just to let them experience enough things to let them experience enough things to let them experience enough things that they can find whatever they that they can find whatever they that they can find whatever they whatever gets them out of bed every day. whatever gets them out of bed every day. whatever gets them out of bed every day. They certainly are in the right They certainly are in the right They certainly are in the right environment to flourish with it. You mentioned that to flourish with it. You mentioned that to flourish with it. You mentioned that climbing's in the Olympics. I could see climbing's in the Olympics. I could see climbing's in the Olympics. I could see and I've observed in other sports where and I've observed in other sports where and I've observed in other sports where the parents are kind of more obsessive the parents are kind of more obsessive the parents are kind of more obsessive than the kid and then the kid burns out than the kid and then the kid burns out than the kid and then the kid burns out on it. If you I read Andre Agassi's book on it. If you I read Andre Agassi's book on it. If you I read Andre Agassi's book Open, which is basically a story of his Open, which is basically a story of his Open, which is basically a story of his dad pushing him to play a game he did dad pushing him to play a game he did dad pushing him to play a game he did not want to play. not want to play. not want to play. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's maybe the best &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's maybe the best &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's maybe the best sports memoir ever. That's like that's a sports memoir ever. That's like that's a sports memoir ever. That's like that's a great uh it's a great book. Yeah, great uh it's a great book. Yeah, great uh it's a great book. Yeah, great book. Yeah, his dad was like a boxer and book. Yeah, his dad was like a boxer and book. Yeah, his dad was like a boxer and basically trained him in tennis like a basically trained him in tennis like a basically trained him in tennis like a boxer. Yeah, so it's sort of like the boxer. Yeah, so it's sort of like the boxer. Yeah, so it's sort of like the light-handed approach of like light-handed approach of like light-handed approach of like I think kids know. I think I mean, you I think kids know. I think I mean, you I think kids know. I think I mean, you kind of let them forage, right? kind of let them forage, right? kind of let them forage, right? &gt;&gt; we're taking the &gt;&gt; we're taking the &gt;&gt; we're taking the light-handed approach for sure. I mean, light-handed approach for sure. I mean, light-handed approach for sure. I mean, our kids will obviously know how to our kids will obviously know how to our kids will obviously know how to climb because that's what we do all the climb because that's what we do all the climb because that's what we do all the time and um but so far we just go time and um but so far we just go time and um but so far we just go hiking. Like we haven't forced them to hiking. Like we haven't forced them to hiking. Like we haven't forced them to climb. We have a little bit of a home climb. We have a little bit of a home climb. We have a little bit of a home gym at home like a little climbing gym at home like a little climbing gym at home like a little climbing garage. And so, the girls can, you know, garage. And so, the girls can, you know, garage. And so, the girls can, you know, play on the wall whenever they want to, play on the wall whenever they want to, play on the wall whenever they want to, but there's certainly never any pressure but there's certainly never any pressure but there's certainly never any pressure to do anything. to do anything. to do anything. I read um and please correct me if this I read um and please correct me if this I read um and please correct me if this is inaccurate, but that it was during is inaccurate, but that it was during is inaccurate, but that it was during college that you had some family members college that you had some family members college that you had some family members pass away and when you really leaned pass away and when you really leaned pass away and when you really leaned into just climbing more. Um I think it's into just climbing more. Um I think it's into just climbing more. Um I think it's somewhere on the internet that you were somewhere on the internet that you were somewhere on the internet that you were climbing out in Indian Rock, which is climbing out in Indian Rock, which is climbing out in Indian Rock, which is interesting to me because I went to interesting to me because I went to interesting to me because I went to graduate school in Berkeley and lived in graduate school in Berkeley and lived in graduate school in Berkeley and lived in Berkeley for a long time and You went to Berkeley for a long time and You went to Berkeley for a long time and You went to Cal? I went to Cal for my master's. And Cal? I went to Cal for my master's. And Cal? I went to Cal for my master's. And then I lived in Berkeley even when I was then I lived in Berkeley even when I was then I lived in Berkeley even when I was a post-doc at Stanford. I love Berkeley. a post-doc at Stanford. I love Berkeley. a post-doc at Stanford. I love Berkeley. &gt;&gt; like, you went from Cal to Stanford? You &gt;&gt; like, you went from Cal to Stanford? You &gt;&gt; like, you went from Cal to Stanford? You don't have to do that. don't have to do that. don't have to do that. &gt;&gt; the enemy. Yeah, it's like Yeah. Did &gt;&gt; the enemy. Yeah, it's like Yeah. Did &gt;&gt; the enemy. Yeah, it's like Yeah. Did they take your they take your they take your &gt;&gt; Born at Stanford, trained at Stanford, &gt;&gt; Born at Stanford, trained at Stanford, &gt;&gt; Born at Stanford, trained at Stanford, and still spent a lot of time at and still spent a lot of time at and still spent a lot of time at Berkeley. I liked the culture in Berkeley. I liked the culture in Berkeley. I liked the culture in Berkeley then and I liked the food. So, Berkeley then and I liked the food. So, Berkeley then and I liked the food. So, I used to take pizzas from the cheese I used to take pizzas from the cheese I used to take pizzas from the cheese board up to Indian Rock. So, while you board up to Indian Rock. So, while you board up to Indian Rock. So, while you were climbing Indian Rock, I was eating were climbing Indian Rock, I was eating were climbing Indian Rock, I was eating and picnicking on Indian Rock. and picnicking on Indian Rock. and picnicking on Indian Rock. Um It's amazing. So, would you just pull It's amazing. So, would you just pull It's amazing. So, would you just pull little solo journeys out there? This is little solo journeys out there? This is little solo journeys out there? This is By the way, folks, a big steep rock, but By the way, folks, a big steep rock, but By the way, folks, a big steep rock, but on one face it's gradual. It on one face it's gradual. It on one face it's gradual. It literally has like rock couches where literally has like rock couches where literally has like rock couches where couples go on dates and you eat some couples go on dates and you eat some couples go on dates and you eat some pizza and hang out and get an amazing pizza and hang out and get an amazing pizza and hang out and get an amazing view. Yeah, overlooking the city. view. Yeah, overlooking the city. view. Yeah, overlooking the city. &gt;&gt; Yeah, so you were climbing up the back &gt;&gt; Yeah, so you were climbing up the back &gt;&gt; Yeah, so you were climbing up the back of it, which is anything but uh Well, of it, which is anything but uh Well, of it, which is anything but uh Well, actually I was mostly traversing the actually I was mostly traversing the actually I was mostly traversing the bottom of it. Um there's tons of like bottom of it. Um there's tons of like bottom of it. Um there's tons of like basically you can contour over the whole basically you can contour over the whole basically you can contour over the whole base of the rock and so you can climb base of the rock and so you can climb base of the rock and so you can climb for, you know, a couple hundred feet for, you know, a couple hundred feet for, you know, a couple hundred feet basically without touching the ground. basically without touching the ground. basically without touching the ground. So, you just go back and forth doing So, you just go back and forth doing So, you just go back and forth doing laps and Yeah, cool. I mean, from where laps and Yeah, cool. I mean, from where laps and Yeah, cool. I mean, from where I was living at Berkeley, there's only, I was living at Berkeley, there's only, I was living at Berkeley, there's only, I don't know, like a 30-minute walk to I don't know, like a 30-minute walk to I don't know, like a 30-minute walk to Indian Rock or something. So, I Indian Rock or something. So, I Indian Rock or something. So, I basically wasn't going to class. I was basically wasn't going to class. I was basically wasn't going to class. I was just strolling to Indian Rock and just strolling to Indian Rock and just strolling to Indian Rock and traversing the wall back and forth. traversing the wall back and forth. traversing the wall back and forth. And and then that's why I dropped out And and then that's why I dropped out And and then that's why I dropped out after 1 year at Berkeley. It's kind of after 1 year at Berkeley. It's kind of after 1 year at Berkeley. It's kind of like, I don't know why I'm at university like, I don't know why I'm at university like, I don't know why I'm at university if I'm not actually if I'm not actually if I'm not actually Actually, it's more complicated Actually, it's more complicated Actually, it's more complicated than that cuz that year I got into the than that cuz that year I got into the than that cuz that year I got into the youth worlds like international thing. youth worlds like international thing. youth worlds like international thing. And so, I was going to take the semester And so, I was going to take the semester And so, I was going to take the semester off to go to worlds and travel and climb off to go to worlds and travel and climb off to go to worlds and travel and climb a little bit. And so, now I've just a little bit. And so, now I've just a little bit. And so, now I've just taken, you know, whatever, like 30 35 taken, you know, whatever, like 30 35 taken, you know, whatever, like 30 35 semesters off or something. You're on semesters off or something. You're on semesters off or something. You're on leave of absence. Yeah, exactly. No, I leave of absence. Yeah, exactly. No, I leave of absence. Yeah, exactly. No, I think I think after some point they were think I think after some point they were think I think after some point they were like, "You're done." Yeah, yeah, I think like, "You're done." Yeah, yeah, I think like, "You're done." Yeah, yeah, I think they closed it. But um It worked out. It they closed it. But um It worked out. It they closed it. But um It worked out. It worked certainly worked out. Yeah, the worked certainly worked out. Yeah, the worked certainly worked out. Yeah, the thing that we find ourselves doing when thing that we find ourselves doing when thing that we find ourselves doing when um we should be doing something else in we should be doing something else in we should be doing something else in the positive sense of it. Like I mean, the positive sense of it. Like I mean, the positive sense of it. Like I mean, that often is the thing. Like it's with that often is the thing. Like it's with that often is the thing. Like it's with that you're obsessed over. Yeah. I mean, that you're obsessed over. Yeah. I mean, that you're obsessed over. Yeah. I mean, it's just hard to know with that stuff it's just hard to know with that stuff it's just hard to know with that stuff though because obviously for most people though because obviously for most people though because obviously for most people they probably should get an education they probably should get an education they probably should get an education and get a job of some kind. Like even if and get a job of some kind. Like even if and get a job of some kind. Like even if you're a really passionate climber, I you're a really passionate climber, I you're a really passionate climber, I mean, most people probably aren't going mean, most people probably aren't going mean, most people probably aren't going to make a living as a professional to make a living as a professional to make a living as a professional climber cuz it's just too small an climber cuz it's just too small an climber cuz it's just too small an industry and, you know, the industry and, you know, the industry and, you know, the depends on your level and everything. I depends on your level and everything. I depends on your level and everything. I mean, I think I got kind of lucky. I mean, I think I got kind of lucky. I mean, I think I got kind of lucky. I mean, in a lot of ways I got lucky. Also mean, in a lot of ways I got lucky. Also mean, in a lot of ways I got lucky. Also just because I like soling and it's just because I like soling and it's just because I like soling and it's like such a niche and not that many like such a niche and not that many like such a niche and not that many people do it and the and the level just people do it and the and the level just people do it and the and the level just wasn't that high. And so, wasn't that high. And so, wasn't that high. And so, you know, I sometimes joke, it's easy to you know, I sometimes joke, it's easy to you know, I sometimes joke, it's easy to be the best if you're the only one doing be the best if you're the only one doing be the best if you're the only one doing it. You know, it's like it's easy to it. You know, it's like it's easy to it. You know, it's like it's easy to compete as the only person in the field compete as the only person in the field compete as the only person in the field and you're kind of like, "Well, that and you're kind of like, "Well, that and you're kind of like, "Well, that makes it so." makes it so." makes it so." And so, you know, I think I got lucky in And so, you know, I think I got lucky in And so, you know, I think I got lucky in a lot of ways like that. And so, yeah, a lot of ways like that. And so, yeah, a lot of ways like that. And so, yeah, most people probably should finish most people probably should finish most people probably should finish university and climb as they can. university and climb as they can. university and climb as they can. That said, I mean, if you love doing a That said, I mean, if you love doing a That said, I mean, if you love doing a thing, it makes sense to maybe build your life it makes sense to maybe build your life it makes sense to maybe build your life around how you can do that thing as much around how you can do that thing as much around how you can do that thing as much as possible just because it keeps you as possible just because it keeps you as possible just because it keeps you energized and fired up and, you know, energized and fired up and, you know, energized and fired up and, you know, makes the rest of your life better. makes the rest of your life better. makes the rest of your life better. I think it was Ryan Holiday that said I think it was Ryan Holiday that said I think it was Ryan Holiday that said that if you don't know what to do with that if you don't know what to do with that if you don't know what to do with your life and you're still trying to your life and you're still trying to your life and you're still trying to figure it out, definitely stay in figure it out, definitely stay in figure it out, definitely stay in college. Because, you know, there are college. Because, you know, there are college. Because, you know, there are all these tales of like Mark Zuckerberg all these tales of like Mark Zuckerberg all these tales of like Mark Zuckerberg leaving Harvard and Steve Jobs dropping leaving Harvard and Steve Jobs dropping leaving Harvard and Steve Jobs dropping out of Reed College and um Alex Honnold out of Reed College and um Alex Honnold out of Reed College and um Alex Honnold leaving Berkeley and uh leaving Berkeley and uh leaving Berkeley and uh and eventually becoming the uh and eventually becoming the uh and eventually becoming the person that you are now. Um person that you are now. Um person that you are now. Um but you had a direction. There was but you had a direction. There was but you had a direction. There was another thing to lean into. It wasn't another thing to lean into. It wasn't another thing to lean into. It wasn't just, "Oh, I don't like this. I don't just, "Oh, I don't like this. I don't just, "Oh, I don't like this. I don't want to be here." Yeah, I mean, if you want to be here." Yeah, I mean, if you want to be here." Yeah, I mean, if you &gt;&gt; have nothing, then you drop out and you &gt;&gt; have nothing, then you drop out and you &gt;&gt; have nothing, then you drop out and you just go play video games in your just go play video games in your just go play video games in your basement or something like that, that's basement or something like that, that's basement or something like that, that's obviously not that's not better than obviously not that's not better than obviously not that's not better than going to school. Like, you're better off going to school. Like, you're better off going to school. Like, you're better off going to school and broadening your going to school and broadening your going to school and broadening your horizons and doing whatever. horizons and doing whatever. horizons and doing whatever. But, yeah, I mean, I thought I was just But, yeah, I mean, I thought I was just But, yeah, I mean, I thought I was just taking some time off and I thought taking some time off and I thought taking some time off and I thought that eventually I'd become a mountain that eventually I'd become a mountain that eventually I'd become a mountain guide or something or like teach at guide or something or like teach at guide or something or like teach at summer camps or I don't know, you know, summer camps or I don't know, you know, summer camps or I don't know, you know, because especially at the time the because especially at the time the because especially at the time the climbing industry was so much smaller, climbing industry was so much smaller, climbing industry was so much smaller, there wasn't any money. Like, I didn't there wasn't any money. Like, I didn't there wasn't any money. Like, I didn't think you could make it a living as a think you could make it a living as a think you could make it a living as a professional climber. And so, I thought professional climber. And so, I thought professional climber. And so, I thought it was just kind of a fun thing I was it was just kind of a fun thing I was it was just kind of a fun thing I was doing in the van for a while before I'd doing in the van for a while before I'd doing in the van for a while before I'd like find some kind of job or something. like find some kind of job or something. like find some kind of job or something. And then, thankfully, the climbing And then, thankfully, the climbing And then, thankfully, the climbing industry has kind of scaled at the same industry has kind of scaled at the same industry has kind of scaled at the same rate that rate that rate that I did as a climber. And so, it that I did as a climber. And so, it that I did as a climber. And so, it all worked out. it all worked out. it all worked out. Is it Is it Is it the case that um the case that um the case that um you didn't have uh any monetary you didn't have uh any monetary you didn't have uh any monetary aspirations when you were doing it? aspirations when you were doing it? aspirations when you were doing it? Like, it sounds like you didn't, but Like, it sounds like you didn't, but Like, it sounds like you didn't, but um did you ever have the conversation with did you ever have the conversation with did you ever have the conversation with your mom like, you know, how are you your mom like, you know, how are you your mom like, you know, how are you going to make a living or No, well, so, going to make a living or No, well, so, going to make a living or No, well, so, I mean, I mentioned that my dad died. I mean, I mentioned that my dad died. I mean, I mentioned that my dad died. So, my parents had just gotten divorced So, my parents had just gotten divorced So, my parents had just gotten divorced and so, my dad had left enough for and so, my dad had left enough for and so, my dad had left enough for my sister and me to finish college. And my sister and me to finish college. And my sister and me to finish college. And so, I took that money and put it in so, I took that money and put it in so, I took that money and put it in bonds. Which like, I don't know what bonds. Which like, I don't know what bonds. Which like, I don't know what that is, but you know, so I was making that is, but you know, so I was making that is, but you know, so I was making like a couple hundred bucks a month in like a couple hundred bucks a month in like a couple hundred bucks a month in bonds. And then, And then, And then, uh I stole the family minivan. Like I uh I stole the family minivan. Like I uh I stole the family minivan. Like I said, my grandparent my two grandfathers said, my grandparent my two grandfathers said, my grandparent my two grandfathers had And then after a couple years I was And then after a couple years I was And then after a couple years I was sponsored. I was getting free product. I sponsored. I was getting free product. I sponsored. I was getting free product. I was getting it like a very, very small was getting it like a very, very small was getting it like a very, very small amount of money, but some amount of amount of money, but some amount of amount of money, but some amount of money, which is enough to sort of money, which is enough to sort of money, which is enough to sort of justify the whole thing. We're like, oh, justify the whole thing. We're like, oh, justify the whole thing. We're like, oh, companies are paying me to do this companies are paying me to do this companies are paying me to do this thing. I should see how well I can do thing. I should see how well I can do thing. I should see how well I can do it. And then and then it all kind of it. And then and then it all kind of it. And then and then it all kind of took off from there. took off from there. took off from there. But yeah, I mean it But yeah, I mean it But yeah, I mean it I mean that's one of the ways in which I mean that's one of the ways in which I mean that's one of the ways in which I was very lucky as a climber. You know, was very lucky as a climber. You know, was very lucky as a climber. You know, there was like just enough financial there was like just enough financial there was like just enough financial cushion that I could try to do the thing cushion that I could try to do the thing cushion that I could try to do the thing as much as I wanted for a couple years as much as I wanted for a couple years as much as I wanted for a couple years and see how it played out. And it just and see how it played out. And it just and see how it played out. And it just happened to work out well. happened to work out well. happened to work out well. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function Function. Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first test with example, in one of my first test with example, in one of my first test with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. Now, I And I say by detoxification. Now, I And I say by detoxification. Now, I And I say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. It's to get early access to Function. It's to get early access to Function. It's going to sound like an odd question, but going to sound like an odd question, but going to sound like an odd question, but I'm very curious about this. Uh you've I'm very curious about this. Uh you've I'm very curious about this. Uh you've been in beautiful places, like just and been in beautiful places, like just and been in beautiful places, like just and you get a very different view of those you get a very different view of those you get a very different view of those places than most people. Um there's a places than most people. Um there's a places than most people. Um there's a really great uh YouTube shorts of you really great uh YouTube shorts of you really great uh YouTube shorts of you hanging on hanging on hanging on by one arm during a climb, which itself by one arm during a climb, which itself by one arm during a climb, which itself is impressive to the observer, is impressive to the observer, is impressive to the observer, but then you take some moments and you but then you take some moments and you but then you take some moments and you like look around and you're just like look around and you're just like look around and you're just like checking out the scene. You're totally checking out the scene. You're totally checking out the scene. You're totally not looking at the rock that I that not looking at the rock that I that not looking at the rock that I that I know, even as a non-expert. And so, I know, even as a non-expert. And so, I know, even as a non-expert. And so, I I'm wondering this. I have reasons to I'm wondering this. I have reasons to I'm wondering this. I have reasons to ask. Do you ever snap photos ask. Do you ever snap photos ask. Do you ever snap photos with your mind your mind's eye? with your mind your mind's eye? with your mind your mind's eye? Like do you have like clear Like do you have like clear Like do you have like clear recollection of like I'm going to I'm recollection of like I'm going to I'm recollection of like I'm going to I'm going to snap a shot of this, I keep going to snap a shot of this, I keep going to snap a shot of this, I keep this one in the memory bank? this one in the memory bank? this one in the memory bank? &gt;&gt; remember. I mean, to me it's more of the &gt;&gt; remember. I mean, to me it's more of the &gt;&gt; remember. I mean, to me it's more of the living there day in and day out. Like, living there day in and day out. Like, living there day in and day out. Like, you know, with free soloing El Capitan, you know, with free soloing El Capitan, you know, with free soloing El Capitan, let's say. I mean, we I spent months on let's say. I mean, we I spent months on let's say. I mean, we I spent months on the wall and it's like just every day, the wall and it's like just every day, the wall and it's like just every day, you know, you're going up before sunrise you know, you're going up before sunrise you know, you're going up before sunrise a lot of the time, so you're watching a lot of the time, so you're watching a lot of the time, so you're watching the sunrise over Half Dome and it's like the sunrise over Half Dome and it's like the sunrise over Half Dome and it's like super beautiful and then you're going super beautiful and then you're going super beautiful and then you're going down at sunset and you're watching the down at sunset and you're watching the down at sunset and you're watching the moon and it's just moon and it's just moon and it's just I mean, it's just day in and day out. I mean, it's just day in and day out. I mean, it's just day in and day out. It's the most beautiful place on Earth It's the most beautiful place on Earth It's the most beautiful place on Earth in all these amazing conditions. You in all these amazing conditions. You in all these amazing conditions. You know, sometimes it starts snowing, know, sometimes it starts snowing, know, sometimes it starts snowing, sometimes it's raining. It's like there sometimes it's raining. It's like there sometimes it's raining. It's like there are clouds swirling and mist or whatever are clouds swirling and mist or whatever are clouds swirling and mist or whatever and you're just like, "Oh, it's and you're just like, "Oh, it's and you're just like, "Oh, it's amazing." But I don't really remember amazing." But I don't really remember amazing." But I don't really remember any specific, any specific, any specific, you know, like a snapshot of that. It's you know, like a snapshot of that. It's you know, like a snapshot of that. It's more just the overall you're like, "Oh, more just the overall you're like, "Oh, more just the overall you're like, "Oh, it's just this amazing place." It's it's just this amazing place." It's it's just this amazing place." It's pretty awesome existence. pretty awesome existence. pretty awesome existence. &gt;&gt; freaking um what is it with Yosemite &gt;&gt; freaking um what is it with Yosemite &gt;&gt; freaking um what is it with Yosemite Falls? The Falls? The Falls? The the Have you ever seen the moon the Have you ever seen the moon the Have you ever seen the moon rainbow thing? Like rainbow thing? Like rainbow thing? Like &gt;&gt; firelight thing where &gt;&gt; firelight thing where &gt;&gt; firelight thing where &gt;&gt; No, the firefalls is a different thing. &gt;&gt; No, the firefalls is a different thing. &gt;&gt; No, the firefalls is a different thing. That's like with the moon and that's a That's like with the moon and that's a That's like with the moon and that's a different time of year. In different time of year. In different time of year. In like May or June, if you get a full moon like May or June, if you get a full moon like May or June, if you get a full moon Oh, the moonbow. That's what it is. It's Oh, the moonbow. That's what it is. It's Oh, the moonbow. That's what it is. It's like when Yosemite Falls will cast a like when Yosemite Falls will cast a like when Yosemite Falls will cast a moonbow. Like you'll be able to see a moonbow. Like you'll be able to see a moonbow. Like you'll be able to see a rainbow from the moonlight in the rainbow from the moonlight in the rainbow from the moonlight in the waterfall when it's at peak water. It's waterfall when it's at peak water. It's waterfall when it's at peak water. It's really insane. My my wife and I went for really insane. My my wife and I went for really insane. My my wife and I went for a romantic walk to go look at the a romantic walk to go look at the a romantic walk to go look at the moonbow one season cuz you're just there moonbow one season cuz you're just there moonbow one season cuz you're just there and you're like, "That's pretty cool." and you're like, "That's pretty cool." and you're like, "That's pretty cool." You know, it's like it's a rainbow at You know, it's like it's a rainbow at You know, it's like it's a rainbow at night. Amazing. night. Amazing. night. Amazing. &gt;&gt; It's really cool. We're going to send a &gt;&gt; It's really cool. We're going to send a &gt;&gt; It's really cool. We're going to send a lot of people to Yosemite by virtue of lot of people to Yosemite by virtue of lot of people to Yosemite by virtue of Cloud's Rest and for the non-climbers or Cloud's Rest and for the non-climbers or Cloud's Rest and for the non-climbers or &gt;&gt; I still think it's crazy you've climbed &gt;&gt; I still think it's crazy you've climbed &gt;&gt; I still think it's crazy you've climbed Cloud's Rest more than once and never Cloud's Rest more than once and never Cloud's Rest more than once and never climbed Half Dome. I've run Cloud's climbed Half Dome. I've run Cloud's climbed Half Dome. I've run Cloud's Rest, rocked it. I've done it I've Rest, rocked it. I've done it I've Rest, rocked it. I've done it I've probably done Cloud's Rest at least a probably done Cloud's Rest at least a probably done Cloud's Rest at least a dozen times. dozen times. dozen times. &gt;&gt; That is crazy cuz you have to go past &gt;&gt; That is crazy cuz you have to go past &gt;&gt; That is crazy cuz you have to go past Half Dome and Half Dome is the much more Half Dome and Half Dome is the much more Half Dome and Half Dome is the much more famous cousin that's closer and easier famous cousin that's closer and easier famous cousin that's closer and easier and kind of more spectacular. and kind of more spectacular. and kind of more spectacular. &gt;&gt; Well, you have to drive past that. So, &gt;&gt; Well, you have to drive past that. So, &gt;&gt; Well, you have to drive past that. So, to be clear, I'm starting from to be clear, I'm starting from to be clear, I'm starting from Sunrise. &gt;&gt; Sunrise. Oh, you're going from Tuolumne. &gt;&gt; Sunrise. Oh, you're going from Tuolumne. &gt;&gt; Sunrise. Oh, you're going from Tuolumne. I'm going from Tuolumne. I'm going from Tuolumne. I'm going from Tuolumne. &gt;&gt; way less impressed. Okay, good. Okay, &gt;&gt; way less impressed. Okay, good. Okay, &gt;&gt; way less impressed. Okay, good. Okay, good. Okay, good. Okay, good. Okay, good. Okay, good. Okay, good. Okay, good. Cuz I was thinking to myself like I was Cuz I was thinking to myself like I was Cuz I was thinking to myself like I was like, you know, Cloud's Rest is like 15 like, you know, Cloud's Rest is like 15 like, you know, Cloud's Rest is like 15 mi up and back. It's like it's No, going mi up and back. It's like it's No, going mi up and back. It's like it's No, going from the valley floor is really hard. from the valley floor is really hard. from the valley floor is really hard. &gt;&gt; Going from the valley floor. So, I &gt;&gt; Going from the valley floor. So, I &gt;&gt; Going from the valley floor. So, I actually don't know many people who come actually don't know many people who come actually don't know many people who come up from the valley floor anymore. People up from the valley floor anymore. People up from the valley floor anymore. People tend to start at Sunrise and then go tend to start at Sunrise and then go tend to start at Sunrise and then go down Cloud's Rest, kind of go down the down Cloud's Rest, kind of go down the down Cloud's Rest, kind of go down the spine of it toward Half Dome. And then I spine of it toward Half Dome. And then I spine of it toward Half Dome. And then I know this cuz then recently Yeah, there know this cuz then recently Yeah, there know this cuz then recently Yeah, there are trails between them and it's there are trails between them and it's there are trails between them and it's obviously Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's so obviously Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's so obviously Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's so funny because you were talking about funny because you were talking about funny because you were talking about rocking a heavy bag up there and I was rocking a heavy bag up there and I was rocking a heavy bag up there and I was like, "Man, that is a hard walk from the like, "Man, that is a hard walk from the like, "Man, that is a hard walk from the valley floor." But because I'm thinking valley floor." But because I'm thinking valley floor." But because I'm thinking everything from the valley floor cuz I everything from the valley floor cuz I everything from the valley floor cuz I spent so much time in Yosemite. I'm spent so much time in Yosemite. I'm spent so much time in Yosemite. I'm starting at about 8,000 ft, finishing at starting at about 8,000 ft, finishing at starting at about 8,000 ft, finishing at about 10,000 ft. about 10,000 ft. about 10,000 ft. &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, yeah. Your yeah, yeah. Your yeah, yeah. Your daughter does this. You know, daughter does this. You know, daughter does this. You know, a 3 and 1/2-year-old daughter. That's a 3 and 1/2-year-old daughter. That's a 3 and 1/2-year-old daughter. That's what I was saying. Like it's like, "Wow, what I was saying. Like it's like, "Wow, what I was saying. Like it's like, "Wow, he's right. Okay." I mean, it's tough. I he's right. Okay." I mean, it's tough. I he's right. Okay." I mean, it's tough. I mean, 2,000 mean, 2,000 mean, 2,000 &gt;&gt; no, it's still tough. I mean, it's like &gt;&gt; no, it's still tough. I mean, it's like &gt;&gt; no, it's still tough. I mean, it's like a workout. a workout. a workout. &gt;&gt; But going from the valley floor is &gt;&gt; But going from the valley floor is &gt;&gt; But going from the valley floor is really tough. Yeah, that's brutal. really tough. Yeah, that's brutal. really tough. Yeah, that's brutal. &gt;&gt; Cuz I had one season in Yosemite where &gt;&gt; Cuz I had one season in Yosemite where &gt;&gt; Cuz I had one season in Yosemite where for whatever reason I wasn't really for whatever reason I wasn't really for whatever reason I wasn't really motivated for climbing goals and I motivated for climbing goals and I motivated for climbing goals and I called it. I said that I retired and I called it. I said that I retired and I called it. I said that I retired and I was on a trail running season. Um was on a trail running season. Um was on a trail running season. Um though it's funny because I actually I though it's funny because I actually I though it's funny because I actually I supported a bunch of my friends on supported a bunch of my friends on supported a bunch of my friends on things and I was bouldering with all my things and I was bouldering with all my things and I was bouldering with all my friends. And so, you know, I said that I friends. And so, you know, I said that I friends. And so, you know, I said that I have a climbing journal. So, by the end have a climbing journal. So, by the end have a climbing journal. So, by the end of the season if you look through the of the season if you look through the of the season if you look through the journal, it would look like a normal journal, it would look like a normal journal, it would look like a normal season where like almost every day I was season where like almost every day I was season where like almost every day I was climbing with somebody. I was doing climbing with somebody. I was doing climbing with somebody. I was doing something and then by the end of the something and then by the end of the something and then by the end of the season I actually did a couple things season I actually did a couple things season I actually did a couple things that I was kind of proud of. But the that I was kind of proud of. But the that I was kind of proud of. But the mindset going into it was like, "I don't mindset going into it was like, "I don't mindset going into it was like, "I don't care. I'm just here having fun. I'm care. I'm just here having fun. I'm care. I'm just here having fun. I'm trail running and I'm supporting my trail running and I'm supporting my trail running and I'm supporting my friends on things and that's it." And uh friends on things and that's it." And uh friends on things and that's it." And uh and one of my big things that season was and one of my big things that season was and one of my big things that season was that I ran Clouds Rest from the valley that I ran Clouds Rest from the valley that I ran Clouds Rest from the valley floor. But to me that was like a triumph floor. But to me that was like a triumph floor. But to me that was like a triumph of trail running, you know, because of trail running, you know, because of trail running, you know, because that's like a pretty big It was that's like a pretty big It was that's like a pretty big It was &gt;&gt; Yeah, how long is that? I don't know. &gt;&gt; Yeah, how long is that? I don't know. &gt;&gt; Yeah, how long is that? I don't know. It's like 5,000 ft of or 6,000 I don't It's like 5,000 ft of or 6,000 I don't It's like 5,000 ft of or 6,000 I don't know. It's like so far. Yeah. Uh let's know. It's like so far. Yeah. Uh let's know. It's like so far. Yeah. Uh let's see cuz it It was like the hardest thing see cuz it It was like the hardest thing see cuz it It was like the hardest thing I'd ever run for sure. I'd ever run for sure. I'd ever run for sure. &gt;&gt; going at least 3 to 4,000 ft from the &gt;&gt; going at least 3 to 4,000 ft from the &gt;&gt; going at least 3 to 4,000 ft from the valley floor up to the meadows and then valley floor up to the meadows and then valley floor up to the meadows and then another 2,000 up to Well, the valley another 2,000 up to Well, the valley another 2,000 up to Well, the valley floor is four and top of Clouds Rest is floor is four and top of Clouds Rest is floor is four and top of Clouds Rest is 10 something. So, you're doing six, 10 something. So, you're doing six, 10 something. So, you're doing six, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's like &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's like &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it's like &gt;&gt; Okay. For me I was like, "Oh, that's a &gt;&gt; Okay. For me I was like, "Oh, that's a &gt;&gt; Okay. For me I was like, "Oh, that's a That's a lot." That's a lot." That's a lot." &gt;&gt; That's a trail run. Yeah. And you're &gt;&gt; That's a trail run. Yeah. And you're &gt;&gt; That's a trail run. Yeah. And you're bringing and you're carrying water or bringing and you're carrying water or bringing and you're carrying water or you get water from the river? you get water from the river? you get water from the river? &gt;&gt; had like a little bottle and then I &gt;&gt; had like a little bottle and then I &gt;&gt; had like a little bottle and then I would fill in the rivers and Yeah, I would fill in the rivers and Yeah, I would fill in the rivers and Yeah, I mean I don't consider myself a serious mean I don't consider myself a serious mean I don't consider myself a serious trail runner or mountaineer, certainly, trail runner or mountaineer, certainly, trail runner or mountaineer, certainly, but I but I but I ever since I got my driver's license it ever since I got my driver's license it ever since I got my driver's license it was like Yosemite. was like Yosemite. was like Yosemite. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's the best. And Glacier is &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's the best. And Glacier is &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's the best. And Glacier is amazing. Um you know, I swear I'm not sent here by you know, I swear I'm not sent here by you know, I swear I'm not sent here by the National Park Service, but I think the National Park Service, but I think the National Park Service, but I think Glacier's got some incredible scenery Glacier's got some incredible scenery Glacier's got some incredible scenery that everyone should make it to. Have that everyone should make it to. Have that everyone should make it to. Have you done a lot of climbing in Glacier? you done a lot of climbing in Glacier? you done a lot of climbing in Glacier? &gt;&gt; No. Uh actually I don't think there is &gt;&gt; No. Uh actually I don't think there is &gt;&gt; No. Uh actually I don't think there is that much climbing in Glacier National that much climbing in Glacier National that much climbing in Glacier National Park, but uh I actually biked past on Park, but uh I actually biked past on Park, but uh I actually biked past on the way to Alaska for this like on the way to Alaska for this like on the way to Alaska for this like random journey I did. random journey I did. random journey I did. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But um but no, I haven't &gt;&gt; Yeah. But um but no, I haven't &gt;&gt; Yeah. But um but no, I haven't done much in there. What are the haven't done much in there. What are the haven't done much in there. What are the um if any cultural differences of um if any cultural differences of um if any cultural differences of climbing in the United States versus in climbing in the United States versus in climbing in the United States versus in Europe? It seems like Europe? It seems like Europe? It seems like you know, like you get guys in the you know, like you get guys in the you know, like you get guys in the training the Alps. training the Alps. training the Alps. Um I keep saying guys, but I want to be Um I keep saying guys, but I want to be Um I keep saying guys, but I want to be fair not for politically people. I'm not fair not for politically people. I'm not fair not for politically people. I'm not saying this for politically correct saying this for politically correct saying this for politically correct reason, but there's a movie out very reason, but there's a movie out very reason, but there's a movie out very soon actually an IMAX movie. I saw the soon actually an IMAX movie. I saw the soon actually an IMAX movie. I saw the trailer, too. Is a friend of yours, a trailer, too. Is a friend of yours, a trailer, too. Is a friend of yours, a woman who's What's she climbing? She's woman who's What's she climbing? She's woman who's What's she climbing? She's climbing El Cap. climbing El Cap. climbing El Cap. &gt;&gt; Yeah, she's climbing El Cap in a day, &gt;&gt; Yeah, she's climbing El Cap in a day, &gt;&gt; Yeah, she's climbing El Cap in a day, like free in a day, this route called like free in a day, this route called like free in a day, this route called Golden Gate. Um yeah, actually, yeah, Golden Gate. Um yeah, actually, yeah, Golden Gate. Um yeah, actually, yeah, surprisingly, I'm in that film much more surprisingly, I'm in that film much more surprisingly, I'm in that film much more than I thought uh because I supported than I thought uh because I supported than I thought uh because I supported her on each of her attempts. Uh we're her on each of her attempts. Uh we're her on each of her attempts. Uh we're talking about Emily Harrington, who's talking about Emily Harrington, who's talking about Emily Harrington, who's also a professional climber, also a professional climber, also a professional climber, um who yeah, freed this route called um who yeah, freed this route called um who yeah, freed this route called Golden Gate in a day. And the film's uh Golden Gate in a day. And the film's uh Golden Gate in a day. And the film's uh called uh Girl Climber. And I think it called uh Girl Climber. And I think it called uh Girl Climber. And I think it comes out 24th. Yeah, isn't that like comes out 24th. Yeah, isn't that like comes out 24th. Yeah, isn't that like soon? Yeah. soon? Yeah. soon? Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's one day in an IMAX, but then &gt;&gt; It's one day in an IMAX, but then &gt;&gt; It's one day in an IMAX, but then presumably it'll be released presumably it'll be released presumably it'll be released &gt;&gt; it'll be some kind of theatrical &gt;&gt; it'll be some kind of theatrical &gt;&gt; it'll be some kind of theatrical release, but I think it'll be a release, but I think it'll be a release, but I think it'll be a relatively small theatrical release and relatively small theatrical release and relatively small theatrical release and then eventually stream and whatever. then eventually stream and whatever. then eventually stream and whatever. But anyway, this film, Girl Climber. But anyway, this film, Girl Climber. But anyway, this film, Girl Climber. Yeah, it's funny because she worked on Yeah, it's funny because she worked on Yeah, it's funny because she worked on this goal for a long time, and I'd kind this goal for a long time, and I'd kind this goal for a long time, and I'd kind of forgotten that I basically supported of forgotten that I basically supported of forgotten that I basically supported her on each of her attempts because when her on each of her attempts because when her on each of her attempts because when you support somebody, I mean, this is you support somebody, I mean, this is you support somebody, I mean, this is kind of like crewing somebody's race or kind of like crewing somebody's race or kind of like crewing somebody's race or something. You know, when you support something. You know, when you support something. You know, when you support somebody, it's basically a rest day for somebody, it's basically a rest day for somebody, it's basically a rest day for you. You're like having a nice day, you. You're like having a nice day, you. You're like having a nice day, you're supporting a friend, it's like no you're supporting a friend, it's like no you're supporting a friend, it's like no pressure, it's all really chill. And so, pressure, it's all really chill. And so, pressure, it's all really chill. And so, the days that I supported her were all the days that I supported her were all the days that I supported her were all like, you know, I mean, I remember them, but you know, I mean, I remember them, but you know, I mean, I remember them, but they were just one day throughout a big they were just one day throughout a big they were just one day throughout a big season where I'd be working on like season where I'd be working on like season where I'd be working on like climbing goals, like all the things that climbing goals, like all the things that climbing goals, like all the things that I'm working on. It's just like a fun day I'm working on. It's just like a fun day I'm working on. It's just like a fun day supporting a friend, but then I went supporting a friend, but then I went supporting a friend, but then I went watch the movie, and it's like, "Oh, watch the movie, and it's like, "Oh, watch the movie, and it's like, "Oh, every time she tries the wall, I'm like, every time she tries the wall, I'm like, every time she tries the wall, I'm like, there I'm supporting her." And I was there I'm supporting her." And I was there I'm supporting her." And I was like, "Oh god, I kind of forgot about like, "Oh god, I kind of forgot about like, "Oh god, I kind of forgot about all these things like a couple years all these things like a couple years all these things like a couple years ago." And I don't know. It was uh yeah, ago." And I don't know. It was uh yeah, ago." And I don't know. It was uh yeah, it's funny seeing the film. It's it's funny seeing the film. It's it's funny seeing the film. It's really It's really inspiring. Is the really It's really inspiring. Is the really It's really inspiring. Is the route that she took um route that she took um route that she took um particularly difficult? What What's particularly difficult? What What's particularly difficult? What What's the What's the milestone that she the What's the milestone that she the What's the milestone that she achieves there? She was the first woman achieves there? She was the first woman achieves there? She was the first woman to do that route in a day, uh free in a to do that route in a day, uh free in a to do that route in a day, uh free in a day. That route's like a harder version day. That route's like a harder version day. That route's like a harder version of the Free Rider, the thing that I of the Free Rider, the thing that I of the Free Rider, the thing that I free soloed in the film Free Solo. Uh free soloed in the film Free Solo. Uh free soloed in the film Free Solo. Uh but yeah, I mean, honestly, I think the but yeah, I mean, honestly, I think the but yeah, I mean, honestly, I think the film does a good job of not trying to film does a good job of not trying to film does a good job of not trying to portray it as anything more than it is. portray it as anything more than it is. portray it as anything more than it is. I mean, it's a very difficult I mean, it's a very difficult I mean, it's a very difficult climbing achievement, but it's not climbing achievement, but it's not climbing achievement, but it's not like it doesn't need super It's not like it doesn't need super It's not like it doesn't need super It's not the hardest thing ever done. It's not the hardest thing ever done. It's not the hardest thing ever done. It's not the first time that, the first time that, the first time that, you know, you know, you know, um but it's very hard. And if you watch um but it's very hard. And if you watch um but it's very hard. And if you watch the film, you see what makes it the film, you see what makes it the film, you see what makes it meaningful is the level of effort that meaningful is the level of effort that meaningful is the level of effort that she puts into it. It's like it's hard she puts into it. It's like it's hard she puts into it. It's like it's hard for her. She's a great climber, and she for her. She's a great climber, and she for her. She's a great climber, and she puts a lot into it, a lot of herself puts a lot into it, a lot of herself puts a lot into it, a lot of herself into it and eventually into it and eventually into it and eventually I don't want to you know spoil it but I don't want to you know spoil it but I don't want to you know spoil it but eventually overcomes like manages to do eventually overcomes like manages to do eventually overcomes like manages to do this thing that's really hard for and I this thing that's really hard for and I this thing that's really hard for and I think that's which in a lot of ways is I think that's which in a lot of ways is I think that's which in a lot of ways is I mean that's climbing in a nutshell. It's mean that's climbing in a nutshell. It's mean that's climbing in a nutshell. It's like none of it really matters cuz like none of it really matters cuz like none of it really matters cuz like even free soloing El Cap, I mean you can even free soloing El Cap, I mean you can even free soloing El Cap, I mean you can walk around the back like you know it's walk around the back like you know it's walk around the back like you know it's like why put the years of effort into like why put the years of effort into like why put the years of effort into climbing the face when you can walk climbing the face when you can walk climbing the face when you can walk around the back? Like all of climbing is around the back? Like all of climbing is around the back? Like all of climbing is relatively meaningless and so ultimately relatively meaningless and so ultimately relatively meaningless and so ultimately it's the effort that we put into it that it's the effort that we put into it that it's the effort that we put into it that has value. And so I think that's that has value. And so I think that's that has value. And so I think that's what the film Girl Climber that's what the film Girl Climber that's what the film Girl Climber Girl Climber does really good job of is Girl Climber does really good job of is Girl Climber does really good job of is that you're sort of like oh wow like she that you're sort of like oh wow like she that you're sort of like oh wow like she puts a lot into it and then and puts a lot into it and then and puts a lot into it and then and therefore gets a lot out of it for therefore gets a lot out of it for therefore gets a lot out of it for herself. Awesome. And I haven't seen it herself. Awesome. And I haven't seen it herself. Awesome. And I haven't seen it yet but clearly for the observer too. I yet but clearly for the observer too. I yet but clearly for the observer too. I mean I find it amazing that humans love mean I find it amazing that humans love mean I find it amazing that humans love to see other humans accomplish great to see other humans accomplish great to see other humans accomplish great feats. You know feats. You know feats. You know &gt;&gt; I think they love to see the effort. I &gt;&gt; I think they love to see the effort. I &gt;&gt; I think they love to see the effort. I mean the accomplishment of course but mean the accomplishment of course but mean the accomplishment of course but it's like but you love seeing somebody it's like but you love seeing somebody it's like but you love seeing somebody work really hard at something try really work really hard at something try really work really hard at something try really hard like face their fears overcome and hard like face their fears overcome and hard like face their fears overcome and then you know ideally achieve something. then you know ideally achieve something. then you know ideally achieve something. But I think it's the effort that's so But I think it's the effort that's so But I think it's the effort that's so inspiring. Like inspiring. Like inspiring. Like I mean at least personally I love to see I mean at least personally I love to see I mean at least personally I love to see other people try that hard because it's other people try that hard because it's other people try that hard because it's a reminder that I can try that hard if I a reminder that I can try that hard if I a reminder that I can try that hard if I want to. Yeah no I completely agree. I want to. Yeah no I completely agree. I want to. Yeah no I completely agree. I I'd made this little list before we I'd made this little list before we I'd made this little list before we I started and I started and I started and I'm trying to just let my unconscious I'm trying to just let my unconscious I'm trying to just let my unconscious mind guide it more than I'm really mind guide it more than I'm really mind guide it more than I'm really scripting out carefully and it says scripting out carefully and it says scripting out carefully and it says Evil Knievel cuz when I was growing up Evil Knievel cuz when I was growing up Evil Knievel cuz when I was growing up it was like everything was Evil Knievel. it was like everything was Evil Knievel. it was like everything was Evil Knievel. Turned out there were many of them. It's Turned out there were many of them. It's Turned out there were many of them. It's all family. Oh yeah. Yeah yeah a bunch all family. Oh yeah. Yeah yeah a bunch all family. Oh yeah. Yeah yeah a bunch of Evil Knievels. of Evil Knievels. of Evil Knievels. &gt;&gt; The Knievels. &gt;&gt; The Knievels. &gt;&gt; The Knievels. &gt;&gt; The Knievels. Yeah. &gt;&gt; The Knievels. Yeah. &gt;&gt; The Knievels. Yeah. And you know jumping you know whatever And you know jumping you know whatever And you know jumping you know whatever you know 50 maybe not 50 you know 50 maybe not 50 you know 50 maybe not 50 length to length but length to length but length to length but semi trucks and semi trucks and semi trucks and um and I think you know there's the element and I think you know there's the element and I think you know there's the element of danger. It's super impressive. of danger. It's super impressive. of danger. It's super impressive. Danny Way growing up cuz I knew that kid Danny Way growing up cuz I knew that kid Danny Way growing up cuz I knew that kid who was now a full grown man doing all who was now a full grown man doing all who was now a full grown man doing all sorts of crazy stuff to the point where sorts of crazy stuff to the point where sorts of crazy stuff to the point where he was starting to go after things that he was starting to go after things that he was starting to go after things that for skateboarders felt a little bit for skateboarders felt a little bit for skateboarders felt a little bit kind of outside the box like land speed kind of outside the box like land speed kind of outside the box like land speed records and things like that you know records and things like that you know records and things like that you know but jumping out of helicopters and but jumping out of helicopters and but jumping out of helicopters and certainly grum- the Great Wall of China certainly grum- the Great Wall of China certainly grum- the Great Wall of China just engineering it from scratch, was just engineering it from scratch, was just engineering it from scratch, was super impressive. super impressive. super impressive. Um and then I've got you here and then Um and then I've got you here and then Um and then I've got you here and then um Hunter Thompson, you know, like the guy Hunter Thompson, you know, like the guy Hunter Thompson, you know, like the guy just was all about like how many just was all about like how many just was all about like how many drug experiences he could have and then drug experiences he could have and then drug experiences he could have and then his funeral was actually um he loved the his funeral was actually um he loved the his funeral was actually um he loved the town of Aspen. He had his ashes exploded town of Aspen. He had his ashes exploded town of Aspen. He had his ashes exploded over the town of Aspen in a in a over the town of Aspen in a in a over the town of Aspen in a in a firework show. So, that's like firework show. So, that's like firework show. So, that's like going out the way the way you lived, you going out the way the way you lived, you going out the way the way you lived, you know. &gt;&gt; That's that is fitting. Right. Um &gt;&gt; That's that is fitting. Right. Um &gt;&gt; That's that is fitting. Right. Um so, I think you're I think you're so, I think you're I think you're so, I think you're I think you're absolutely right, however, that we love absolutely right, however, that we love absolutely right, however, that we love to touch into the amount of effort and to touch into the amount of effort and to touch into the amount of effort and training that's required. I mean, that's training that's required. I mean, that's training that's required. I mean, that's the Rocky movies, that's um the Rocky movies, that's um the Rocky movies, that's um pretty much everything and that's really pretty much everything and that's really pretty much everything and that's really where the where the where the work is. Like that's the that should the work is. Like that's the that should the work is. Like that's the that should be the inspiring part, right? Cuz that's be the inspiring part, right? Cuz that's be the inspiring part, right? Cuz that's the part that one can adopt. the part that one can adopt. the part that one can adopt. &gt;&gt; the Rocky training montage, that's the &gt;&gt; the Rocky training montage, that's the &gt;&gt; the Rocky training montage, that's the best part of the movie. I mean, a lot of best part of the movie. I mean, a lot of best part of the movie. I mean, a lot of those films the best part is the those films the best part is the those films the best part is the training montage where it's like cuts to training montage where it's like cuts to training montage where it's like cuts to the person working really hard the person working really hard the person working really hard for a long time and like getting swole for a long time and like getting swole for a long time and like getting swole and then you get to the actual them and then you get to the actual them and then you get to the actual them doing the thing. And them doing the doing the thing. And them doing the doing the thing. And them doing the thing is cool, but it's like them thing is cool, but it's like them thing is cool, but it's like them getting ready to do the thing is often getting ready to do the thing is often getting ready to do the thing is often the part that you're like, that's so the part that you're like, that's so the part that you're like, that's so awesome. I'm all fired up. Totally. It's awesome. I'm all fired up. Totally. It's awesome. I'm all fired up. Totally. It's the chasing chickens and all that weird the chasing chickens and all that weird the chasing chickens and all that weird stuff. Speaking of which, um for the stuff. Speaking of which, um for the stuff. Speaking of which, um for the non-climber, what would be the non-climber, what would be the non-climber, what would be the strangest um aspect of your training? Do strangest um aspect of your training? Do strangest um aspect of your training? Do you train your feet? Do you train your you train your feet? Do you train your you train your feet? Do you train your hands in ways that are un- hands in ways that are un- hands in ways that are un- &gt;&gt; But it's probably the dangling from your &gt;&gt; But it's probably the dangling from your &gt;&gt; But it's probably the dangling from your fingertips that I think a non-climber fingertips that I think a non-climber fingertips that I think a non-climber would I mean, also I mean, I think that's the I mean, also I mean, I think that's the I mean, also I mean, I think that's the type of thing that a non-climber just type of thing that a non-climber just type of thing that a non-climber just can't even interface with. Like they can't even interface with. Like they can't even interface with. Like they just can't hang from an edge, you know? just can't hang from an edge, you know? just can't hang from an edge, you know? It's like from a small It's like the It's like from a small It's like the It's like from a small It's like the training your fingertip type stuff. training your fingertip type stuff. training your fingertip type stuff. Um yeah, I mean, I think the yeah, I mean, I think the yeah, I mean, I think the though I mean, now there've been so many though I mean, now there've been so many though I mean, now there've been so many mainstream climbing things that I think mainstream climbing things that I think mainstream climbing things that I think people have a sense that that's people have a sense that that's people have a sense that that's what it is. You like dangling tiny edges what it is. You like dangling tiny edges what it is. You like dangling tiny edges and do pull-ups and all that kind of and do pull-ups and all that kind of and do pull-ups and all that kind of stuff. Well, I think uh I follow an stuff. Well, I think uh I follow an stuff. Well, I think uh I follow an Instagram account that's actually Instagram account that's actually Instagram account that's actually informative. Um informative. Um informative. Um it's a former army guy who's a it's a former army guy who's a it's a former army guy who's a he's a rock climber. And so, it's mainly he's a rock climber. And so, it's mainly he's a rock climber. And so, it's mainly focused on pull-ups and things like that focused on pull-ups and things like that focused on pull-ups and things like that and touching into like how you if and touching into like how you if and touching into like how you if you change the speed of the initial you change the speed of the initial you change the speed of the initial one-arm pull-up, like learning to one-arm pull-up, like learning to one-arm pull-up, like learning to blast through the bar like through and blast through the bar like through and blast through the bar like through and above the bar and let go and then catch above the bar and let go and then catch above the bar and let go and then catch it again. Generates a completely it again. Generates a completely it again. Generates a completely different sort of motor neuron adapt different sort of motor neuron adapt different sort of motor neuron adapt adaptation response than like just doing adaptation response than like just doing adaptation response than like just doing a bunch of pull-ups or like slow one a bunch of pull-ups or like slow one a bunch of pull-ups or like slow one arm pull-ups. Like the ability be arm pull-ups. Like the ability be arm pull-ups. Like the ability be ballistic but and then also like the ballistic but and then also like the ballistic but and then also like the eccentric like catch yourself and lower. eccentric like catch yourself and lower. eccentric like catch yourself and lower. Um and it seems to have a lot of parallels and it seems to have a lot of parallels and it seems to have a lot of parallels with climbing. Maybe I should just get with climbing. Maybe I should just get with climbing. Maybe I should just get on a wall and climb. It sounds like uh on a wall and climb. It sounds like uh on a wall and climb. It sounds like uh do you so I imagine if you're bouldering do you so I imagine if you're bouldering do you so I imagine if you're bouldering you end up doing all this stuff in the you end up doing all this stuff in the you end up doing all this stuff in the process of bouldering. Yeah, actually I process of bouldering. Yeah, actually I process of bouldering. Yeah, actually I was immediately like so should I be was immediately like so should I be was immediately like so should I be going faster when I do pull-ups cuz I've going faster when I do pull-ups cuz I've going faster when I do pull-ups cuz I've been like doing one arms at the end of a been like doing one arms at the end of a been like doing one arms at the end of a session but like my one arms are pretty session but like my one arms are pretty session but like my one arms are pretty slow. You know, you just grab the bar slow. You know, you just grab the bar slow. You know, you just grab the bar and you just like struggle until you do and you just like struggle until you do and you just like struggle until you do a I mean he talks about you know, a lot a I mean he talks about you know, a lot a I mean he talks about you know, a lot of people can do a lot of pull-ups in of people can do a lot of pull-ups in of people can do a lot of pull-ups in full range slow concentric and eccentric full range slow concentric and eccentric full range slow concentric and eccentric but that they rarely ever get to like but that they rarely ever get to like but that they rarely ever get to like muscle ups or to one arm pull-ups muscle ups or to one arm pull-ups muscle ups or to one arm pull-ups at kind of level that he's pulling a ton at kind of level that he's pulling a ton at kind of level that he's pulling a ton of weight of weight of weight because they there are number of things because they there are number of things because they there are number of things that he suggests we can link to this that he suggests we can link to this that he suggests we can link to this account. A lot of there's some training account. A lot of there's some training account. A lot of there's some training of forearms and brachialis and hands of forearms and brachialis and hands of forearms and brachialis and hands that's required. But he said you know that's required. But he said you know that's required. But he said you know that not being able to generate enough that not being able to generate enough that not being able to generate enough force at the beginning is the reason a force at the beginning is the reason a force at the beginning is the reason a lot of people don't get to the lot of people don't get to the lot of people don't get to the muscle up because with the muscle up you muscle up because with the muscle up you muscle up because with the muscle up you actually there's a little bit of a kip involved there's a little bit of a kip involved there's a little bit of a kip involved at least when one's first learning it at least when one's first learning it at least when one's first learning it and so people are used to kind of and so people are used to kind of and so people are used to kind of dragging themselves in low gear out of dragging themselves in low gear out of dragging themselves in low gear out of the bottom. the bottom. the bottom. It's going to be a long while before It's going to be a long while before It's going to be a long while before they have the strength to do a muscle they have the strength to do a muscle they have the strength to do a muscle up. Whereas if you can blast yourself up. Whereas if you can blast yourself up. Whereas if you can blast yourself out of the bottom you sort of end up out of the bottom you sort of end up out of the bottom you sort of end up almost above the bar at some point. I almost above the bar at some point. I almost above the bar at some point. I actually just started doing muscle ups actually just started doing muscle ups actually just started doing muscle ups again like couple months ago in my again like couple months ago in my again like couple months ago in my little home gym and I was like I haven't little home gym and I was like I haven't little home gym and I was like I haven't done a muscle up since I was a teenager, done a muscle up since I was a teenager, done a muscle up since I was a teenager, you know, I was like is it kind of a gym you know, I was like is it kind of a gym you know, I was like is it kind of a gym feat when you're a kid just to see if feat when you're a kid just to see if feat when you're a kid just to see if you can and as an adult it's just also you can and as an adult it's just also you can and as an adult it's just also living in a van obviously you can't do living in a van obviously you can't do living in a van obviously you can't do muscle ups cuz there's nothing to muscle ups cuz there's nothing to muscle ups cuz there's nothing to muscle past. You're like hanging from a little past. You're like hanging from a little past. You're like hanging from a little bar inside the van. bar inside the van. bar inside the van. But yeah, I started doing them again and But yeah, I started doing them again and But yeah, I started doing them again and I was like oh wow, it's so explosive. I was like oh wow, it's so explosive. I was like oh wow, it's so explosive. I was I was kind of like wow, what a dude. was I was kind of like wow, what a dude. was I was kind of like wow, what a dude. I was so psyched I could still do them. I was so psyched I could still do them. I was so psyched I could still do them. Well, yeah, then you don't need his help Well, yeah, then you don't need his help Well, yeah, then you don't need his help but I'll send you the this account but I'll send you the this account but I'll send you the this account so you can take a look. He's got some so you can take a look. He's got some so you can take a look. He's got some interesting progressions. interesting progressions. interesting progressions. &gt;&gt; did want to I mean I was like oh &gt;&gt; did want to I mean I was like oh &gt;&gt; did want to I mean I was like oh going to chat with him and I was like so going to chat with him and I was like so going to chat with him and I was like so what am I supposed to be doing? You know what am I supposed to be doing? You know what am I supposed to be doing? You know what I mean? Like well that's the thing what I mean? Like well that's the thing what I mean? Like well that's the thing is like well cuz I've been just been is like well cuz I've been just been is like well cuz I've been just been doing all the same training stuff for 30 doing all the same training stuff for 30 doing all the same training stuff for 30 years. I mean and obviously I read all years. I mean and obviously I read all years. I mean and obviously I read all the books and you know all my friends the books and you know all my friends the books and you know all my friends are professional climbers so we talk are professional climbers so we talk are professional climbers so we talk about this kind of stuff all the time. about this kind of stuff all the time. about this kind of stuff all the time. But there are a lot of things we always But there are a lot of things we always But there are a lot of things we always kind of as like a self-trained, kind of as like a self-trained, kind of as like a self-trained, self-coached athlete to some extent, self-coached athlete to some extent, self-coached athlete to some extent, you're kind of like you're kind of like you're kind of like should I be doing this more? Should I be should I be doing this more? Should I be should I be doing this more? Should I be doing this less? Like and it doing this less? Like and it doing this less? Like and it I was like training a bunch this summer I was like training a bunch this summer I was like training a bunch this summer and it was really motivating. And then and it was really motivating. And then and it was really motivating. And then I've kind of just the pendulum has kind I've kind of just the pendulum has kind I've kind of just the pendulum has kind of just swung back to being like do I of just swung back to being like do I of just swung back to being like do I need to do training stuff? Like the need to do training stuff? Like the need to do training stuff? Like the calisthenics, the extra workout stuff or calisthenics, the extra workout stuff or calisthenics, the extra workout stuff or should I just go pure climbing? Because should I just go pure climbing? Because should I just go pure climbing? Because to some extent climbing, like if you to some extent climbing, like if you to some extent climbing, like if you want to be a climber, you just climb. want to be a climber, you just climb. want to be a climber, you just climb. Like if you have energy left over, you Like if you have energy left over, you Like if you have energy left over, you should just climb harder or climb more. should just climb harder or climb more. should just climb harder or climb more. You don't necessarily need to save it You don't necessarily need to save it You don't necessarily need to save it for workout stuff and training stuff. for workout stuff and training stuff. for workout stuff and training stuff. So I don't know. But yeah, what do what So I don't know. But yeah, what do what So I don't know. But yeah, what do what do you think? do you think? do you think? &gt;&gt; Okay, well I'm not going to tell I'm not &gt;&gt; Okay, well I'm not going to tell I'm not &gt;&gt; Okay, well I'm not going to tell I'm not going to tell how to change his training going to tell how to change his training going to tell how to change his training especially before you take on a big a especially before you take on a big a especially before you take on a big a big milestone. I mean all I can say is big milestone. I mean all I can say is big milestone. I mean all I can say is what and I don't have a degree in exercise and I don't have a degree in exercise and I don't have a degree in exercise physiology. What I do have a degree in physiology. What I do have a degree in physiology. What I do have a degree in is 35 years of trying to get stronger. is 35 years of trying to get stronger. is 35 years of trying to get stronger. I'm naturally pretty I'm naturally pretty I'm naturally pretty I would say like medium joints. I'm not I would say like medium joints. I'm not I would say like medium joints. I'm not like real thick joints. Like my bulldog, like real thick joints. Like my bulldog, like real thick joints. Like my bulldog, you know, like some of those guys that you know, like some of those guys that you know, like some of those guys that just have like naturally the joints I just have like naturally the joints I just have like naturally the joints I but I'm actually keeping some endurance but I'm actually keeping some endurance but I'm actually keeping some endurance and some degree of and some degree of and some degree of explosivity but mostly strength and explosivity but mostly strength and explosivity but mostly strength and endurance have been the two main things. endurance have been the two main things. endurance have been the two main things. To me the thing that has just been the To me the thing that has just been the To me the thing that has just been the most beneficial is what Pavel most beneficial is what Pavel most beneficial is what Pavel Tsatsouline taught me when he came here Tsatsouline taught me when he came here Tsatsouline taught me when he came here which is which is which is take a weight that you can maybe do take a weight that you can maybe do take a weight that you can maybe do six or seven maybe eight reps with and six or seven maybe eight reps with and six or seven maybe eight reps with and do three repetitions. Set it down and do three repetitions. Set it down and do three repetitions. Set it down and just do many more sets and rest a long just do many more sets and rest a long just do many more sets and rest a long period of time if you have time to do period of time if you have time to do period of time if you have time to do that. That really like that that. That really like that that. That really like that really work those fast twitch motor really work those fast twitch motor really work those fast twitch motor units. You mean do the do the reps units. You mean do the do the reps units. You mean do the do the reps faster? Well, no not necessarily. So if faster? Well, no not necessarily. So if faster? Well, no not necessarily. So if you take a weight that you could do you take a weight that you could do you take a weight that you could do maximum like you'd fail somewhere maximum like you'd fail somewhere maximum like you'd fail somewhere between seven and eight repetitions. You between seven and eight repetitions. You between seven and eight repetitions. You take the weight maybe even add a take the weight maybe even add a take the weight maybe even add a little bit and you just do three little bit and you just do three little bit and you just do three repetitions. You don't go to failure but repetitions. You don't go to failure but repetitions. You don't go to failure but you do many more sets. So, you might do you do many more sets. So, you might do you do many more sets. So, you might do let's say some sort of push pull so like let's say some sort of push pull so like let's say some sort of push pull so like a shoulder press of some sort or a shoulder press of some sort or a shoulder press of some sort or and then if you could get eight you do and then if you could get eight you do and then if you could get eight you do three or four, but then you go do your three or four, but then you go do your three or four, but then you go do your pull-ups. You might do your you know pull-ups. You might do your you know pull-ups. You might do your you know sort of ballistic pull-ups that we were sort of ballistic pull-ups that we were sort of ballistic pull-ups that we were talking about before. I'm actually talking about before. I'm actually talking about before. I'm actually getting a lot of getting a lot of getting a lot of progress from those like trying to blast progress from those like trying to blast progress from those like trying to blast through and past the bar and kind of through and past the bar and kind of through and past the bar and kind of catch up below. catch up below. catch up below. I'm almost there I'm kipping too much I'm almost there I'm kipping too much I'm almost there I'm kipping too much when I do it. So, I'm doing it but I'm when I do it. So, I'm doing it but I'm when I do it. So, I'm doing it but I'm kind of like throwing myself up there. kind of like throwing myself up there. kind of like throwing myself up there. I'm not doing like a like a super I'm not doing like a like a super I'm not doing like a like a super controlled muscle up yet. Soon that's controlled muscle up yet. Soon that's controlled muscle up yet. Soon that's the goal. Um the goal. Um the goal. Um but not training to failure seems to be but not training to failure seems to be but not training to failure seems to be really beneficial if you don't want to really beneficial if you don't want to really beneficial if you don't want to eat into your recovery too much. There's eat into your recovery too much. There's eat into your recovery too much. There's something about hitting muscular failure something about hitting muscular failure something about hitting muscular failure that's great for generating hypertrophy, that's great for generating hypertrophy, that's great for generating hypertrophy, but it really according to Pavel and I'm but it really according to Pavel and I'm but it really according to Pavel and I'm finding this too it sort of teaches your finding this too it sort of teaches your finding this too it sort of teaches your nervous system to reach that static nervous system to reach that static nervous system to reach that static point where you can't move any longer point where you can't move any longer point where you can't move any longer and it really eats into your recovery and it really eats into your recovery and it really eats into your recovery ability. So, I'm able to now train ability. So, I'm able to now train ability. So, I'm able to now train muscle groups that I used to only be muscle groups that I used to only be muscle groups that I used to only be able to recover if I train them once or able to recover if I train them once or able to recover if I train them once or twice a week. I can train them like twice a week. I can train them like twice a week. I can train them like three or four days a week and I'm making three or four days a week and I'm making three or four days a week and I'm making much more progress overall, but there's much more progress overall, but there's much more progress overall, but there's no single set where I'm like grinding no single set where I'm like grinding no single set where I'm like grinding out that last final rep. That's out that last final rep. That's out that last final rep. That's interesting. So, if so like so bench interesting. So, if so like so bench interesting. So, if so like so bench pressing for example like that's pressing for example like that's pressing for example like that's actually the only weight that I move actually the only weight that I move actually the only weight that I move around is I around is I around is I bench like when I'm at home and have I bench like when I'm at home and have I bench like when I'm at home and have like my own little home gym. I bench like my own little home gym. I bench like my own little home gym. I bench press like twice a week let's say press like twice a week let's say press like twice a week let's say and I feel like it's like good for and I feel like it's like good for and I feel like it's like good for shoulder stability health. I don't know shoulder stability health. I don't know shoulder stability health. I don't know it's like nice to balance cuz as a it's like nice to balance cuz as a it's like nice to balance cuz as a climber you're always pulling so it's climber you're always pulling so it's climber you're always pulling so it's like I do that's my only pushing like I do that's my only pushing like I do that's my only pushing basically and so basically and so basically and so I can do like normally do three sets of I can do like normally do three sets of I can do like normally do three sets of five or six. It's just kind of like a five or six. It's just kind of like a five or six. It's just kind of like a basic something. So, you're saying I basic something. So, you're saying I basic something. So, you're saying I should do should do should do like six sets or like eight sets like six sets or like eight sets like six sets or like eight sets of three or something. of three or something. of three or something. &gt;&gt; maybe eight sets of three to four &gt;&gt; maybe eight sets of three to four &gt;&gt; maybe eight sets of three to four with slightly more weight but don't go with slightly more weight but don't go with slightly more weight but don't go to failure and obviously have a spotter. to failure and obviously have a spotter. to failure and obviously have a spotter. There are these horrible instances where There are these horrible instances where There are these horrible instances where people are benching at home and they people are benching at home and they people are benching at home and they don't have a spotter. don't have a spotter. don't have a spotter. &gt;&gt; Well, I only have a dumbbells anyway so &gt;&gt; Well, I only have a dumbbells anyway so &gt;&gt; Well, I only have a dumbbells anyway so yeah. It seems it seems like that's the yeah. It seems it seems like that's the yeah. It seems it seems like that's the type of thing too. Also, type of thing too. Also, type of thing too. Also, I kind of like the dumbbells cuz it I kind of like the dumbbells cuz it I kind of like the dumbbells cuz it seems more like so much of what I care seems more like so much of what I care seems more like so much of what I care about is shoulder stability and whatever about is shoulder stability and whatever about is shoulder stability and whatever and I'm kind of like oh it seems like and I'm kind of like oh it seems like and I'm kind of like oh it seems like dumbbells are good for that. dumbbells are good for that. dumbbells are good for that. &gt;&gt; bench I'm going to catch a lot of &gt;&gt; bench I'm going to catch a lot of &gt;&gt; bench I'm going to catch a lot of for this, but barbell bench press it for this, but barbell bench press it for this, but barbell bench press it there's a lot of ego involved for there's a lot of ego involved for there's a lot of ego involved for people. &gt;&gt; I'm like, I don't need that I I've &gt;&gt; I'm like, I don't need that I I've &gt;&gt; I'm like, I don't need that I I've never actually done a single rep max never actually done a single rep max never actually done a single rep max for uh barbell bench press. Never been for uh barbell bench press. Never been for uh barbell bench press. Never been curious enough. Cuz you don't have curious enough. Cuz you don't have curious enough. Cuz you don't have enough friends to help spot that much enough friends to help spot that much enough friends to help spot that much weight, you know? weight, you know? weight, you know? &gt;&gt; exactly. I'm alone I'm alone studying &gt;&gt; exactly. I'm alone I'm alone studying &gt;&gt; exactly. I'm alone I'm alone studying and I'm bench pressing alone in my and I'm bench pressing alone in my and I'm bench pressing alone in my basement. Um another reason to use basement. Um another reason to use basement. Um another reason to use dumbbells, but yet taking a weight that dumbbells, but yet taking a weight that dumbbells, but yet taking a weight that um you could do seven or eight um you could do seven or eight um you could do seven or eight repetitions and doing three or four or repetitions and doing three or four or repetitions and doing three or four or maybe five and then just setting it down maybe five and then just setting it down maybe five and then just setting it down and going doing something else maybe for and going doing something else maybe for and going doing something else maybe for an opposing muscle group and then coming an opposing muscle group and then coming an opposing muscle group and then coming back to it so that your total rest is back to it so that your total rest is back to it so that your total rest is somewhere &gt;&gt; try that particularly for the benching &gt;&gt; try that particularly for the benching &gt;&gt; try that particularly for the benching because I do actually get kind of sore because I do actually get kind of sore because I do actually get kind of sore from like, you know, it's just this sore from like, you know, it's just this sore from like, you know, it's just this sore sucks. And you get really strong. I sucks. And you get really strong. I sucks. And you get really strong. I never would have thought this cuz I never would have thought this cuz I never would have thought this cuz I came up in the lineage of I came up in the lineage of I came up in the lineage of I learned from Mike Mentzer who was a like learned from Mike Mentzer who was a like learned from Mike Mentzer who was a like a he was an ex-bodybuilder, but then he a he was an ex-bodybuilder, but then he a he was an ex-bodybuilder, but then he trained Dorian Yates who won the Olympia trained Dorian Yates who won the Olympia trained Dorian Yates who won the Olympia many times and that whole philosophy was many times and that whole philosophy was many times and that whole philosophy was around doing one or two sets to around doing one or two sets to around doing one or two sets to absolute failure with force traps and absolute failure with force traps and absolute failure with force traps and drop sets and all the all the stuff that drop sets and all the all the stuff that drop sets and all the all the stuff that builds a lot of muscle but makes you builds a lot of muscle but makes you builds a lot of muscle but makes you very sore. And so Pavel sat right where very sore. And so Pavel sat right where very sore. And so Pavel sat right where you're sitting and he was just like, try you're sitting and he was just like, try you're sitting and he was just like, try this. Uh find movements you can do this. Uh find movements you can do this. Uh find movements you can do safely, load up the bar and do far fewer safely, load up the bar and do far fewer safely, load up the bar and do far fewer reps, many more sets. reps, many more sets. reps, many more sets. And perhaps even divide those sets And perhaps even divide those sets And perhaps even divide those sets across two days during the week as across two days during the week as across two days during the week as you're already doing supposed to just you're already doing supposed to just you're already doing supposed to just training a muscle group once per week. training a muscle group once per week. training a muscle group once per week. &gt;&gt; Do people do that? Doing something once &gt;&gt; Do people do that? Doing something once &gt;&gt; Do people do that? Doing something once a week? a week? a week? &gt;&gt; I only train my legs once a week and I'm &gt;&gt; I only train my legs once a week and I'm &gt;&gt; I only train my legs once a week and I'm getting stronger most every workout. But getting stronger most every workout. But getting stronger most every workout. But I sprint on a separate day, so that's I sprint on a separate day, so that's I sprint on a separate day, so that's kind of a leg workout. kind of a leg workout. kind of a leg workout. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that seems like a leg workout. I &gt;&gt; Yeah, that seems like a leg workout. I &gt;&gt; Yeah, that seems like a leg workout. I don't have great recovery ability, never don't have great recovery ability, never don't have great recovery ability, never have. So it's um And you don't pushing have. So it's um And you don't pushing have. So it's um And you don't pushing 50, yeah. What's that? And I'm pushing 50, yeah. What's that? And I'm pushing 50, yeah. What's that? And I'm pushing 50 and I didn't run from the valley 50 and I didn't run from the valley 50 and I didn't run from the valley floor, right? You know, clouds you know, floor, right? You know, clouds you know, floor, right? You know, clouds you know, exactly. I definitely exactly. I definitely exactly. I definitely have found that if I avoid going to have found that if I avoid going to have found that if I avoid going to muscular momentary muscular failure as muscular momentary muscular failure as muscular momentary muscular failure as it's called, far less soreness, far it's called, far less soreness, far it's called, far less soreness, far better recovery, and you get really better recovery, and you get really better recovery, and you get really strong. Which is crazy, you would think strong. Which is crazy, you would think strong. Which is crazy, you would think the opposite. &gt;&gt; stimulus basically to like build? If you &gt;&gt; stimulus basically to like build? If you &gt;&gt; stimulus basically to like build? If you do enough sets, but probably twice you do enough sets, but probably twice you do enough sets, but probably twice you know that the data seem to show that the know that the data seem to show that the know that the data seem to show that the muscle protein synthesis is initiated muscle protein synthesis is initiated muscle protein synthesis is initiated after those workouts and then it takes after those workouts and then it takes after those workouts and then it takes anywhere from 48 to 72 hours before it anywhere from 48 to 72 hours before it anywhere from 48 to 72 hours before it you know it subsides. you know it subsides. you know it subsides. I just personally find if I train my I just personally find if I train my I just personally find if I train my legs once a week, but then I sprint four legs once a week, but then I sprint four legs once a week, but then I sprint four or five days later, that's sort of two or five days later, that's sort of two or five days later, that's sort of two leg workouts. Yeah. You know, so it's leg workouts. Yeah. You know, so it's leg workouts. Yeah. You know, so it's really twice a week and then I do a push really twice a week and then I do a push really twice a week and then I do a push pull day and then I do a separate day pull day and then I do a separate day pull day and then I do a separate day for my arms and extremities and for my arms and extremities and for my arms and extremities and that ends up training you know chest and that ends up training you know chest and that ends up training you know chest and shoulders and back again. So it's really shoulders and back again. So it's really shoulders and back again. So it's really twice per week. Once Yeah, so you're twice per week. Once Yeah, so you're twice per week. Once Yeah, so you're doing all your stuff basically twice a doing all your stuff basically twice a doing all your stuff basically twice a week. But everything heavy, like really week. But everything heavy, like really week. But everything heavy, like really heavy, never going I don't think I've heavy, never going I don't think I've heavy, never going I don't think I've done above eight reps this year. I'm done above eight reps this year. I'm done above eight reps this year. I'm stronger than ever and I can run really stronger than ever and I can run really stronger than ever and I can run really far, which is so the two things I was far, which is so the two things I was far, which is so the two things I was those were those were those were &gt;&gt; a long run during the week or something? &gt;&gt; a long run during the week or something? &gt;&gt; a long run during the week or something? &gt;&gt; I do one for me very long run, which &gt;&gt; I do one for me very long run, which &gt;&gt; I do one for me very long run, which means an hour to an hour and a half of means an hour to an hour and a half of means an hour to an hour and a half of just running with a 10 lb weight vest. just running with a 10 lb weight vest. just running with a 10 lb weight vest. Oh, why? Just to make sure that the Oh, why? Just to make sure that the Oh, why? Just to make sure that the small stabilizing muscles are strong and small stabilizing muscles are strong and small stabilizing muscles are strong and also because also because also because um I want to be able to just show up to um I want to be able to just show up to um I want to be able to just show up to Cloud's Rest and just do it. I don't Cloud's Rest and just do it. I don't Cloud's Rest and just do it. I don't want to have to train for things in want to have to train for things in want to have to train for things in life. Yeah. And I love Also I love life. Yeah. And I love Also I love life. Yeah. And I love Also I love running. I mean just that low that slow running. I mean just that low that slow running. I mean just that low that slow pace at first just it sucks and then pace at first just it sucks and then pace at first just it sucks and then after about 20 minutes you're just like after about 20 minutes you're just like after about 20 minutes you're just like I could go all day. This is awesome. Uh I could go all day. This is awesome. Uh I could go all day. This is awesome. Uh I don't know that that's been my regimen I don't know that that's been my regimen I don't know that that's been my regimen now for almost 35 years to train each now for almost 35 years to train each now for almost 35 years to train each muscle group once a week directly muscle group once a week directly muscle group once a week directly indirectly, a long run and I try and do indirectly, a long run and I try and do indirectly, a long run and I try and do one sprint run. But but again, I'm not one sprint run. But but again, I'm not one sprint run. But but again, I'm not going to tell Alex Honnold how to going to tell Alex Honnold how to going to tell Alex Honnold how to how to train, but I'm always looking for how to train, but I'm always looking for how to train, but I'm always looking for ideas. If you don't like getting sore ideas. If you don't like getting sore ideas. If you don't like getting sore and you want to get stronger and you want to get stronger and you want to get stronger you're hearing it from me, but it's you're hearing it from me, but it's you're hearing it from me, but it's really Pavel Tsatsouline that deserves really Pavel Tsatsouline that deserves really Pavel Tsatsouline that deserves the credit for this. Yeah, no, I'll try the credit for this. Yeah, no, I'll try the credit for this. Yeah, no, I'll try that for sure because particularly with that for sure because particularly with that for sure because particularly with something like benching where it's like something like benching where it's like something like benching where it's like I don't really care about pushing I don't really care about pushing I don't really care about pushing muscles, but when your when your pec or muscles, but when your when your pec or muscles, but when your when your pec or whatever this muscle is like the you whatever this muscle is like the you whatever this muscle is like the you know connecting your shoulders like know connecting your shoulders like know connecting your shoulders like yeah, it's like so sore and then that yeah, it's like so sore and then that yeah, it's like so sore and then that kind of affects all your pulling as well kind of affects all your pulling as well kind of affects all your pulling as well and so you're going to like oh you just and so you're going to like oh you just and so you're going to like oh you just don't need to get that sore doing mean don't need to get that sore doing mean don't need to get that sore doing mean that's like a side activity anyway. that's like a side activity anyway. that's like a side activity anyway. Yeah. Yeah, they and I'm guessing you're Yeah. Yeah, they and I'm guessing you're Yeah. Yeah, they and I'm guessing you're already getting it from your climbing, already getting it from your climbing, already getting it from your climbing, but I found that but I found that but I found that anytime I'm doing pushing, which is you anytime I'm doing pushing, which is you anytime I'm doing pushing, which is you know, basically know, basically know, basically all the time, all the time, all the time, making sure that I train like some rear making sure that I train like some rear making sure that I train like some rear deltoid type thing where you're rear deltoid type thing where you're rear deltoid type thing where you're pulling, getting that smaller muscle on pulling, getting that smaller muscle on pulling, getting that smaller muscle on the back of the shoulders because a lot the back of the shoulders because a lot the back of the shoulders because a lot of people you don't have this problem, of people you don't have this problem, of people you don't have this problem, but if you look at a lot of people lift but if you look at a lot of people lift but if you look at a lot of people lift weights, they just stand passively their weights, they just stand passively their weights, they just stand passively their thumbs kind of point towards their thumbs kind of point towards their thumbs kind of point towards their groin. Like they're kind of internally groin. Like they're kind of internally groin. Like they're kind of internally rotated. Yeah, whereas if you look at rotated. Yeah, whereas if you look at rotated. Yeah, whereas if you look at people who kind of do like the people who kind of do like the people who kind of do like the Fonzie thing like you want your shoulder Fonzie thing like you want your shoulder Fonzie thing like you want your shoulder you want your thumbs like if you were you want your thumbs like if you were you want your thumbs like if you were just stand or sit naturally your thumbs just stand or sit naturally your thumbs just stand or sit naturally your thumbs pointing straight forward. So you're pointing straight forward. So you're pointing straight forward. So you're leaning like I met Mike Tyson and leaning like I met Mike Tyson and leaning like I met Mike Tyson and like he's like this, but like he's spent like he's like this, but like he's spent like he's like this, but like he's spent his whole life in that peekaboo stance, his whole life in that peekaboo stance, his whole life in that peekaboo stance, right? Then you meet people like you or right? Then you meet people like you or right? Then you meet people like you or people who practice yoga regularly or people who practice yoga regularly or people who practice yoga regularly or the really like most impressive postures the really like most impressive postures the really like most impressive postures and physiques are the dancers. Mhm. and physiques are the dancers. Mhm. and physiques are the dancers. Mhm. Right. Like Eric Jarvis was on this Right. Like Eric Jarvis was on this Right. Like Eric Jarvis was on this podcast. He's a neuroscientist, but he podcast. He's a neuroscientist, but he podcast. He's a neuroscientist, but he used to he was accepted into the Alvin used to he was accepted into the Alvin used to he was accepted into the Alvin is it Alvin Ailey Dance Company? It was is it Alvin Ailey Dance Company? It was is it Alvin Ailey Dance Company? It was like you know, elite dance company or like you know, elite dance company or like you know, elite dance company or you see like a Twyla Tharp who's in her you see like a Twyla Tharp who's in her you see like a Twyla Tharp who's in her 80s and like in she doesn't look like 80s and like in she doesn't look like 80s and like in she doesn't look like she's rigidly upright. She's just she's rigidly upright. She's just she's rigidly upright. She's just upright. And that's how I want to be upright. And that's how I want to be upright. And that's how I want to be when I'm in my 80s. when I'm in my 80s. when I'm in my 80s. &gt;&gt; hard. Well, it's just she spends 2 hours &gt;&gt; hard. Well, it's just she spends 2 hours &gt;&gt; hard. Well, it's just she spends 2 hours a day in the gym 7 days a week. Wow. a day in the gym 7 days a week. Wow. a day in the gym 7 days a week. Wow. 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. That is the first That is the first That is the first thing I heard. thing I heard. thing I heard. &gt;&gt; And then three hard-boiled eggs. &gt;&gt; And then three hard-boiled eggs. &gt;&gt; And then three hard-boiled eggs. And then she gets to work. Like yeah, And then she gets to work. Like yeah, And then she gets to work. Like yeah, but she's I'm like that's a healthy but she's I'm like that's a healthy but she's I'm like that's a healthy lifestyle. She's and cognitively she's lifestyle. She's and cognitively she's lifestyle. She's and cognitively she's just so strong. Huh. Yeah. just so strong. Huh. Yeah. just so strong. Huh. Yeah. Yeah, I know climbers definitely have Yeah, I know climbers definitely have Yeah, I know climbers definitely have issues with posture like that because if issues with posture like that because if issues with posture like that because if you spend your whole life just pulling you spend your whole life just pulling you spend your whole life just pulling like you know, climbing. If you just like you know, climbing. If you just like you know, climbing. If you just climb you're just doing pulling things climb you're just doing pulling things climb you're just doing pulling things and so you wind up kind of like actually and so you wind up kind of like actually and so you wind up kind of like actually you kind of wind up hunched. I think you kind of wind up hunched. I think you kind of wind up hunched. I think it's because like you still use some of it's because like you still use some of it's because like you still use some of these muscles for pulling and so you these muscles for pulling and so you these muscles for pulling and so you just wind up kind of tight in different just wind up kind of tight in different just wind up kind of tight in different ways. Yeah. But So things like it put ways. Yeah. But So things like it put ways. Yeah. But So things like it put you in a bridge pose and like in like you in a bridge pose and like in like you in a bridge pose and like in like spinal extension. spinal extension. spinal extension. Those seem to be aren't very useful. Those seem to be aren't very useful. Those seem to be aren't very useful. Yeah, as I again, I'm not an elite Yeah, as I again, I'm not an elite Yeah, as I again, I'm not an elite athlete or even a competitive athlete, athlete or even a competitive athlete, athlete or even a competitive athlete, but I find that doing things that just but I find that doing things that just but I find that doing things that just like a long slow run, a sprint day, like a long slow run, a sprint day, like a long slow run, a sprint day, training heavy with weights, but being training heavy with weights, but being training heavy with weights, but being able to, you know, run for 30 minutes. I able to, you know, run for 30 minutes. I able to, you know, run for 30 minutes. I mean, it's just I don't think I need a mean, it's just I don't think I need a mean, it's just I don't think I need a degree in exercise physiology to just It degree in exercise physiology to just It degree in exercise physiology to just It just makes sense. You're just I'm trying just makes sense. You're just I'm trying just makes sense. You're just I'm trying to be to be to be upper end of average upper end of average upper end of average at everything, but that's very different at everything, but that's very different at everything, but that's very different than what you're trying to do, than what you're trying to do, than what you're trying to do, obviously. You're an elite athlete. obviously. You're an elite athlete. obviously. You're an elite athlete. &gt;&gt; Yeah, but some of the stuff like &gt;&gt; Yeah, but some of the stuff like &gt;&gt; Yeah, but some of the stuff like running, like uh like I went for a running, like uh like I went for a running, like uh like I went for a 1-hour run yesterday. I've been trying 1-hour run yesterday. I've been trying 1-hour run yesterday. I've been trying to run one day a week just like run for to run one day a week just like run for to run one day a week just like run for an hour once a week. And then I try an hour once a week. And then I try an hour once a week. And then I try to do one kind of cardio adventure once to do one kind of cardio adventure once to do one kind of cardio adventure once a week, which is like climbing a week, which is like climbing a week, which is like climbing a mountain or do something, you know, mountain or do something, you know, mountain or do something, you know, anywhere from like 2 to 4 hours, let's anywhere from like 2 to 4 hours, let's anywhere from like 2 to 4 hours, let's say, but hopefully with like 3,000 plus say, but hopefully with like 3,000 plus say, but hopefully with like 3,000 plus feet of vert or something. Just like go feet of vert or something. Just like go feet of vert or something. Just like go up a thing, kind of trot down. And up a thing, kind of trot down. And up a thing, kind of trot down. And that's kind of enough to maintain that's kind of enough to maintain that's kind of enough to maintain cardio. I mean, this is kind of like cardio. I mean, this is kind of like cardio. I mean, this is kind of like family lifestyle cuz the thing is like family lifestyle cuz the thing is like family lifestyle cuz the thing is like when I was living in a van by myself, when I was living in a van by myself, when I was living in a van by myself, you're just doing that stuff on a rest you're just doing that stuff on a rest you're just doing that stuff on a rest days all the time. So, you're kind of days all the time. So, you're kind of days all the time. So, you're kind of like, "Oh, I'm going to summit this new like, "Oh, I'm going to summit this new like, "Oh, I'm going to summit this new peak." Or like, "Check out this hike." peak." Or like, "Check out this hike." peak." Or like, "Check out this hike." Or do whatever. But now that I'm living Or do whatever. But now that I'm living Or do whatever. But now that I'm living in a place and, you know, taking kids to in a place and, you know, taking kids to in a place and, you know, taking kids to school and all that, it's like I kind of school and all that, it's like I kind of school and all that, it's like I kind of have to be a little more structured with have to be a little more structured with have to be a little more structured with just like I'm going to go and with just like I'm going to go and with just like I'm going to go and But so, But so, But so, yeah, now I'm definitely thinking about yeah, now I'm definitely thinking about yeah, now I'm definitely thinking about all this a little more. Just like, "Is all this a little more. Just like, "Is all this a little more. Just like, "Is this enough cardio? Is this, you know, this enough cardio? Is this, you know, this enough cardio? Is this, you know, is this work?" But I think that is this work?" But I think that is this work?" But I think that lays a good foundation to be able to do lays a good foundation to be able to do lays a good foundation to be able to do things. Like I'm going to be in Yosemite things. Like I'm going to be in Yosemite things. Like I'm going to be in Yosemite this season and you know, I'm this season and you know, I'm this season and you know, I'm aspiring to climb stuff on El Cap. Not aspiring to climb stuff on El Cap. Not aspiring to climb stuff on El Cap. Not free soloing necessarily or not free soloing necessarily or not free soloing necessarily or not free soloing at all, but maybe some like rope soloing at all, but maybe some like rope soloing at all, but maybe some like rope soloing, maybe some speed stuff, maybe soloing, maybe some speed stuff, maybe soloing, maybe some speed stuff, maybe whatever. But either way, I just want to whatever. But either way, I just want to whatever. But either way, I just want to be able to climb 3,000 ft relatively be able to climb 3,000 ft relatively be able to climb 3,000 ft relatively quickly without being that tired. And quickly without being that tired. And quickly without being that tired. And so, it seems like for running or for so, it seems like for running or for so, it seems like for running or for mountain climbing, it's like, "Oh, you mountain climbing, it's like, "Oh, you mountain climbing, it's like, "Oh, you just have to be able to do that kind of just have to be able to do that kind of just have to be able to do that kind of vertical without getting too fatigued." vertical without getting too fatigued." vertical without getting too fatigued." &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think the one day a week long &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think the one day a week long &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think the one day a week long run, one day one day a week like run, one day one day a week like run, one day one day a week like 30-minute run at a faster clip, and then 30-minute run at a faster clip, and then 30-minute run at a faster clip, and then one day a week sprint training. Um one day a week sprint training. Um one day a week sprint training. Um I mean, you're covering all bases there. I mean, you're covering all bases there. I mean, you're covering all bases there. That's 3 days a week of running though. That's 3 days a week of running though. That's 3 days a week of running though. And I'm like, "I don't love running that And I'm like, "I don't love running that And I'm like, "I don't love running that much." &gt;&gt; them is like 12 minutes long. You warm &gt;&gt; them is like 12 minutes long. You warm &gt;&gt; them is like 12 minutes long. You warm up for 3 minutes. up for 3 minutes. up for 3 minutes. &gt;&gt; training 12 minutes? &gt;&gt; training 12 minutes? &gt;&gt; training 12 minutes? &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz you're you know, you warm &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz you're you know, you warm &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz you're you know, you warm up and then you run a 400, you know, and up and then you run a 400, you know, and up and then you run a 400, you know, and then you walk a lap, you do a 200, then you walk a lap, you do a 200, then you walk a lap, you do a 200, you walk a lap, you do a 100. And like you walk a lap, you do a 100. And like you walk a lap, you do a 100. And like it you're going not all out all out. But it you're going not all out all out. But it you're going not all out all out. But close. Yeah, you can hurt yourself close. Yeah, you can hurt yourself close. Yeah, you can hurt yourself sprinting all out all out. We um sprinting all out all out. We um sprinting all out all out. We um uh had Stu McMillan who's an elite uh had Stu McMillan who's an elite uh had Stu McMillan who's an elite sprint coach, trains a lot of Olympians sprint coach, trains a lot of Olympians sprint coach, trains a lot of Olympians and gold medalists and um and gold medalists and um and gold medalists and um yeah, running full speed is like how you yeah, running full speed is like how you yeah, running full speed is like how you hurt yourself. You you pop a hamstring hurt yourself. You you pop a hamstring hurt yourself. You you pop a hamstring or something. Like you but or something. Like you but or something. Like you but &gt;&gt; Are you are you at a track? I prefer to &gt;&gt; Are you are you at a track? I prefer to &gt;&gt; Are you are you at a track? I prefer to do it at a track. Sometimes I'll do it do it at a track. Sometimes I'll do it do it at a track. Sometimes I'll do it in the soft sand. And when I use a vest, in the soft sand. And when I use a vest, in the soft sand. And when I use a vest, I should say and I have no I have no I should say and I have no I have no I should say and I have no I have no sponsorship relationship to them, sponsorship relationship to them, sponsorship relationship to them, Amorpho makes these vests that are like Amorpho makes these vests that are like Amorpho makes these vests that are like it looks it's kind of funny to call like it looks it's kind of funny to call like it looks it's kind of funny to call it this, but it looks more like a kind it this, but it looks more like a kind it this, but it looks more like a kind of vest that you know, you know, of vest that you know, you know, of vest that you know, you know, like a dress vest and it's got little like a dress vest and it's got little like a dress vest and it's got little ball bearings in it. So it's not like ball bearings in it. So it's not like ball bearings in it. So it's not like one of those like one of those like one of those like police type vest. police type vest. police type vest. And so that 8 or 10 lb that they make up And so that 8 or 10 lb that they make up And so that 8 or 10 lb that they make up to 12 lb, I think it's just enough to 12 lb, I think it's just enough to 12 lb, I think it's just enough to give you some extra work on that long give you some extra work on that long give you some extra work on that long run. And then on the day when you run. And then on the day when you run. And then on the day when you sprint, you feel like you have you know, sprint, you feel like you have you know, sprint, you feel like you have you know, jet propulsion. Hm. You know, you I feel jet propulsion. Hm. You know, you I feel jet propulsion. Hm. You know, you I feel like that. I realize I don't, but yeah. like that. I realize I don't, but yeah. like that. I realize I don't, but yeah. Yeah, totally. Totally. And then all the Yeah, totally. Totally. And then all the Yeah, totally. Totally. And then all the little stabilizer things like you don't little stabilizer things like you don't little stabilizer things like you don't have any like aching like you're have any like aching like you're have any like aching like you're You seem like a very balanced in terms You seem like a very balanced in terms You seem like a very balanced in terms of your overall structure. That's one of your overall structure. That's one of your overall structure. That's one thing that I've really noticed about thing that I've really noticed about thing that I've really noticed about climbers. Like you see guys that are in climbers. Like you see guys that are in climbers. Like you see guys that are in the gym. I've spent a fair amount of the gym. I've spent a fair amount of the gym. I've spent a fair amount of time in gyms and there's this phenotype time in gyms and there's this phenotype time in gyms and there's this phenotype where they've got these big wide where they've got these big wide where they've got these big wide shoulders, wide back and the whole thing shoulders, wide back and the whole thing shoulders, wide back and the whole thing and then they got like this little head and then they got like this little head and then they got like this little head and a little neck and you go with their and a little neck and you go with their and a little neck and you go with their upper spot they're not training their upper spot they're not training their upper spot they're not training their neck and it looks crazy. I don't know if neck and it looks crazy. I don't know if neck and it looks crazy. I don't know if anyone's told them this, but they like anyone's told them this, but they like anyone's told them this, but they like you know, I walk by and I'm like don't you know, I walk by and I'm like don't you know, I walk by and I'm like don't skip neck day, you know, but skip neck day, you know, but skip neck day, you know, but you know, when a body is out of but you know, when a body is out of but you know, when a body is out of balance like that like if you saw a balance like that like if you saw a balance like that like if you saw a giant dog with a tiny head and neck, giant dog with a tiny head and neck, giant dog with a tiny head and neck, you'd be like that dog is crazy looking. you'd be like that dog is crazy looking. you'd be like that dog is crazy looking. That's Are there a lot of dog breeds That's Are there a lot of dog breeds That's Are there a lot of dog breeds like that where you're like that dog you like that where you're like that dog you like that where you're like that dog you know, it's hard to believe it came from know, it's hard to believe it came from know, it's hard to believe it came from a wolf, you know. Exactly. You know, so a wolf, you know. Exactly. You know, so a wolf, you know. Exactly. You know, so inbred. So right, the healthiest inbred. So right, the healthiest inbred. So right, the healthiest version of something can move best is version of something can move best is version of something can move best is always fairly balanced. It seems like always fairly balanced. It seems like always fairly balanced. It seems like climbers are very balanced across the climbers are very balanced across the climbers are very balanced across the board. &gt;&gt; think climbing is one of the &gt;&gt; think climbing is one of the &gt;&gt; think climbing is one of the healthiest sports and like lifestyles healthiest sports and like lifestyles healthiest sports and like lifestyles and also just it's so fun. Like going to and also just it's so fun. Like going to and also just it's so fun. Like going to a gym, you hang out with your friends. a gym, you hang out with your friends. a gym, you hang out with your friends. It's like it's mostly really chill. You It's like it's mostly really chill. You It's like it's mostly really chill. You mostly hang out and chitchat and like if mostly hang out and chitchat and like if mostly hang out and chitchat and like if you do a gym session, you feel like you do a gym session, you feel like you do a gym session, you feel like you just went and hung out with your friends just went and hung out with your friends just went and hung out with your friends all time. But then you also wind up fit all time. But then you also wind up fit all time. But then you also wind up fit and mobile and you know, pretty strong and mobile and you know, pretty strong and mobile and you know, pretty strong and so much of climbing is strength and so much of climbing is strength and so much of climbing is strength to weight and so you just wind up kind to weight and so you just wind up kind to weight and so you just wind up kind of like lean and not like a big gym of like lean and not like a big gym of like lean and not like a big gym bro kind of thing. Which I think is bro kind of thing. Which I think is bro kind of thing. Which I think is healthier as one ages too. Like you healthier as one ages too. Like you healthier as one ages too. Like you want to maintain muscle and hold on to want to maintain muscle and hold on to want to maintain muscle and hold on to muscle but there's all sorts of things muscle but there's all sorts of things muscle but there's all sorts of things associated with being heavily muscled associated with being heavily muscled associated with being heavily muscled where people end up with some kind of where people end up with some kind of where people end up with some kind of sleep apnea or pseudo sleep apnea cuz sleep apnea or pseudo sleep apnea cuz sleep apnea or pseudo sleep apnea cuz the neck is thick and it blocks the neck is thick and it blocks the neck is thick and it blocks the air waves and you know, sleep apnea is air waves and you know, sleep apnea is air waves and you know, sleep apnea is one of the biggest health risks. It you one of the biggest health risks. It you one of the biggest health risks. It you know, people not just heart attacks know, people not just heart attacks know, people not just heart attacks during sleep but I mean you're basically during sleep but I mean you're basically during sleep but I mean you're basically clogging all the blood flow and clogging all the blood flow and clogging all the blood flow and cleaning out of your brain that happens cleaning out of your brain that happens cleaning out of your brain that happens during sleep. It's very common in during sleep. It's very common in during sleep. It's very common in bigger people either because they're fat bigger people either because they're fat bigger people either because they're fat or heavily muscled. But it's one of the or heavily muscled. But it's one of the or heavily muscled. But it's one of the reasons a lot of bodybuilders die. reasons a lot of bodybuilders die. reasons a lot of bodybuilders die. &gt;&gt; Thank goodness. I've never put on that &gt;&gt; Thank goodness. I've never put on that &gt;&gt; Thank goodness. I've never put on that much muscle. much muscle. much muscle. &gt;&gt; Yeah, well you can clearly generate &gt;&gt; Yeah, well you can clearly generate &gt;&gt; Yeah, well you can clearly generate a lot of force doing what you're doing. a lot of force doing what you're doing. a lot of force doing what you're doing. I'm curious how you deal with cramps I'm curious how you deal with cramps I'm curious how you deal with cramps when you're when you're on the rock. when you're when you're on the rock. when you're when you're on the rock. Like you know, you don't you just don't Like you know, you don't you just don't Like you know, you don't you just don't you just don't really cramp. You don't you just don't really cramp. You don't you just don't really cramp. You don't cramp? Yeah, not really. I've never I mean Yeah, not really. I've never I mean Yeah, not really. I've never I mean sometimes you know, if you're trying to sometimes you know, if you're trying to sometimes you know, if you're trying to climb El Cap in a day like a like an climb El Cap in a day like a like an climb El Cap in a day like a like an 18-hour ascent or something like 18-hour ascent or something like 18-hour ascent or something like climbing with a rope climbing with a rope climbing with a rope but free ascents. Like basically if but free ascents. Like basically if but free ascents. Like basically if you're doing a really long climbs, some you're doing a really long climbs, some you're doing a really long climbs, some of my friends sometimes will cramp you of my friends sometimes will cramp you of my friends sometimes will cramp you cuz you're like late into it, you know, cuz you're like late into it, you know, cuz you're like late into it, you know, post 12 hours into a an athletic post 12 hours into a an athletic post 12 hours into a an athletic activity you're just a little more activity you're just a little more activity you're just a little more likely. But I never I never have. Pretty likely. But I never I never have. Pretty likely. But I never I never have. Pretty much in general all my athletic much in general all my athletic much in general all my athletic performance is always a steady decline performance is always a steady decline performance is always a steady decline where I start and I'm doing great and where I start and I'm doing great and where I start and I'm doing great and then over the next you know, 10 to 48 then over the next you know, 10 to 48 then over the next you know, 10 to 48 hours I just slowly get worse at a hours I just slowly get worse at a hours I just slowly get worse at a relatively linear rate. relatively linear rate. relatively linear rate. Except that normally before sunrise of Except that normally before sunrise of Except that normally before sunrise of the next day it starts to drop quite a the next day it starts to drop quite a the next day it starts to drop quite a bit more. You know, like as you start bit more. You know, like as you start bit more. You know, like as you start getting close to 24 hours you're like getting close to 24 hours you're like getting close to 24 hours you're like I'm pretty tired. It's like but I'm pretty tired. It's like but I'm pretty tired. It's like but then when the sun comes up you really then when the sun comes up you really then when the sun comes up you really like boost back up again and so then like boost back up again and so then like boost back up again and so then you're pretty good again. You just keep you're pretty good again. You just keep you're pretty good again. You just keep on the linear decline. So these are all on the linear decline. So these are all on the linear decline. So these are all night climbs. Yeah, I mean I've done a night climbs. Yeah, I mean I've done a night climbs. Yeah, I mean I've done a lot I've done quite a number of things lot I've done quite a number of things lot I've done quite a number of things now that are like more than 24-hour now that are like more than 24-hour now that are like more than 24-hour outings. You know, I mean, that's outings. You know, I mean, that's outings. You know, I mean, that's typically like climbing or mountain it's typically like climbing or mountain it's typically like climbing or mountain it's where you're like hiking and climbing where you're like hiking and climbing where you're like hiking and climbing and then hiking some more and climbing and then hiking some more and climbing and then hiking some more and climbing some more doing whatever. some more doing whatever. some more doing whatever. But, yeah, generally, you know, by 24 to But, yeah, generally, you know, by 24 to But, yeah, generally, you know, by 24 to 36 hours, you're just you're just a 36 hours, you're just you're just a 36 hours, you're just you're just a worse version of what you used to be. worse version of what you used to be. worse version of what you used to be. Right. You know, you're just you're just Right. You know, you're just you're just Right. You know, you're just you're just tired. &gt;&gt; And risk goes up when you're sleep &gt;&gt; And risk goes up when you're sleep &gt;&gt; And risk goes up when you're sleep deprived. I mean, that's uh Well, like deprived. I mean, that's uh Well, like deprived. I mean, that's uh Well, like where Yeah, judgment gets worse. Uh where Yeah, judgment gets worse. Uh where Yeah, judgment gets worse. Uh uh reflexes get worse. Like everything is reflexes get worse. Like everything is reflexes get worse. Like everything is worse. Sle- sleep is key. worse. Sle- sleep is key. worse. Sle- sleep is key. But, yeah, that's circadian clock But, yeah, that's circadian clock But, yeah, that's circadian clock phenomenon where like you've been up all phenomenon where like you've been up all phenomenon where like you've been up all night, but then you start waking up night, but then you start waking up night, but then you start waking up again. It's Yeah, it's pretty again. It's Yeah, it's pretty again. It's Yeah, it's pretty incredible. &gt;&gt; I mean, also some of it with outdoor &gt;&gt; I mean, also some of it with outdoor &gt;&gt; I mean, also some of it with outdoor stuff is that uh stuff is that uh stuff is that uh just when you can see again, you know, just when you can see again, you know, just when you can see again, you know, it's like you've been going by headlamp it's like you've been going by headlamp it's like you've been going by headlamp for so long and typically by that point for so long and typically by that point for so long and typically by that point your headlamp is kind of dying. You just your headlamp is kind of dying. You just your headlamp is kind of dying. You just don't see that well and then the sun don't see that well and then the sun don't see that well and then the sun comes up and you're like, "Thank god." comes up and you're like, "Thank god." comes up and you're like, "Thank god." And it's not cold anymore. It's like the And it's not cold anymore. It's like the And it's not cold anymore. It's like the sun. So, you get this like breath of sun. So, you get this like breath of sun. So, you get this like breath of fresh air and then you just keep fresh air and then you just keep fresh air and then you just keep grinding. Have you um Have you um Have you um ever had or do you have any kind of ever had or do you have any kind of ever had or do you have any kind of like leanings towards this like leanings towards this like leanings towards this like mystical experiences? Like do you do you mystical experiences? Like do you do you mystical experiences? Like do you do you believe in any of that? No, I've believe in any of that? No, I've believe in any of that? No, I've always been a fierce atheist. Mhm. Uh always been a fierce atheist. Mhm. Uh always been a fierce atheist. Mhm. Uh technically, I was raised Catholic, so technically, I was raised Catholic, so technically, I was raised Catholic, so like I know religion a bit. Um and like I know religion a bit. Um and like I know religion a bit. Um and I've just never I've always been like, I've just never I've always been like, I've just never I've always been like, "You know, it just doesn't make any "You know, it just doesn't make any "You know, it just doesn't make any sense to me." Like, yeah, I'm strongly sense to me." Like, yeah, I'm strongly sense to me." Like, yeah, I'm strongly unreligious. Though, I mean, I've been unreligious. Though, I mean, I've been unreligious. Though, I mean, I've been in so many beautiful places on Earth and in so many beautiful places on Earth and in so many beautiful places on Earth and had so many had so many had so many you know, what some would characterize you know, what some would characterize you know, what some would characterize as spiritual experiences like feeling a as spiritual experiences like feeling a as spiritual experiences like feeling a oneness with nature like a connection, oneness with nature like a connection, oneness with nature like a connection, you know, or just awe-inspiring beauty, you know, or just awe-inspiring beauty, you know, or just awe-inspiring beauty, you know, when you're just somewhere and you know, when you're just somewhere and you know, when you're just somewhere and you look out and you're like, "Oh, the you look out and you're like, "Oh, the you look out and you're like, "Oh, the universe is so incredible. This is like universe is so incredible. This is like universe is so incredible. This is like the world is a magical place." So, you the world is a magical place." So, you the world is a magical place." So, you know, I'm certainly open to general know, I'm certainly open to general know, I'm certainly open to general spiritualism, I suppose, or spiritualism, I suppose, or spiritualism, I suppose, or you know, you know, you know, but no, I'm very opposed to but no, I'm very opposed to but no, I'm very opposed to organized religion, basically. organized religion, basically. organized religion, basically. Biology is awe-inspiring. Yeah, that's Biology is awe-inspiring. Yeah, that's Biology is awe-inspiring. Yeah, that's the thing is I'm like I think there's the thing is I'm like I think there's the thing is I'm like I think there's enough wonder in the world and in the enough wonder in the world and in the enough wonder in the world and in the universe without adding all the layers universe without adding all the layers universe without adding all the layers of dogma, basically. Like all the weird of dogma, basically. Like all the weird of dogma, basically. Like all the weird things that you don't really need to things that you don't really need to things that you don't really need to believe. I can't help but tell you this cuz I can't help but tell you this cuz I can't help but tell you this cuz I find it fascinating and I think you find it fascinating and I think you find it fascinating and I think you might find it interesting if not uh might find it interesting if not uh might find it interesting if not uh then forgive me. Um uh then forgive me. Um uh then forgive me. Um speaking of Berkeley, there was a speaking of Berkeley, there was a speaking of Berkeley, there was a laboratory at Berkeley that wanted to laboratory at Berkeley that wanted to laboratory at Berkeley that wanted to understand how geckos could walk up understand how geckos could walk up understand how geckos could walk up walls. Mhm. And uh for a long time it walls. Mhm. And uh for a long time it walls. Mhm. And uh for a long time it was thought that it was like suction of was thought that it was like suction of was thought that it was like suction of some sort, but then um some sort, but then um some sort, but then um uh it turns out uh they could do it in a uh it turns out uh they could do it in a uh it turns out uh they could do it in a vacuum, so it means it can't be suction. vacuum, so it means it can't be suction. vacuum, so it means it can't be suction. It turns out they have these little It turns out they have these little It turns out they have these little pedals on their on their fingertips. pedals on their on their fingertips. pedals on their on their fingertips. Um and they can push those pedals their Um and they can push those pedals their Um and they can push those pedals their feath- they're like feather uh feath- they're like feather uh feath- they're like feather uh feath- organized like sort of like feathers. organized like sort of like feathers. organized like sort of like feathers. They can push them so close to the They can push them so close to the They can push them so close to the surface that they're climbing surface that they're climbing surface that they're climbing that they use what are called van der that they use what are called van der that they use what are called van der Waals forces, which is the exchange of Waals forces, which is the exchange of Waals forces, which is the exchange of molecules between the surface and those molecules between the surface and those molecules between the surface and those pedals. And they're making and breaking pedals. And they're making and breaking pedals. And they're making and breaking those van der Waals forces as they those van der Waals forces as they those van der Waals forces as they climb. Really? Like Spider-Man? Like climb. Really? Like Spider-Man? Like climb. Really? Like Spider-Man? Like magical stickiness? magical stickiness? magical stickiness? &gt;&gt; Yes. So as they climb, they're &gt;&gt; Yes. So as they climb, they're &gt;&gt; Yes. So as they climb, they're exchanging molecules with the surface exchanging molecules with the surface exchanging molecules with the surface they're climbing, which I find they're climbing, which I find they're climbing, which I find absolutely amazing. I realize that's not absolutely amazing. I realize that's not absolutely amazing. I realize that's not how you're climbing. how you're climbing. how you're climbing. &gt;&gt; sweating all over the wall, so it's kind &gt;&gt; sweating all over the wall, so it's kind &gt;&gt; sweating all over the wall, so it's kind of the same idea. of the same idea. of the same idea. &gt;&gt; Right. It's like yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. It's like yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. It's like yeah. Yeah, and I'm leaving skin behind. Yeah, and I'm leaving skin behind. Yeah, and I'm leaving skin behind. You're like, "Ah, my tips. It hurts." You're like, "Ah, my tips. It hurts." You're like, "Ah, my tips. It hurts." Well, uh you may not feel a kinship to Well, uh you may not feel a kinship to Well, uh you may not feel a kinship to them, but I have a feeling they feel a them, but I have a feeling they feel a them, but I have a feeling they feel a kinship to you because they're they are kinship to you because they're they are kinship to you because they're they are uh world-class climbers. Um and I just uh world-class climbers. Um and I just uh world-class climbers. Um and I just find it amazing that they've evolved find it amazing that they've evolved find it amazing that they've evolved some way to literally exchange some way to literally exchange some way to literally exchange molecules. So I mean you spend a lot of molecules. So I mean you spend a lot of molecules. So I mean you spend a lot of time on the rock, I'm sure that you're time on the rock, I'm sure that you're time on the rock, I'm sure that you're carrying some granite in you by carrying some granite in you by carrying some granite in you by now. Yeah. For sure. For sure. No, now. Yeah. For sure. For sure. No, now. Yeah. For sure. For sure. No, that's cool. I mean you see a lot of that's cool. I mean you see a lot of that's cool. I mean you see a lot of creatures on walls like that, you creatures on walls like that, you creatures on walls like that, you know, you see like little frogs know, you see like little frogs know, you see like little frogs wandering up and down. I mean even wandering up and down. I mean even wandering up and down. I mean even something like El Capitan, looks like a something like El Capitan, looks like a something like El Capitan, looks like a 3,000-ft solid cliff. I mean there're 3,000-ft solid cliff. I mean there're 3,000-ft solid cliff. I mean there're rodents running up and down the there're rodents running up and down the there're rodents running up and down the cracks. There're there're frogs in cracks. There're there're frogs in cracks. There're there're frogs in there. There're all kinds of birds. there. There're all kinds of birds. there. There're all kinds of birds. There're bats. So like you see all these There're bats. So like you see all these There're bats. So like you see all these creatures running around, you're just creatures running around, you're just creatures running around, you're just kind of like, "Oh, they're just living. kind of like, "Oh, they're just living. kind of like, "Oh, they're just living. They're just up here doing their thing." They're just up here doing their thing." They're just up here doing their thing." And you know, I mean climbing is so And you know, I mean climbing is so And you know, I mean climbing is so relatively hard for humans. And then relatively hard for humans. And then relatively hard for humans. And then yeah, and then you're up there and like yeah, and then you're up there and like yeah, and then you're up there and like this just it's just all part of the this just it's just all part of the this just it's just all part of the natural environment for all the other natural environment for all the other natural environment for all the other creatures. I didn't realize there were frogs up I didn't realize there were frogs up I didn't realize there were frogs up there. I didn't seen birds go by. I there. I didn't seen birds go by. I there. I didn't seen birds go by. I think there are a couple clips in Free think there are a couple clips in Free think there are a couple clips in Free Solo birds go by. Solo birds go by. Solo birds go by. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they live in all the cracks. Often &gt;&gt; Yeah, they live in all the cracks. Often &gt;&gt; Yeah, they live in all the cracks. Often when you put your hands in, birds will when you put your hands in, birds will when you put your hands in, birds will like run down your arm and fly out of like run down your arm and fly out of like run down your arm and fly out of the crack and things like that. You're the crack and things like that. You're the crack and things like that. You're like, "Whoa." It's startling. like, "Whoa." It's startling. like, "Whoa." It's startling. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's startling. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's startling. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's startling. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Well, I mean it's or it's very startling &gt;&gt; Well, I mean it's or it's very startling &gt;&gt; Well, I mean it's or it's very startling the first time and then, you know, the first time and then, you know, the first time and then, you know, less startling the subsequent times, but less startling the subsequent times, but less startling the subsequent times, but you're always kind of like, "Oh, wow, a you're always kind of like, "Oh, wow, a you're always kind of like, "Oh, wow, a swift just landed on my arm." That's swift just landed on my arm." That's swift just landed on my arm." That's wild. &gt;&gt; it's cool. &gt;&gt; it's cool. &gt;&gt; it's cool. Well, Alex, Well, Alex, Well, Alex, you've inspired and continue to inspire you've inspired and continue to inspire you've inspired and continue to inspire so many people and I think you hit the so many people and I think you hit the so many people and I think you hit the nail on the head when you said it's the nail on the head when you said it's the nail on the head when you said it's the effort involved. You know, I think that effort involved. You know, I think that effort involved. You know, I think that many people many people many people um might think it's the summiting and um might think it's the summiting and um might think it's the summiting and like standing on top of the rock and like standing on top of the rock and like standing on top of the rock and that those are moments that, thanks to that those are moments that, thanks to that those are moments that, thanks to you, we've been fortunate enough to you, we've been fortunate enough to you, we've been fortunate enough to share and experience, you know, uh share and experience, you know, uh share and experience, you know, uh indirectly, but uh clearly it's the indirectly, but uh clearly it's the indirectly, but uh clearly it's the effort involved. And I actually think effort involved. And I actually think effort involved. And I actually think that's uh why people are so intrigued by that's uh why people are so intrigued by that's uh why people are so intrigued by what you do. Um in addition to the fact what you do. Um in addition to the fact what you do. Um in addition to the fact that it's in beautiful places and that it's in beautiful places and that it's in beautiful places and incredibly high risk, high consequence. incredibly high risk, high consequence. incredibly high risk, high consequence. It's like you it's so clear that you're It's like you it's so clear that you're It's like you it's so clear that you're regimented and you're and that you regimented and you're and that you regimented and you're and that you love what you do and that you put a ton love what you do and that you put a ton love what you do and that you put a ton of effort into it. And the way you of effort into it. And the way you of effort into it. And the way you describe climbing with your friends, I describe climbing with your friends, I describe climbing with your friends, I think is the best hook, uh sales pitch think is the best hook, uh sales pitch think is the best hook, uh sales pitch for climbing ever. Like hanging out with for climbing ever. Like hanging out with for climbing ever. Like hanging out with your friends, talking and getting better your friends, talking and getting better your friends, talking and getting better and physically healthier and it um puts and physically healthier and it um puts and physically healthier and it um puts you in a place to go have bigger you in a place to go have bigger you in a place to go have bigger adventures and experience life more adventures and experience life more adventures and experience life more richly. Let's also get you back sometime richly. Let's also get you back sometime richly. Let's also get you back sometime uh after this next big feat. We can't uh after this next big feat. We can't uh after this next big feat. We can't talk too much about it. talk too much about it. talk too much about it. &gt;&gt; it'll be amazing. Awesome. All right. &gt;&gt; it'll be amazing. Awesome. All right. &gt;&gt; it'll be amazing. Awesome. All right. Well, we'll see you after that climb. Well, we'll see you after that climb. Well, we'll see you after that climb. Cool. Thank you. Cool. Thank you. Cool. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Alex Honnold. If you're discussion with Alex Honnold. If you're discussion with Alex Honnold. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled "Protocols, an Operating It's entitled "Protocols, an Operating It's entitled "Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body". This is a Manual for the Human Body". This is a Manual for the Human Body". This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called "Protocols, an Operating Manual for the "Protocols, an Operating Manual for the "Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body". And if you're not already Human Body". And if you're not already Human Body". And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Alex Honnold. today's discussion with Alex Honnold. today's discussion with Alex Honnold. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.