Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about how to we're going to talk all about how to we're going to talk all about how to optimize your workspace for maximum optimize your workspace for maximum optimize your workspace for maximum productivity. Indeed, that means to productivity. Indeed, that means to productivity. Indeed, that means to heighten levels of focus, to increase heighten levels of focus, to increase heighten levels of focus, to increase levels of creativity, to improve your levels of creativity, to improve your levels of creativity, to improve your ability to task switch. And this could ability to task switch. And this could ability to task switch. And this could be for sake of school or for work, be for sake of school or for work, be for sake of school or for work, creative endeavors, personal endeavors. creative endeavors, personal endeavors. creative endeavors, personal endeavors. This really extends to everybody. This really extends to everybody. This really extends to everybody. This is a topic that's intrigued me for a is a topic that's intrigued me for a is a topic that's intrigued me for a very long time very long time very long time because my undergraduate advisor, my because my undergraduate advisor, my because my undergraduate advisor, my graduate advisor, and my post-doc graduate advisor, and my post-doc graduate advisor, and my post-doc advisor had many things in common, including had many things in common, including had many things in common, including being great scientists, being kind being great scientists, being kind being great scientists, being kind people, and terrific mentors, but they people, and terrific mentors, but they people, and terrific mentors, but they had another thing in common, which had another thing in common, which had another thing in common, which always perplexed me, which is that their always perplexed me, which is that their always perplexed me, which is that their offices were a complete disaster. They offices were a complete disaster. They offices were a complete disaster. They had mountains of books, mountains of had mountains of books, mountains of had mountains of books, mountains of papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff, papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff, papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff, and yet all of them were extremely and yet all of them were extremely and yet all of them were extremely productive and could remain extremely productive and could remain extremely productive and could remain extremely focused in that incredibly cluttered focused in that incredibly cluttered focused in that incredibly cluttered environment. Now, I'm somebody who environment. Now, I'm somebody who environment. Now, I'm somebody who doesn't like clutter. I find it very doesn't like clutter. I find it very doesn't like clutter. I find it very hard to focus in cluttered environments. hard to focus in cluttered environments. hard to focus in cluttered environments. And indeed, there's tremendous variation And indeed, there's tremendous variation And indeed, there's tremendous variation among people among people among people as to whether or not they can remain as to whether or not they can remain as to whether or not they can remain focused or whether or not they struggle focused or whether or not they struggle focused or whether or not they struggle to focus in physically cluttered to focus in physically cluttered to focus in physically cluttered environments. There's no right or wrong environments. There's no right or wrong environments. There's no right or wrong to this, but the question we should ask to this, but the question we should ask to this, but the question we should ask ourselves is why were they all able to ourselves is why were they all able to ourselves is why were they all able to be so focused? And it turns out that the be so focused? And it turns out that the be so focused? And it turns out that the reason they were able to be so focused reason they were able to be so focused reason they were able to be so focused is that they all captured one single, is that they all captured one single, is that they all captured one single, and yet fundamental, variable of and yet fundamental, variable of and yet fundamental, variable of workspace optimization. And we'll talk workspace optimization. And we'll talk workspace optimization. And we'll talk about what that variable is. In fact, about what that variable is. In fact, about what that variable is. In fact, we're going to talk about what all the we're going to talk about what all the we're going to talk about what all the variables of optimizing a workspace are. variables of optimizing a workspace are. variables of optimizing a workspace are. Things like vision, things like light, Things like vision, things like light, Things like vision, things like light, things like noise in the room, whether things like noise in the room, whether things like noise in the room, whether or not you listen to music or not, or not you listen to music or not, or not you listen to music or not, whether or not you use noise-canceling whether or not you use noise-canceling whether or not you use noise-canceling headphones or not. We're going to talk headphones or not. We're going to talk headphones or not. We're going to talk about all of that. And we're going to do about all of that. And we're going to do about all of that. And we're going to do that in a way that you can optimize your that in a way that you can optimize your that in a way that you can optimize your workspace regardless of whether or not workspace regardless of whether or not workspace regardless of whether or not you are at home, whether or not you're you are at home, whether or not you're you are at home, whether or not you're on the road, etc. Because the last thing on the road, etc. Because the last thing on the road, etc. Because the last thing I would ever want to do is to create a I would ever want to do is to create a I would ever want to do is to create a situation where you find the optimal situation where you find the optimal situation where you find the optimal workspace and then you are a slave to workspace and then you are a slave to workspace and then you are a slave to that optimal workspace. That's just not that optimal workspace. That's just not that optimal workspace. That's just not the way the world works. What you want the way the world works. What you want the way the world works. What you want to do, or my goal for you rather, is to do, or my goal for you rather, is to do, or my goal for you rather, is that you will have a short checklist of that you will have a short checklist of that you will have a short checklist of things that you can look to anytime you things that you can look to anytime you things that you can look to anytime you sit down to do work and you can think sit down to do work and you can think sit down to do work and you can think about the underlying variables that about the underlying variables that about the underlying variables that impact your brain and your body and impact your brain and your body and impact your brain and your body and allow your brain and body to get into allow your brain and body to get into allow your brain and body to get into the optimal state in order to learn, in the optimal state in order to learn, in the optimal state in order to learn, in order to be productive, and indeed to order to be productive, and indeed to order to be productive, and indeed to move through your work bouts in a very move through your work bouts in a very move through your work bouts in a very relaxed and pleasurable way while relaxed and pleasurable way while relaxed and pleasurable way while maintaining focus and while pursuing any maintaining focus and while pursuing any maintaining focus and while pursuing any of the number of things that you're of the number of things that you're of the number of things that you're doing. The first variable we want to doing. The first variable we want to doing. The first variable we want to think about in terms of workspace think about in terms of workspace think about in terms of workspace optimization is vision and light. From optimization is vision and light. From optimization is vision and light. From the time you wake up in the morning the time you wake up in the morning the time you wake up in the morning until about 6:00 or 7:00 or 8:00, until about 6:00 or 7:00 or 8:00, until about 6:00 or 7:00 or 8:00, sometimes 9:00 hours later, your brain sometimes 9:00 hours later, your brain sometimes 9:00 hours later, your brain is in a unique state. It is in a state is in a unique state. It is in a state is in a unique state. It is in a state of high levels of dopamine, a of high levels of dopamine, a of high levels of dopamine, a neuromodulator, and high levels of neuromodulator, and high levels of neuromodulator, and high levels of epinephrine, as well as hormones like epinephrine, as well as hormones like epinephrine, as well as hormones like cortisol and so forth. That early part cortisol and so forth. That early part cortisol and so forth. That early part of the day is a time of day in which, of the day is a time of day in which, of the day is a time of day in which, for sake of workspace optimization, for sake of workspace optimization, for sake of workspace optimization, being in a brightly lit environment can being in a brightly lit environment can being in a brightly lit environment can lend itself to optimal work throughout lend itself to optimal work throughout lend itself to optimal work throughout the day, not just during that early the day, not just during that early the day, not just during that early phase. So, one of the things that I've phase. So, one of the things that I've phase. So, one of the things that I've done for my workspace is to make sure done for my workspace is to make sure done for my workspace is to make sure that when I wake up in the morning, I do that when I wake up in the morning, I do that when I wake up in the morning, I do go get my sunlight. If the sun isn't go get my sunlight. If the sun isn't go get my sunlight. If the sun isn't out, I turn on as many bright artificial out, I turn on as many bright artificial out, I turn on as many bright artificial lights as I can manage or tolerate and lights as I can manage or tolerate and lights as I can manage or tolerate and then I go get my sunlight exposure. But then I go get my sunlight exposure. But then I go get my sunlight exposure. But once I set out to do some work, that all once I set out to do some work, that all once I set out to do some work, that all the overhead lights in that room are on, the overhead lights in that room are on, the overhead lights in that room are on, as well as lights in front of me. And as well as lights in front of me. And as well as lights in front of me. And that's again to stimulate heightened that's again to stimulate heightened that's again to stimulate heightened levels of focus and further release of levels of focus and further release of levels of focus and further release of these neuromodulators that I mentioned these neuromodulators that I mentioned these neuromodulators that I mentioned before, dopamine, norepinephrine, and before, dopamine, norepinephrine, and before, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Now, the way that one could do that Now, the way that one could do that Now, the way that one could do that could be a very low-cost way of having, could be a very low-cost way of having, could be a very low-cost way of having, for instance, a desk lamp and those for instance, a desk lamp and those for instance, a desk lamp and those overhead lights. Ring lights can be overhead lights. Ring lights can be overhead lights. Ring lights can be pretty cost-effective, and yet they're pretty cost-effective, and yet they're pretty cost-effective, and yet they're very bright and they have the sort of very bright and they have the sort of very bright and they have the sort of bright blue light that is going to bright blue light that is going to bright blue light that is going to optimally stimulate those melanopsin optimally stimulate those melanopsin optimally stimulate those melanopsin ganglion cells. I don't use a ring ganglion cells. I don't use a ring ganglion cells. I don't use a ring light, I use a light pad. light, I use a light pad. light, I use a light pad. The particular light pad I use, I bought The particular light pad I use, I bought The particular light pad I use, I bought on Amazon. So, I place that on the desk on Amazon. So, I place that on the desk on Amazon. So, I place that on the desk in front of me and I turn it on in front of me and I turn it on in front of me and I turn it on essentially throughout this phase one of essentially throughout this phase one of essentially throughout this phase one of the day. For those of you that can place the day. For those of you that can place the day. For those of you that can place your desk near a window, and even better your desk near a window, and even better your desk near a window, and even better to open the window, that would be really to open the window, that would be really to open the window, that would be really fantastic. Why would I say open the fantastic. Why would I say open the fantastic. Why would I say open the window? Well, it turns out that sunlight window? Well, it turns out that sunlight window? Well, it turns out that sunlight is going to be the best stimulus for is going to be the best stimulus for is going to be the best stimulus for waking up your brain and body through waking up your brain and body through waking up your brain and body through this melanopsin to hypothalamus system. this melanopsin to hypothalamus system. this melanopsin to hypothalamus system. And by looking at sunlight through a And by looking at sunlight through a And by looking at sunlight through a window, it's 50 5 0 times less effective window, it's 50 5 0 times less effective window, it's 50 5 0 times less effective than if that window were to be open. than if that window were to be open. than if that window were to be open. Mostly because those windows filter out Mostly because those windows filter out Mostly because those windows filter out a lot of the wavelengths of blue light a lot of the wavelengths of blue light a lot of the wavelengths of blue light that are essential for stimulating the that are essential for stimulating the that are essential for stimulating the eyes and this wake-up signal. Now, in eyes and this wake-up signal. Now, in eyes and this wake-up signal. Now, in the afternoon, starting at about 9:00 the afternoon, starting at about 9:00 the afternoon, starting at about 9:00 and continuing until about 16 hours and continuing until about 16 hours and continuing until about 16 hours after waking, you want to start dimming after waking, you want to start dimming after waking, you want to start dimming the lights in that environment. The idea the lights in that environment. The idea the lights in that environment. The idea is that in this so-called phase two of is that in this so-called phase two of is that in this so-called phase two of the 24-hour cycle, from about 9:00 to 16 the 24-hour cycle, from about 9:00 to 16 the 24-hour cycle, from about 9:00 to 16 hours after waking, you want to bring the after waking, you want to bring the after waking, you want to bring the level of lights down a bit. Having level of lights down a bit. Having level of lights down a bit. Having lights that are in front of you is fine, lights that are in front of you is fine, lights that are in front of you is fine, but overhead lights at that time are not but overhead lights at that time are not but overhead lights at that time are not going to be optimal for the sorts of going to be optimal for the sorts of going to be optimal for the sorts of neurochemical states that your brain neurochemical states that your brain neurochemical states that your brain wants to be in. The states that I'm wants to be in. The states that I'm wants to be in. The states that I'm referring to are a shift from the referring to are a shift from the referring to are a shift from the dopamine and norepinephrine that's dopamine and norepinephrine that's dopamine and norepinephrine that's highest early in the day to increases in highest early in the day to increases in highest early in the day to increases in things like serotonin and other things like serotonin and other things like serotonin and other neuromodulators that put your brain into neuromodulators that put your brain into neuromodulators that put your brain into a state that's better for creative a state that's better for creative a state that's better for creative endeavors or for more abstract thinking. endeavors or for more abstract thinking. endeavors or for more abstract thinking. So, what I recommend doing and what I So, what I recommend doing and what I So, what I recommend doing and what I personally do is I will turn off personally do is I will turn off personally do is I will turn off overhead lights in the afternoon. It's overhead lights in the afternoon. It's overhead lights in the afternoon. It's not completely dim, it's not completely not completely dim, it's not completely not completely dim, it's not completely dark, but I will start to reduce the dark, but I will start to reduce the dark, but I will start to reduce the amount of overhead light and just simply amount of overhead light and just simply amount of overhead light and just simply keep the light pad on and whatever other keep the light pad on and whatever other keep the light pad on and whatever other lamps I happen to be using. So, lamps I happen to be using. So, lamps I happen to be using. So, somewhere around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., somewhere around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., somewhere around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., which for me is, you know, about 12 which for me is, you know, about 12 which for me is, you know, about 12 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake, I will turn off after I've been awake, I will turn off after I've been awake, I will turn off that light pad and start to transition that light pad and start to transition that light pad and start to transition the lights in my environment to more the lights in my environment to more the lights in my environment to more yellows and reds. And then, I'll just yellows and reds. And then, I'll just yellows and reds. And then, I'll just mention because I know there are people mention because I know there are people mention because I know there are people who are working in the middle of the who are working in the middle of the who are working in the middle of the night, there's phase three, which is night, there's phase three, which is night, there's phase three, which is about 17 to 24 hours after waking. about 17 to 24 hours after waking. about 17 to 24 hours after waking. If you are going to be doing work in If you are going to be doing work in If you are going to be doing work in that third phase of your circadian that third phase of your circadian that third phase of your circadian cycle, you really want to limit the amount of you really want to limit the amount of you really want to limit the amount of bright light that you're getting in your bright light that you're getting in your bright light that you're getting in your eyes to just the amount that allows you eyes to just the amount that allows you eyes to just the amount that allows you to do the work that you're doing. to do the work that you're doing. to do the work that you're doing. Because if you get light in your eyes Because if you get light in your eyes Because if you get light in your eyes that's any brighter than that, you're that's any brighter than that, you're that's any brighter than that, you're going to severely deplete your melatonin going to severely deplete your melatonin going to severely deplete your melatonin levels. You're going to severely shift levels. You're going to severely shift levels. You're going to severely shift your circadian clock and it's your circadian clock and it's your circadian clock and it's effectively like traveling to another effectively like traveling to another effectively like traveling to another time zone. So, if you stay up from 3:00 time zone. So, if you stay up from 3:00 time zone. So, if you stay up from 3:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. or 2:00 a.m. until a.m. until 6:00 a.m. or 2:00 a.m. until a.m. until 6:00 a.m. or 2:00 a.m. until 4:00 a.m. working on a term paper or 4:00 a.m. working on a term paper or 4:00 a.m. working on a term paper or something of that sort and you're something of that sort and you're something of that sort and you're getting bright light in your eyes, getting bright light in your eyes, getting bright light in your eyes, you are effectively flying 6 hours in you are effectively flying 6 hours in you are effectively flying 6 hours in to a different time zone. Or at least to a different time zone. Or at least to a different time zone. Or at least that's what your body registers it as, that's what your body registers it as, that's what your body registers it as, and it can really throw your sleep and it can really throw your sleep and it can really throw your sleep and your metabolism and a number of other your metabolism and a number of other your metabolism and a number of other things out of whack. things out of whack. things out of whack. Now, there's an exception to this, which Now, there's an exception to this, which Now, there's an exception to this, which is if you really want to be awake, it is if you really want to be awake, it is if you really want to be awake, it can often be beneficial to flipping on can often be beneficial to flipping on can often be beneficial to flipping on all the lights in the room and keeping all the lights in the room and keeping all the lights in the room and keeping them really bright. One of the hardest them really bright. One of the hardest them really bright. One of the hardest things to do is to stay up all night things to do is to stay up all night things to do is to stay up all night studying when you're in a dim studying when you're in a dim studying when you're in a dim environment. So, you have to determine environment. So, you have to determine environment. So, you have to determine the trade-off between whether or not you the trade-off between whether or not you the trade-off between whether or not you want to shift your clock or whether or want to shift your clock or whether or want to shift your clock or whether or not you want to get the work done. Now, not you want to get the work done. Now, not you want to get the work done. Now, that's light, but there's another aspect that's light, but there's another aspect that's light, but there's another aspect of vision that has been shown to be of vision that has been shown to be of vision that has been shown to be critically important for how alert we critically important for how alert we critically important for how alert we are going to be and how well we can are going to be and how well we can are going to be and how well we can maintain that alertness. maintain that alertness. maintain that alertness. And that has to do with where our visual And that has to do with where our visual And that has to do with where our visual focus is in a given environment. There's focus is in a given environment. There's focus is in a given environment. There's a very underappreciated and yet a very underappreciated and yet a very underappreciated and yet incredible aspect of our neurology that incredible aspect of our neurology that incredible aspect of our neurology that has to do with the relationship between has to do with the relationship between has to do with the relationship between where we look and our level of where we look and our level of where we look and our level of alertness. And it works in a very logical way. We And it works in a very logical way. We And it works in a very logical way. We have clusters of neurons in our brain have clusters of neurons in our brain have clusters of neurons in our brain stem and those clusters of neurons and those clusters of neurons and those clusters of neurons control our eyelid muscles and they control our eyelid muscles and they control our eyelid muscles and they control our eye movements up and down control our eye movements up and down control our eye movements up and down and to the sides. Now, the neurons that and to the sides. Now, the neurons that and to the sides. Now, the neurons that control those muscles have a very control those muscles have a very control those muscles have a very interesting feature which is that interesting feature which is that interesting feature which is that when we are looking down toward the when we are looking down toward the when we are looking down toward the ground or anywhere below basically the ground or anywhere below basically the ground or anywhere below basically the central region of our face the central region of our face the central region of our face the neurons that control that eye the neurons that control that eye the neurons that control that eye movement are intimately related to areas movement are intimately related to areas movement are intimately related to areas of the brain stem that release certain of the brain stem that release certain of the brain stem that release certain types of neuromodulators and types of neuromodulators and types of neuromodulators and neurotransmitters. And they activate areas of the brain And they activate areas of the brain And they activate areas of the brain that are associated with calm and indeed that are associated with calm and indeed that are associated with calm and indeed even with sleepiness. even with sleepiness. even with sleepiness. Now, the opposite is also true. We have Now, the opposite is also true. We have Now, the opposite is also true. We have neurons that place our eyes into an neurons that place our eyes into an neurons that place our eyes into an upward gaze above the sort of level of upward gaze above the sort of level of upward gaze above the sort of level of our nose and up above our forehead, our nose and up above our forehead, our nose and up above our forehead, literally looking up while keeping the literally looking up while keeping the literally looking up while keeping the head stationary. Those neurons don't head stationary. Those neurons don't head stationary. Those neurons don't just control the position of the eyes just control the position of the eyes just control the position of the eyes and cause them to move up. They also and cause them to move up. They also and cause them to move up. They also trigger the activation of brain circuits trigger the activation of brain circuits trigger the activation of brain circuits that are associated with alertness. Now, that are associated with alertness. Now, that are associated with alertness. Now, this has some obvious implications. this has some obvious implications. this has some obvious implications. Contrary to what most people do, which Contrary to what most people do, which Contrary to what most people do, which is to look down at their laptop, tablet, is to look down at their laptop, tablet, is to look down at their laptop, tablet, or phone if you want to be alert and you or phone if you want to be alert and you or phone if you want to be alert and you want to maintain the maximum amount of want to maintain the maximum amount of want to maintain the maximum amount of focus for whatever it is that you're focus for whatever it is that you're focus for whatever it is that you're reading or doing you want that screen or reading or doing you want that screen or reading or doing you want that screen or whatever it is that you're looking at to whatever it is that you're looking at to whatever it is that you're looking at to at least be at eye level and ideally at least be at eye level and ideally at least be at eye level and ideally slightly above it. slightly above it. slightly above it. There's another aspect of our vision There's another aspect of our vision There's another aspect of our vision that's absolutely critical for that's absolutely critical for that's absolutely critical for optimizing our workspace. And that has optimizing our workspace. And that has optimizing our workspace. And that has to do with this really interesting to do with this really interesting to do with this really interesting feature of our visual pathways in that feature of our visual pathways in that feature of our visual pathways in that it has two major channels. it has two major channels. it has two major channels. Those two major channels have names, Those two major channels have names, Those two major channels have names, although you don't have to remember the although you don't have to remember the although you don't have to remember the names. The first one is the so-called names. The first one is the so-called names. The first one is the so-called parvocellular channel, which is involved parvocellular channel, which is involved parvocellular channel, which is involved in looking at things at specific points in looking at things at specific points in looking at things at specific points in space and at high resolution or in space and at high resolution or in space and at high resolution or detail. And then there's the so-called detail. And then there's the so-called detail. And then there's the so-called magnocellular channel that's involved in magnocellular channel that's involved in magnocellular channel that's involved in looking at big swaths of visual space looking at big swaths of visual space looking at big swaths of visual space and at lower resolution. Now, again, you and at lower resolution. Now, again, you and at lower resolution. Now, again, you don't have to the names. What you do don't have to the names. What you do don't have to the names. What you do have to remember, however, have to remember, however, have to remember, however, is that you're going to create the is that you're going to create the is that you're going to create the maximum amount of alertness in your maximum amount of alertness in your maximum amount of alertness in your system, the maximum amount of ability to system, the maximum amount of ability to system, the maximum amount of ability to focus, when your system is in that focus, when your system is in that focus, when your system is in that parvocellular mode, when you're bringing parvocellular mode, when you're bringing parvocellular mode, when you're bringing your eyes to a common point, what we your eyes to a common point, what we your eyes to a common point, what we call a vergence eye movement, v e r g e call a vergence eye movement, v e r g e call a vergence eye movement, v e r g e n c e, bringing your eyes to a single n c e, bringing your eyes to a single n c e, bringing your eyes to a single point in space, point in space, point in space, will create a narrower aperture of a will create a narrower aperture of a will create a narrower aperture of a visual window, meaning your visual window, meaning your visual window, meaning your visual world actually shrinks, at least world actually shrinks, at least world actually shrinks, at least perceptually. Now, the caveat to this is perceptually. Now, the caveat to this is perceptually. Now, the caveat to this is that if you are going to look at a that if you are going to look at a that if you are going to look at a narrow space, a narrow window for any narrow space, a narrow window for any narrow space, a narrow window for any period of time, whether or not it's a period of time, whether or not it's a period of time, whether or not it's a book or a laptop or a tablet or a phone, book or a laptop or a tablet or a phone, book or a laptop or a tablet or a phone, those vergence eye movements not only those vergence eye movements not only those vergence eye movements not only create alertness, but they also require create alertness, but they also require create alertness, but they also require energy. And they also can fatigue the energy. And they also can fatigue the energy. And they also can fatigue the eyes because there's a process called eyes because there's a process called eyes because there's a process called accommodation, whereby the shape of your accommodation, whereby the shape of your accommodation, whereby the shape of your eye literally has to change so that the eye literally has to change so that the eye literally has to change so that the lens can move so that you can focus at lens can move so that you can focus at lens can move so that you can focus at that location. Accommodation is an that location. Accommodation is an that location. Accommodation is an incredible process, but it is a incredible process, but it is a incredible process, but it is a demanding one, and that's the reason demanding one, and that's the reason demanding one, and that's the reason that your eyes get tired when you focus that your eyes get tired when you focus that your eyes get tired when you focus on something for too long. So, here's a on something for too long. So, here's a on something for too long. So, here's a principle extracted from the principle extracted from the principle extracted from the ophthalmology and neuroscience ophthalmology and neuroscience ophthalmology and neuroscience literature that you can adopt. For every literature that you can adopt. For every literature that you can adopt. For every 45 minutes in which you are focusing on 45 minutes in which you are focusing on 45 minutes in which you are focusing on something like a phone or a tablet or a book page like a phone or a tablet or a book page like a phone or a tablet or a book page or your computer, or your computer, or your computer, you want to get into magnocellular you want to get into magnocellular you want to get into magnocellular panoramic vision for at least 5 minutes. panoramic vision for at least 5 minutes. panoramic vision for at least 5 minutes. And the way that I suggest to do this is And the way that I suggest to do this is And the way that I suggest to do this is actually to take a walk, ideally actually to take a walk, ideally actually to take a walk, ideally outside. So, for every 45 minutes or so, outside. So, for every 45 minutes or so, outside. So, for every 45 minutes or so, try and get 5 minutes of relaxing your try and get 5 minutes of relaxing your try and get 5 minutes of relaxing your eyes. Look off into the distance, eyes. Look off into the distance, eyes. Look off into the distance, looking at a horizon will automatically looking at a horizon will automatically looking at a horizon will automatically trigger this panoramic gaze, which is trigger this panoramic gaze, which is trigger this panoramic gaze, which is very relaxing to the eyes, and will very relaxing to the eyes, and will very relaxing to the eyes, and will allow you to go back into a focused work allow you to go back into a focused work allow you to go back into a focused work bout. The one thing you absolutely do not want The one thing you absolutely do not want The one thing you absolutely do not want to do is to go outside and check your to do is to go outside and check your to do is to go outside and check your phone, because if you're outside phone, because if you're outside phone, because if you're outside checking your phone or you're taking a checking your phone or you're taking a checking your phone or you're taking a break and checking your phone, you're break and checking your phone, you're break and checking your phone, you're still in that vergence eye movement. still in that vergence eye movement. still in that vergence eye movement. Okay? So, this is very, very important Okay? So, this is very, very important Okay? So, this is very, very important because virgins eye movements increase because virgins eye movements increase because virgins eye movements increase focus and attention and you can exploit focus and attention and you can exploit focus and attention and you can exploit that to increase focus and attention that to increase focus and attention that to increase focus and attention when you want to, but you absolutely when you want to, but you absolutely when you want to, but you absolutely need to relax the system. Again, for need to relax the system. Again, for need to relax the system. Again, for every 45 minutes in which you've been in every 45 minutes in which you've been in every 45 minutes in which you've been in that focused mode, you want to get at that focused mode, you want to get at that focused mode, you want to get at least 5 minutes of panoramic vision. least 5 minutes of panoramic vision. least 5 minutes of panoramic vision. Next, I'd like to talk about an aspect Next, I'd like to talk about an aspect Next, I'd like to talk about an aspect of workspace optimization that can of workspace optimization that can of workspace optimization that can actually bias whether or not our brain actually bias whether or not our brain actually bias whether or not our brain and nervous system are better suited for and nervous system are better suited for and nervous system are better suited for detailed analytic work or more abstract detailed analytic work or more abstract detailed analytic work or more abstract work. What I'm about to describe is work. What I'm about to describe is work. What I'm about to describe is called the cathedral effect. The called the cathedral effect. The called the cathedral effect. The cathedral effect cathedral effect cathedral effect has been discussed well, really for many has been discussed well, really for many has been discussed well, really for many decades, maybe even hundreds of many decades, maybe even hundreds of many decades, maybe even hundreds of years, but formally has been discussed years, but formally has been discussed years, but formally has been discussed since the early 2000s in which it seemed since the early 2000s in which it seemed since the early 2000s in which it seemed that people who were in high-ceilinged that people who were in high-ceilinged that people who were in high-ceilinged environments hence the phrase cathedral environments hence the phrase cathedral environments hence the phrase cathedral would shift their thinking and their would shift their thinking and their would shift their thinking and their ideas to more abstract and creative ideas to more abstract and creative ideas to more abstract and creative lofty type thinking. So, literally lofty type thinking. So, literally lofty type thinking. So, literally higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher aspirations that this was aspirations that this was aspirations that this was observed in terms of the language that observed in terms of the language that observed in terms of the language that they used, but also the sorts of ideas they used, but also the sorts of ideas they used, but also the sorts of ideas that they would generate. that they would generate. that they would generate. And conversely, that people that were in And conversely, that people that were in And conversely, that people that were in lower-ceilinged environments lower-ceilinged environments lower-ceilinged environments would be more oriented toward using language be more oriented toward using language be more oriented toward using language that was more restricted, literally more that was more restricted, literally more that was more restricted, literally more detailed, analytic about things in their detailed, analytic about things in their detailed, analytic about things in their immediate space. So, what does this mean immediate space. So, what does this mean immediate space. So, what does this mean for workspace optimization? Well, most for workspace optimization? Well, most for workspace optimization? Well, most of us have a fixed ceiling level in our of us have a fixed ceiling level in our of us have a fixed ceiling level in our in our home, but you might have rooms in our home, but you might have rooms in our home, but you might have rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is lower. If that were which the ceiling is lower. If that were which the ceiling is lower. If that were the case, I recommend if you want to do the case, I recommend if you want to do the case, I recommend if you want to do creative work during phase two, the 9 to creative work during phase two, the 9 to creative work during phase two, the 9 to 16 hours of your circadian cycle, 9 to 16 hours of your circadian cycle, 9 to 16 hours of your circadian cycle, 9 to 16 hours after waking that is, that you 16 hours after waking that is, that you 16 hours after waking that is, that you do that in the high-ceiling room or do that in the high-ceiling room or do that in the high-ceiling room or maybe even outdoors, out on a deck or on maybe even outdoors, out on a deck or on maybe even outdoors, out on a deck or on a patio cuz the highest ceiling, of a patio cuz the highest ceiling, of a patio cuz the highest ceiling, of course, is the sky. And again, the course, is the sky. And again, the course, is the sky. And again, the lower the ceiling or the lower your lower the ceiling or the lower your lower the ceiling or the lower your visual environment, the more that one visual environment, the more that one visual environment, the more that one tends to do or I should say performs tends to do or I should say performs tends to do or I should say performs detailed analytic work detailed analytic work detailed analytic work accurately. And the more that one's accurately. And the more that one's accurately. And the more that one's thinking is oriented towards detailed thinking is oriented towards detailed thinking is oriented towards detailed sort of correct answer type work. sort of correct answer type work. sort of correct answer type work. Whereas when the ceiling is higher or Whereas when the ceiling is higher or Whereas when the ceiling is higher or there's no ceiling, the more that the there's no ceiling, the more that the there's no ceiling, the more that the brain and the rest of the processing brain and the rest of the processing brain and the rest of the processing that we call cognitive processing that we call cognitive processing that we call cognitive processing is related to abstract reasoning, is related to abstract reasoning, is related to abstract reasoning, brainstorming, and indeed can pull from brainstorming, and indeed can pull from brainstorming, and indeed can pull from broader swaths of memory resources. broader swaths of memory resources. broader swaths of memory resources. Because really what abstract reasoning Because really what abstract reasoning Because really what abstract reasoning is it's taking existing elements and is it's taking existing elements and is it's taking existing elements and maneuvering them or arranging them and maneuvering them or arranging them and maneuvering them or arranging them into novel ways. So you could think into novel ways. So you could think into novel ways. So you could think about like notes on a piano, um playing about like notes on a piano, um playing about like notes on a piano, um playing a particular song, learning scales. a particular song, learning scales. a particular song, learning scales. That's very analytic. There's a There's That's very analytic. There's a There's That's very analytic. There's a There's a correct answer that you're trying to a correct answer that you're trying to a correct answer that you're trying to arrive at or generate. Whereas writing arrive at or generate. Whereas writing arrive at or generate. Whereas writing music or um writing poetry or generating music or um writing poetry or generating music or um writing poetry or generating um new material of any kind involves um new material of any kind involves um new material of any kind involves taking existing elements, right? You're taking existing elements, right? You're taking existing elements, right? You're not going to use words that you don't not going to use words that you don't not going to use words that you don't have committed to your memory or that have committed to your memory or that have committed to your memory or that you're not aware of, you're not aware of, you're not aware of, and arranging them in novel ways. So I and arranging them in novel ways. So I and arranging them in novel ways. So I think the cathedral effect can be think the cathedral effect can be think the cathedral effect can be leveraged, and again you don't need to leveraged, and again you don't need to leveraged, and again you don't need to move into a different home or build a move into a different home or build a move into a different home or build a slanted roof and work at one side of the slanted roof and work at one side of the slanted roof and work at one side of the room at one part of the day and the room at one part of the day and the room at one part of the day and the other side of the room at the other. other side of the room at the other. other side of the room at the other. Although hey, if that's the way you um Although hey, if that's the way you um Although hey, if that's the way you um you want to swing it, that's great. Uh you want to swing it, that's great. Uh you want to swing it, that's great. Uh most of us don't have that flexibility. most of us don't have that flexibility. most of us don't have that flexibility. But it's very clear that the height of the it's very clear that the height of the it's very clear that the height of the ceiling of the visual environment that ceiling of the visual environment that ceiling of the visual environment that we're in has a profound effect on the we're in has a profound effect on the we're in has a profound effect on the types of cognitive processes that we are types of cognitive processes that we are types of cognitive processes that we are able to engage. Now I'd like to shift able to engage. Now I'd like to shift able to engage. Now I'd like to shift our attention to the auditory our attention to the auditory our attention to the auditory environment or the noise in the room or environment or the noise in the room or environment or the noise in the room or the music in the room or the music or the music in the room or the music or the music in the room or the music or noise in the headphones. Because it noise in the headphones. Because it noise in the headphones. Because it turns out that there is a lot of quality turns out that there is a lot of quality turns out that there is a lot of quality scientific data out there scientific data out there scientific data out there that speaks to whether or not that speaks to whether or not that speaks to whether or not listening to particular sounds can listening to particular sounds can listening to particular sounds can enhance our cognition. And indeed the enhance our cognition. And indeed the enhance our cognition. And indeed the answer is yes, but there are very answer is yes, but there are very answer is yes, but there are very particular types of things to listen to particular types of things to listen to particular types of things to listen to under very particular types of under very particular types of under very particular types of conditions that allow one to do that. If conditions that allow one to do that. If conditions that allow one to do that. If you look across the literature you look across the literature you look across the literature for studies that involve complete for studies that involve complete for studies that involve complete silence or white noise or binaural beats silence or white noise or binaural beats silence or white noise or binaural beats or music or classical music or rock and or music or classical music or rock and or music or classical music or rock and roll, you can find results to support roll, you can find results to support roll, you can find results to support any type of environment as being more any type of environment as being more any type of environment as being more beneficial. However, as we'll talk about in a However, as we'll talk about in a However, as we'll talk about in a moment, there are a few types of moment, there are a few types of moment, there are a few types of environments to really avoid and a few environments to really avoid and a few environments to really avoid and a few types of sounds that really can enhance types of sounds that really can enhance types of sounds that really can enhance the cognition and your ability to focus the cognition and your ability to focus the cognition and your ability to focus in your workspace environment across the in your workspace environment across the in your workspace environment across the board that really seem to work for all board that really seem to work for all board that really seem to work for all people. Let's talk about background people. Let's talk about background people. Let's talk about background noise to avoid. And here we're talking noise to avoid. And here we're talking noise to avoid. And here we're talking about background noise to avoid because about background noise to avoid because about background noise to avoid because it actually can cause it actually can cause it actually can cause some pretty severe deficits in some pretty severe deficits in some pretty severe deficits in cognition. There's a paper, first author Jordan There's a paper, first author Jordan There's a paper, first author Jordan Love, cool name, Love, cool name, Love, cool name, last author Alexander Francis. The last author Alexander Francis. The last author Alexander Francis. The title of the paper title of the paper title of the paper has to do with psychophysiological has to do with psychophysiological has to do with psychophysiological responses to potentially annoying responses to potentially annoying responses to potentially annoying heating, ventilation, and air heating, ventilation, and air heating, ventilation, and air conditioning noise during mentally conditioning noise during mentally conditioning noise during mentally demanding work, which is a mouthful, but demanding work, which is a mouthful, but demanding work, which is a mouthful, but basically what this paper identifies is a large what this paper identifies is a large what this paper identifies is a large data set in which workplace and data set in which workplace and data set in which workplace and environmental noise, mostly the humming environmental noise, mostly the humming environmental noise, mostly the humming of air conditioners that's very loud or of air conditioners that's very loud or of air conditioners that's very loud or the humming of heaters that's very loud the humming of heaters that's very loud the humming of heaters that's very loud and ongoing, just incessant, doesn't let and ongoing, just incessant, doesn't let and ongoing, just incessant, doesn't let up, can really increase mental fatigue and can really increase mental fatigue and can really increase mental fatigue and can vastly decrease cognitive can vastly decrease cognitive can vastly decrease cognitive performance. I think we've all performance. I think we've all performance. I think we've all experienced that. When you're in a room experienced that. When you're in a room experienced that. When you're in a room and there's some ongoing background and there's some ongoing background and there's some ongoing background noise and all of a sudden it stops and noise and all of a sudden it stops and noise and all of a sudden it stops and you just feel this enormous relief. you just feel this enormous relief. you just feel this enormous relief. So, does that mean that we shouldn't So, does that mean that we shouldn't So, does that mean that we shouldn't listen to white noise or pink noise or listen to white noise or pink noise or listen to white noise or pink noise or brown noise while we're working? brown noise while we're working? brown noise while we're working? Certainly a lot of people do. In fact, Certainly a lot of people do. In fact, Certainly a lot of people do. In fact, if you want to know what white noise, if you want to know what white noise, if you want to know what white noise, pink noise, and brown noise are, they're pink noise, and brown noise are, they're pink noise, and brown noise are, they're just different constellations of just different constellations of just different constellations of auditory frequencies that are played auditory frequencies that are played auditory frequencies that are played together. Brown noise has others, it has together. Brown noise has others, it has together. Brown noise has others, it has different frequencies that are that are different frequencies that are that are different frequencies that are that are included at higher amplitude, et cetera. included at higher amplitude, et cetera. included at higher amplitude, et cetera. You can look this stuff up on YouTube if You can look this stuff up on YouTube if You can look this stuff up on YouTube if you want, you just put brown noise. None you want, you just put brown noise. None you want, you just put brown noise. None of it sounds terrific, it doesn't sound of it sounds terrific, it doesn't sound of it sounds terrific, it doesn't sound like music, it's literally just noise, like music, it's literally just noise, like music, it's literally just noise, mixed frequencies in no particular mixed frequencies in no particular mixed frequencies in no particular arrangement. There is some evidence that arrangement. There is some evidence that arrangement. There is some evidence that playing white noise in the background or playing white noise in the background or playing white noise in the background or on headphones or pink noise or brown on headphones or pink noise or brown on headphones or pink noise or brown noise can facilitate cognition, but it's noise can facilitate cognition, but it's noise can facilitate cognition, but it's mainly through an increase in this mainly through an increase in this mainly through an increase in this overall alertness. overall alertness. overall alertness. As a consequence of areas like locus As a consequence of areas like locus As a consequence of areas like locus ceruleus and other brain stem areas that ceruleus and other brain stem areas that ceruleus and other brain stem areas that are associated with autonomic arousal are associated with autonomic arousal are associated with autonomic arousal from that noise. There's really no from that noise. There's really no from that noise. There's really no reason to suspect however that those reason to suspect however that those reason to suspect however that those particular patterns of noise are going particular patterns of noise are going particular patterns of noise are going to optimize particular mental functions. to optimize particular mental functions. to optimize particular mental functions. So, what I'd like to turn to next are So, what I'd like to turn to next are So, what I'd like to turn to next are particular patterns of sounds that particular patterns of sounds that particular patterns of sounds that indeed have been shown in peer-reviewed indeed have been shown in peer-reviewed indeed have been shown in peer-reviewed studies to optimize certain types of studies to optimize certain types of studies to optimize certain types of mental processing because you can mental processing because you can mental processing because you can incorporate these into your optimized incorporate these into your optimized incorporate these into your optimized workspace environment workspace environment workspace environment through headphones or through speakers, through headphones or through speakers, through headphones or through speakers, whatever mechanism that you want in whatever mechanism that you want in whatever mechanism that you want in order to get more out of your work order to get more out of your work order to get more out of your work efforts. If you were to search for apps efforts. If you were to search for apps efforts. If you were to search for apps or go online and try and find sounds or go online and try and find sounds or go online and try and find sounds that can improve thinking or change your that can improve thinking or change your that can improve thinking or change your emotions, you're generally going to find emotions, you're generally going to find emotions, you're generally going to find three types. One are called isochronic three types. One are called isochronic three types. One are called isochronic tones. These are tones usually of a tones. These are tones usually of a tones. These are tones usually of a common frequency. So, it might be a beep common frequency. So, it might be a beep common frequency. So, it might be a beep and then a pause and then beep of the and then a pause and then beep of the and then a pause and then beep of the same frequency and then beep. Forgive my same frequency and then beep. Forgive my same frequency and then beep. Forgive my terrible beeping. I don't know what good terrible beeping. I don't know what good terrible beeping. I don't know what good beeping would sound like, but beeping would sound like, but beeping would sound like, but contrast isochronic tones with monaural contrast isochronic tones with monaural contrast isochronic tones with monaural beats. Monaural beats would be beats. Monaural beats would be beats. Monaural beats would be repetitive almost percussive like beats repetitive almost percussive like beats repetitive almost percussive like beats delivered to just one ear. This kind of thing. Okay, you can find This kind of thing. Okay, you can find This kind of thing. Okay, you can find apps that can deliver monaural beats. apps that can deliver monaural beats. apps that can deliver monaural beats. You can find also apps that deliver You can find also apps that deliver You can find also apps that deliver so-called binaural beats. You can also so-called binaural beats. You can also so-called binaural beats. You can also find YouTube scripts that or channels find YouTube scripts that or channels find YouTube scripts that or channels that will deliver binaural beats. that will deliver binaural beats. that will deliver binaural beats. Binaural beats as the name suggest are Binaural beats as the name suggest are Binaural beats as the name suggest are beats delivered to the two ears. beats delivered to the two ears. beats delivered to the two ears. One pattern of kind of percussive beat One pattern of kind of percussive beat One pattern of kind of percussive beat to one ear and a different pattern that to one ear and a different pattern that to one ear and a different pattern that or at least a pattern that's out of or at least a pattern that's out of or at least a pattern that's out of phase that's not synchronized delivered phase that's not synchronized delivered phase that's not synchronized delivered to the other ear. So, on one ear you to the other ear. So, on one ear you to the other ear. So, on one ear you hear do and in the hear do and in the hear do and in the other ear you've got do and what other ear you've got do and what other ear you've got do and what happens is because of the way that the happens is because of the way that the happens is because of the way that the auditory system converges in the brain auditory system converges in the brain auditory system converges in the brain stem and generates what are called stem and generates what are called stem and generates what are called intra-aural time differences. I'll intra-aural time differences. I'll intra-aural time differences. I'll explain what that means in a moment. explain what that means in a moment. explain what that means in a moment. Intra-aural time differences Intra-aural time differences Intra-aural time differences the difference between the two patterns the difference between the two patterns the difference between the two patterns of beats that are heard by the each of beats that are heard by the each of beats that are heard by the each of the two different ears the two different ears the two different ears leads to a third pattern that the brain leads to a third pattern that the brain leads to a third pattern that the brain entrains to and kind of maps onto and entrains to and kind of maps onto and entrains to and kind of maps onto and generates particular types of brain generates particular types of brain generates particular types of brain waves, okay? So, without going into a waves, okay? So, without going into a waves, okay? So, without going into a lot of detail lot of detail lot of detail intra-aural time differences are the intra-aural time differences are the intra-aural time differences are the ways in which if you were to hear ways in which if you were to hear ways in which if you were to hear something off to your right, like I just something off to your right, like I just something off to your right, like I just snapped my finger just to the right of snapped my finger just to the right of snapped my finger just to the right of my right ear that a signal arrives in my right ear that a signal arrives in my right ear that a signal arrives in my right ear before that sound signal, right ear before that sound signal, right ear before that sound signal, those sound waves arrive in my left ear. those sound waves arrive in my left ear. those sound waves arrive in my left ear. So, there's an intra-aural, between So, there's an intra-aural, between So, there's an intra-aural, between ears, time difference. And there's a ears, time difference. And there's a ears, time difference. And there's a brainstem area in which signals from one brainstem area in which signals from one brainstem area in which signals from one ear and signals from the other ear converge and signals from the other ear converge and signals from the other ear converge and there's literally a math done by and there's literally a math done by and there's literally a math done by your nervous system that says this your nervous system that says this your nervous system that says this signal arrived before the other signal. signal arrived before the other signal. signal arrived before the other signal. And the difference between those signals And the difference between those signals And the difference between those signals is the intra-aural time difference. is the intra-aural time difference. is the intra-aural time difference. Binaural beats Binaural beats Binaural beats have been generated in ways that create have been generated in ways that create have been generated in ways that create a particular pattern of intra-aural time a particular pattern of intra-aural time a particular pattern of intra-aural time differences that then cascades up to the differences that then cascades up to the differences that then cascades up to the rest of the brain and puts the forebrain rest of the brain and puts the forebrain rest of the brain and puts the forebrain and other areas of the brain that are and other areas of the brain that are and other areas of the brain that are involved in cognition and action into a involved in cognition and action into a involved in cognition and action into a particular rhythm. And some of the particular rhythm. And some of the particular rhythm. And some of the rhythms or waves of brain activity are rhythms or waves of brain activity are rhythms or waves of brain activity are ones that you may have heard of, things ones that you may have heard of, things ones that you may have heard of, things like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma waves. If you look across the board at waves. If you look across the board at waves. If you look across the board at the studies of binaural beats and you the studies of binaural beats and you the studies of binaural beats and you ask what sorts of binaural beats appear ask what sorts of binaural beats appear ask what sorts of binaural beats appear to be useful for people to enhance their to be useful for people to enhance their to be useful for people to enhance their brain function for particular kinds of brain function for particular kinds of brain function for particular kinds of task, we arrive at some very interesting task, we arrive at some very interesting task, we arrive at some very interesting answers. So, we'll review what those are now. The So, we'll review what those are now. The So, we'll review what those are now. The frequency of binaural beats that appears frequency of binaural beats that appears frequency of binaural beats that appears to bring about improved cognitive to bring about improved cognitive to bring about improved cognitive functioning at the level of memory functioning at the level of memory functioning at the level of memory improved reaction times improved reaction times improved reaction times and improved verbal recall and improved verbal recall and improved verbal recall seems to be 40 hertz. You might try seems to be 40 hertz. You might try seems to be 40 hertz. You might try listening to binaural beats for about 30 listening to binaural beats for about 30 listening to binaural beats for about 30 minutes while doing something else and minutes while doing something else and minutes while doing something else and then maybe eating lunch or something of then maybe eating lunch or something of then maybe eating lunch or something of that sort or taking a walk and then that sort or taking a walk and then that sort or taking a walk and then going into the work about. Because going into the work about. Because going into the work about. Because remember, the moment that you start remember, the moment that you start remember, the moment that you start listening to these binaural beats, the listening to these binaural beats, the listening to these binaural beats, the brain doesn't immediately switch into a brain doesn't immediately switch into a brain doesn't immediately switch into a particular pattern of oscillation or particular pattern of oscillation or particular pattern of oscillation or brain waves. It takes some time. So brain waves. It takes some time. So brain waves. It takes some time. So again, 40 hertz binaural beats, many again, 40 hertz binaural beats, many again, 40 hertz binaural beats, many apps, many YouTube scripts out many apps, many YouTube scripts out many apps, many YouTube scripts out there, probably other resources for there, probably other resources for there, probably other resources for binaural beats. Hopefully zero cost so binaural beats. Hopefully zero cost so binaural beats. Hopefully zero cost so you can access those without any you can access those without any you can access those without any need to shell out any money. Some of need to shell out any money. Some of need to shell out any money. Some of you out there might be craving a little you out there might be craving a little you out there might be craving a little bit more mechanism by which binaural bit more mechanism by which binaural bit more mechanism by which binaural beats can influence things like focus or beats can influence things like focus or beats can influence things like focus or reduced reaction time. This has actually reduced reaction time. This has actually reduced reaction time. This has actually been explored. been explored. been explored. This 40 hertz binaural beats pattern This 40 hertz binaural beats pattern This 40 hertz binaural beats pattern seems to have an effect on what's called seems to have an effect on what's called seems to have an effect on what's called striatal dopamine. That dopamine release striatal dopamine. That dopamine release striatal dopamine. That dopamine release leads to heighten levels of motivation leads to heighten levels of motivation leads to heighten levels of motivation and focus. Why motivation and focus? and focus. Why motivation and focus? and focus. Why motivation and focus? Well, dopamine is actually the substrate Well, dopamine is actually the substrate Well, dopamine is actually the substrate by which epinephrine is made. Dopamine, by which epinephrine is made. Dopamine, by which epinephrine is made. Dopamine, the molecule, was actually converted the molecule, was actually converted the molecule, was actually converted into epinephrine, adrenaline, and they into epinephrine, adrenaline, and they into epinephrine, adrenaline, and they work together like close cousins, work together like close cousins, work together like close cousins, dopamine and epinephrine, in order to dopamine and epinephrine, in order to dopamine and epinephrine, in order to put us on a path of movement or if we put us on a path of movement or if we put us on a path of movement or if we are doing work of mental movement toward are doing work of mental movement toward are doing work of mental movement toward a goal. So, that's a little bit of a goal. So, that's a little bit of a goal. So, that's a little bit of mechanistic meat to explain at least mechanistic meat to explain at least mechanistic meat to explain at least part of the reason why 40 hertz binaural part of the reason why 40 hertz binaural part of the reason why 40 hertz binaural beats can enhance our focus, reduce our beats can enhance our focus, reduce our beats can enhance our focus, reduce our reaction times, and improve indeed reaction times, and improve indeed reaction times, and improve indeed learning and memory. Next, I'd like to learning and memory. Next, I'd like to learning and memory. Next, I'd like to talk about two aspects of optimizing talk about two aspects of optimizing talk about two aspects of optimizing workspace that will come up at some workspace that will come up at some workspace that will come up at some point in your work or school life. The point in your work or school life. The point in your work or school life. The first one is interruptions. There's a first one is interruptions. There's a first one is interruptions. There's a simple method that I learned from my simple method that I learned from my simple method that I learned from my graduate advisor that works very graduate advisor that works very graduate advisor that works very well. What she would do was if I came by well. What she would do was if I came by well. What she would do was if I came by and asked a question or if anyone came and asked a question or if anyone came and asked a question or if anyone came by and asked a question, by and asked a question, by and asked a question, she would acknowledge their presence but she would acknowledge their presence but she would acknowledge their presence but would not shift her body toward them. would not shift her body toward them. would not shift her body toward them. So, she purposely did not position her So, she purposely did not position her So, she purposely did not position her computer facing the door, which I think computer facing the door, which I think computer facing the door, which I think is a deadly is a deadly is a deadly or I should say deadly to focus or I should say deadly to focus or I should say deadly to focus way of positioning your workspace. So, way of positioning your workspace. So, way of positioning your workspace. So, her computer was facing the wall, the her computer was facing the wall, the her computer was facing the wall, the door was uh door was uh door was uh to that. to that. to that. And I would come by and I say, "I have a And I would come by and I say, "I have a And I would come by and I say, "I have a question." And she would say, "Yes." So, question." And she would say, "Yes." So, question." And she would say, "Yes." So, she would acknowledge my presence, but she would acknowledge my presence, but she would acknowledge my presence, but she wouldn't actually orient her body she wouldn't actually orient her body she wouldn't actually orient her body toward me, which told me that this toward me, which told me that this toward me, which told me that this conversation was not going to last very conversation was not going to last very conversation was not going to last very long. And no matter how long I stood long. And no matter how long I stood long. And no matter how long I stood there or what I asked, she would never there or what I asked, she would never there or what I asked, she would never orient toward me, which generally kept orient toward me, which generally kept orient toward me, which generally kept these conversations very, very short. these conversations very, very short. these conversations very, very short. The other approach, which um I confess The other approach, which um I confess The other approach, which um I confess uh colleagues of mine have used before, uh colleagues of mine have used before, uh colleagues of mine have used before, um not necessarily at Stanford, but um not necessarily at Stanford, but um not necessarily at Stanford, but elsewhere, is to um simply say no to elsewhere, is to um simply say no to elsewhere, is to um simply say no to everything that's somebody requests or everything that's somebody requests or everything that's somebody requests or comes by. So, if someone would knock on comes by. So, if someone would knock on comes by. So, if someone would knock on the door, they would just shout no the door, they would just shout no the door, they would just shout no through the door. Or if someone say, through the door. Or if someone say, through the door. Or if someone say, "Can I bother you for a second?" they "Can I bother you for a second?" they "Can I bother you for a second?" they would say, "No." Or if someone say, "I would say, "No." Or if someone say, "I would say, "No." Or if someone say, "I have something I want to tell you." they have something I want to tell you." they have something I want to tell you." they would just say, "No." And they would just say, "No." And they would just say, "No." And they would just continue doing this until the just continue doing this until the just continue doing this until the person went away. That was actually very person went away. That was actually very person went away. That was actually very effective. These were some of the most effective. These were some of the most effective. These were some of the most productive people I know, not always the productive people I know, not always the productive people I know, not always the kindest people, but some of them were kindest people, but some of them were kindest people, but some of them were very kind. So, is it better to sit or is very kind. So, is it better to sit or is very kind. So, is it better to sit or is it better to stand when doing work, at it better to stand when doing work, at it better to stand when doing work, at least as it relates to focus and least as it relates to focus and least as it relates to focus and productivity? And the answer is both. productivity? And the answer is both. productivity? And the answer is both. There've been a number of systematic There've been a number of systematic There've been a number of systematic studies exploring what are called studies exploring what are called studies exploring what are called sit-stand desks. So, these are desks sit-stand desks. So, these are desks sit-stand desks. So, these are desks that can be set to a height that makes that can be set to a height that makes that can be set to a height that makes standing the best practice, and then they can be the best practice, and then they can be the best practice, and then they can be lowered to a height that makes sitting lowered to a height that makes sitting lowered to a height that makes sitting the best practice or the easiest the best practice or the easiest the best practice or the easiest practice, I should say. practice, I should say. practice, I should say. And it turns out that just sitting is And it turns out that just sitting is And it turns out that just sitting is terrible for us, okay? And there's an terrible for us, okay? And there's an terrible for us, okay? And there's an enormous number of studies out there enormous number of studies out there enormous number of studies out there that have pointed to the fact that have pointed to the fact that have pointed to the fact that people who sit for five or six or seven people who sit for five or six or seven people who sit for five or six or seven hours a day doing work have all sorts of hours a day doing work have all sorts of hours a day doing work have all sorts of issues related to sleep, neck pain, issues related to sleep, neck pain, issues related to sleep, neck pain, cognition suffers, a number of cognition suffers, a number of cognition suffers, a number of cardiovascular effects, even digestion. cardiovascular effects, even digestion. cardiovascular effects, even digestion. There may even actually be some almost There may even actually be some almost There may even actually be some almost pressure effects on the pelvic floor and pressure effects on the pelvic floor and pressure effects on the pelvic floor and things of that sort, depending on the things of that sort, depending on the things of that sort, depending on the chairs that one uses. chairs that one uses. chairs that one uses. But that people who stand are in a But that people who stand are in a But that people who stand are in a slightly better situation, where many of slightly better situation, where many of slightly better situation, where many of those health metrics improve, but that those health metrics improve, but that those health metrics improve, but that people that do a combination of sitting people that do a combination of sitting people that do a combination of sitting and standing at the same desk throughout and standing at the same desk throughout and standing at the same desk throughout the day or move from one desk to another the day or move from one desk to another the day or move from one desk to another if they don't have a combination sit if they don't have a combination sit if they don't have a combination sit stand desk that's going to be best. Now, stand desk that's going to be best. Now, stand desk that's going to be best. Now, what's interesting if you look at the what's interesting if you look at the what's interesting if you look at the scientific literature is that people who scientific literature is that people who scientific literature is that people who decreased their sitting time by about decreased their sitting time by about decreased their sitting time by about half each day showed incredibly half each day showed incredibly half each day showed incredibly significant effects on reduced neck and significant effects on reduced neck and significant effects on reduced neck and shoulder pain, increase in subjective shoulder pain, increase in subjective shoulder pain, increase in subjective health, vitality in work-related health, vitality in work-related health, vitality in work-related environments, and perhaps most environments, and perhaps most environments, and perhaps most importantly for sake of today's importantly for sake of today's importantly for sake of today's discussion, improvement in cognitive conditioning improvement in cognitive conditioning improvement in cognitive conditioning and the ability to embrace new tasks and the ability to embrace new tasks and the ability to embrace new tasks and cognitive performance. cognitive performance. cognitive performance. What happens if we just stand? Well, What happens if we just stand? Well, What happens if we just stand? Well, that can also generate some postural that can also generate some postural that can also generate some postural issues in terms of stabilization and issues in terms of stabilization and issues in terms of stabilization and fatigue. That said, most everybody, at fatigue. That said, most everybody, at fatigue. That said, most everybody, at least in the US, is not getting least in the US, is not getting least in the US, is not getting sufficient cardiovascular exercise or sufficient cardiovascular exercise or sufficient cardiovascular exercise or movement throughout the day, and movement throughout the day, and movement throughout the day, and standing at one's desk can improve some standing at one's desk can improve some standing at one's desk can improve some of those health metrics and again can of those health metrics and again can of those health metrics and again can improve productivity probably because of improve productivity probably because of improve productivity probably because of those postural effects that I talked those postural effects that I talked those postural effects that I talked about earlier. Have to say, after now about earlier. Have to say, after now about earlier. Have to say, after now about 10 years of working at a sit stand desk, 10 years of working at a sit stand desk, 10 years of working at a sit stand desk, I find I can't sit for too long before I find I can't sit for too long before I find I can't sit for too long before I want to stand, and my standing bouts can want to stand, and my standing bouts can want to stand, and my standing bouts can be anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours, be anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours, be anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours, although 2 hours would be a little bit although 2 hours would be a little bit although 2 hours would be a little bit long, and then I catch myself kind of long, and then I catch myself kind of long, and then I catch myself kind of leaning on the desk off to the side. So, leaning on the desk off to the side. So, leaning on the desk off to the side. So, again, the idea is to stand but not be again, the idea is to stand but not be again, the idea is to stand but not be leaning on the desk. Obviously, if leaning on the desk. Obviously, if leaning on the desk. Obviously, if you're typing or you're writing, you're typing or you're writing, you're typing or you're writing, there'll be some leaning involved, but there'll be some leaning involved, but there'll be some leaning involved, but that's what the literature support. So, that's what the literature support. So, that's what the literature support. So, we've been discussing workspace we've been discussing workspace we've been discussing workspace optimization with the understanding that optimization with the understanding that optimization with the understanding that you're not always going to work in the you're not always going to work in the you're not always going to work in the same place every day. same place every day. same place every day. What I've tried to do is give you a set What I've tried to do is give you a set What I've tried to do is give you a set of high-potency tools that can improve of high-potency tools that can improve of high-potency tools that can improve your focus and cognition, and to place your focus and cognition, and to place your focus and cognition, and to place that within a framework for particular that within a framework for particular that within a framework for particular kinds of work. Let's just review some of kinds of work. Let's just review some of kinds of work. Let's just review some of the basic elements of what we've covered the basic elements of what we've covered the basic elements of what we've covered today. First of all, today. First of all, today. First of all, in the first part of your day, that 0 to in the first part of your day, that 0 to in the first part of your day, that 0 to 9 hours after waking, you want bright 9 hours after waking, you want bright 9 hours after waking, you want bright lights, especially overhead lights, as lights, especially overhead lights, as lights, especially overhead lights, as bright as you can keep them without bright as you can keep them without bright as you can keep them without feeling uncomfortable or certainly not feeling uncomfortable or certainly not feeling uncomfortable or certainly not without feeling any pain in your eyes or without feeling any pain in your eyes or without feeling any pain in your eyes or elsewhere in your body. Bright lights elsewhere in your body. Bright lights elsewhere in your body. Bright lights will make for the maximum state of will make for the maximum state of will make for the maximum state of alertness. And if you can, try and place alertness. And if you can, try and place alertness. And if you can, try and place whatever it is you're focusing on at whatever it is you're focusing on at whatever it is you're focusing on at least at nose level or above. Try and least at nose level or above. Try and least at nose level or above. Try and avoid reclining. Try and stand for at avoid reclining. Try and stand for at avoid reclining. Try and stand for at least half of your work day. least half of your work day. least half of your work day. That's a good goal and it may take some That's a good goal and it may take some That's a good goal and it may take some time to work up to that goal. time to work up to that goal. time to work up to that goal. In addition, if you're going to use In addition, if you're going to use In addition, if you're going to use sound as a stimulus for increasing focus sound as a stimulus for increasing focus sound as a stimulus for increasing focus and alertness, try and avoid exposure to and alertness, try and avoid exposure to and alertness, try and avoid exposure to white noise, pink noise, or brown noise white noise, pink noise, or brown noise white noise, pink noise, or brown noise for extended periods of time, for more for extended periods of time, for more for extended periods of time, for more than an hour or so. That might actually than an hour or so. That might actually than an hour or so. That might actually be damaging to the auditory system and be damaging to the auditory system and be damaging to the auditory system and at the very least is kind of stressful at the very least is kind of stressful at the very least is kind of stressful even though you might not notice it. even though you might not notice it. even though you might not notice it. It's kind of a background level of It's kind of a background level of It's kind of a background level of anxiety and stress that is not going to anxiety and stress that is not going to anxiety and stress that is not going to serve you well. Rather, if you're going serve you well. Rather, if you're going serve you well. Rather, if you're going to pursue particular types of sound to pursue particular types of sound to pursue particular types of sound frequencies, consider using 40 hertz frequencies, consider using 40 hertz frequencies, consider using 40 hertz binaural beats, not monaural beats, but binaural beats, not monaural beats, but binaural beats, not monaural beats, but 40 hertz binaural beats 40 hertz binaural beats 40 hertz binaural beats done during a particular work bout or done during a particular work bout or done during a particular work bout or for 30 minutes prior to that work bout. for 30 minutes prior to that work bout. for 30 minutes prior to that work bout. I would not rely on binaural beats all I would not rely on binaural beats all I would not rely on binaural beats all the time every day. I think that could the time every day. I think that could the time every day. I think that could cause them to lose their potency just cause them to lose their potency just cause them to lose their potency just because of the way the auditory system because of the way the auditory system because of the way the auditory system attenuates. Some other things that you attenuates. Some other things that you attenuates. Some other things that you could do in order to could do in order to could do in order to improve your workplace performance would improve your workplace performance would improve your workplace performance would be to consider the cathedral effect. If be to consider the cathedral effect. If be to consider the cathedral effect. If you're going to do analytic work for any you're going to do analytic work for any you're going to do analytic work for any part of the day, phase one or phase two part of the day, phase one or phase two part of the day, phase one or phase two as I describe them, but really in any as I describe them, but really in any as I describe them, but really in any time of day, that detailed analytic work time of day, that detailed analytic work time of day, that detailed analytic work for which there is a correct answer, for which there is a correct answer, for which there is a correct answer, then try and get into an environment then try and get into an environment then try and get into an environment with a relatively low ceiling. If you with a relatively low ceiling. If you with a relatively low ceiling. If you don't have access to a low ceiling don't have access to a low ceiling don't have access to a low ceiling environment, you might consider environment, you might consider environment, you might consider using a brimmed hat or even a hoodie or using a brimmed hat or even a hoodie or using a brimmed hat or even a hoodie or even just or even just or even just facing down or even putting your hand facing down or even putting your hand facing down or even putting your hand above uh above your eyes as you will as above uh above your eyes as you will as above uh above your eyes as you will as at the level of your of your eyebrows. at the level of your of your eyebrows. at the level of your of your eyebrows. In contrast, if you're interested in In contrast, if you're interested in In contrast, if you're interested in doing brainstorming, creative work, you're brainstorming, creative work, you're brainstorming, creative work, you're writing new things, you're creating new writing new things, you're creating new writing new things, you're creating new things of any kind, artwork, consider things of any kind, artwork, consider things of any kind, artwork, consider getting into a high ceiling or no getting into a high ceiling or no getting into a high ceiling or no ceiling environment. ceiling environment. ceiling environment. Or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or Or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or Or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that back. Now, of course, there are an back. Now, of course, there are an back. Now, of course, there are an enormous number of other things that you enormous number of other things that you enormous number of other things that you can do to improve work performance and can do to improve work performance and can do to improve work performance and productivity, and I've talked about productivity, and I've talked about productivity, and I've talked about those in previous episodes, in those in previous episodes, in those in previous episodes, in particular in the episode on focus and particular in the episode on focus and particular in the episode on focus and the episode on motivation. There are the episode on motivation. There are the episode on motivation. There are supplements you can take that can supplements you can take that can supplements you can take that can increase dopamine, for instance. There increase dopamine, for instance. There increase dopamine, for instance. There are tools that you can use to increase are tools that you can use to increase are tools that you can use to increase your focus, for instance, focusing your focus, for instance, focusing your focus, for instance, focusing your visual attention on one location for 30 visual attention on one location for 30 visual attention on one location for 30 to 60 seconds prior to entering a to 60 seconds prior to entering a to 60 seconds prior to entering a focused work bout. I do want to focused work bout. I do want to focused work bout. I do want to acknowledge again the fact that I acknowledge again the fact that I acknowledge again the fact that I realize people are showing up to this realize people are showing up to this realize people are showing up to this challenge of workspace optimization with challenge of workspace optimization with challenge of workspace optimization with different budgets, with different budgets, with different budgets, with different constraints. Some people have kids at constraints. Some people have kids at constraints. Some people have kids at home, there are a lot of interruptions, home, there are a lot of interruptions, home, there are a lot of interruptions, some people do not. some people do not. some people do not. Nonetheless, I hope that the information Nonetheless, I hope that the information Nonetheless, I hope that the information I was able to provide today will allow I was able to provide today will allow I was able to provide today will allow you to make subtle or maybe even drastic you to make subtle or maybe even drastic you to make subtle or maybe even drastic rearrangements in your workspace rearrangements in your workspace rearrangements in your workspace environment. There's one other point environment. There's one other point environment. There's one other point related to that I did not cover and related to that I did not cover and related to that I did not cover and that I'd like to cover just briefly, that I'd like to cover just briefly, that I'd like to cover just briefly, which is that there's nothing to say which is that there's nothing to say which is that there's nothing to say that you have to always work in the same that you have to always work in the same that you have to always work in the same location all the time. You can move from location all the time. You can move from location all the time. You can move from house to cafe if that works for you, you house to cafe if that works for you, you house to cafe if that works for you, you can move from office to home, you can move from office to home, you can move from office to home, you can also move from different locations also move from different locations also move from different locations within your home. Once again, thank you within your home. Once again, thank you within your home. Once again, thank you for joining me for this discussion about for joining me for this discussion about for joining me for this discussion about the science and peer-reviewed literature the science and peer-reviewed literature the science and peer-reviewed literature on workspace optimization. I hope some, on workspace optimization. I hope some, on workspace optimization. I hope some, if not all of the tools will be if not all of the tools will be if not all of the tools will be beneficial for you, and as always, thank beneficial for you, and as always, thank beneficial for you, and as always, thank you for your interest in science.