Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring you effort to bring you effort to bring you zero-cost-to-consumer information about zero-cost-to-consumer information about zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the general public. We just closed out the general public. We just closed out the general public. We just closed out the episodes on hormones. Now we are going episodes on hormones. Now we are going episodes on hormones. Now we are going to talk about how to optimize physical to talk about how to optimize physical to talk about how to optimize physical performance and skill learning. There performance and skill learning. There performance and skill learning. There are so many variables to physical are so many variables to physical are so many variables to physical performance, and we can manage physical performance, and we can manage physical performance, and we can manage physical performance and skill learning from a performance and skill learning from a performance and skill learning from a variety of contexts. I made just a short variety of contexts. I made just a short variety of contexts. I made just a short list of some of the things that come to list of some of the things that come to list of some of the things that come to mind that can powerfully impact physical mind that can powerfully impact physical mind that can powerfully impact physical performance and skill learning. Some of performance and skill learning. Some of performance and skill learning. Some of them are what I would consider them are what I would consider them are what I would consider foundational. They allow you to show up foundational. They allow you to show up foundational. They allow you to show up with your current ability, and if you with your current ability, and if you with your current ability, and if you were to disrupt those, you would perform were to disrupt those, you would perform were to disrupt those, you would perform less well. So, things like getting a less well. So, things like getting a less well. So, things like getting a good night's sleep, things like being good night's sleep, things like being good night's sleep, things like being properly hydrated, things like being properly hydrated, things like being properly hydrated, things like being well-nourished. There are supplements, well-nourished. There are supplements, well-nourished. There are supplements, there are drugs, there are different there are drugs, there are different there are drugs, there are different ways to breathe, there are so many tools ways to breathe, there are so many tools ways to breathe, there are so many tools related to mindset, visualization. It's related to mindset, visualization. It's related to mindset, visualization. It's just a vast space, but it's not just a vast space, but it's not just a vast space, but it's not infinite. And there are a few things in the list And there are a few things in the list And there are a few things in the list of things that can impact and even of things that can impact and even of things that can impact and even optimize physical performance and skill optimize physical performance and skill optimize physical performance and skill learning that have an outsized effect learning that have an outsized effect learning that have an outsized effect that any of you can use. So, today we that any of you can use. So, today we that any of you can use. So, today we are going to focus on what I believe to are going to focus on what I believe to are going to focus on what I believe to be one of the most powerful tools to be one of the most powerful tools to be one of the most powerful tools to improve physical performance and skill improve physical performance and skill improve physical performance and skill learning and recovery. We'll talk about learning and recovery. We'll talk about learning and recovery. We'll talk about why that's important. And that's about why that's important. And that's about why that's important. And that's temperature. Believe it or not, temperature is the Believe it or not, temperature is the Believe it or not, temperature is the most powerful variable most powerful variable most powerful variable for improving physical performance and for improving physical performance and for improving physical performance and for recovery. for recovery. for recovery. There are two aspects to temperature, of There are two aspects to temperature, of There are two aspects to temperature, of course. There's heat and there's cold. There's heat and there's cold. There's heat and there's cold. We are mainly going to focus on cold as We are mainly going to focus on cold as We are mainly going to focus on cold as a way to buffer heat. We're going to a way to buffer heat. We're going to a way to buffer heat. We're going to talk about cold from the standpoint of talk about cold from the standpoint of talk about cold from the standpoint of thermal physiology. This is a literature thermal physiology. This is a literature thermal physiology. This is a literature that's rich in scientific information that's rich in scientific information that's rich in scientific information that goes back very deep into the last that goes back very deep into the last that goes back very deep into the last century where physiologists and neuroscientists where physiologists and neuroscientists where physiologists and neuroscientists figured out that there are different figured out that there are different figured out that there are different compartments in your body that heat and compartments in your body that heat and compartments in your body that heat and cool you differently and that you can cool you differently and that you can cool you differently and that you can leverage those in order to double, even leverage those in order to double, even leverage those in order to double, even triple or quadruple your work output, triple or quadruple your work output, triple or quadruple your work output, both strength, repetitions and both strength, repetitions and both strength, repetitions and endurance. So, this is not weak sauce, endurance. So, this is not weak sauce, endurance. So, this is not weak sauce, as they say. This is the stuff that can as they say. This is the stuff that can as they say. This is the stuff that can really shift the needle quite a bit and really shift the needle quite a bit and really shift the needle quite a bit and it's not just about performing well it's not just about performing well it's not just about performing well once. It's about being able to perform well It's about being able to perform well It's about being able to perform well and recover from that performance so and recover from that performance so and recover from that performance so that you do even better when you're not that you do even better when you're not that you do even better when you're not incorporating these tools incorporating these tools incorporating these tools on days where, for instance, you can't on days where, for instance, you can't on days where, for instance, you can't access cold or an ice pack or an ice access cold or an ice pack or an ice access cold or an ice pack or an ice bath or things of that sort. Let's start bath or things of that sort. Let's start bath or things of that sort. Let's start by talking about temperature. by talking about temperature. by talking about temperature. How does temperature impact the body and How does temperature impact the body and How does temperature impact the body and its ability to perform, including learn its ability to perform, including learn its ability to perform, including learn new skills? new skills? new skills? So, everyone probably remembers or has at everyone probably remembers or has at everyone probably remembers or has at least heard of the word homeostasis, least heard of the word homeostasis, least heard of the word homeostasis, right? That the body wants to remain in right? That the body wants to remain in right? That the body wants to remain in a particular range of temperatures, that a particular range of temperatures, that a particular range of temperatures, that it doesn't like to be too hot or too it doesn't like to be too hot or too it doesn't like to be too hot or too cold. Heating up too much is just plain cold. Heating up too much is just plain cold. Heating up too much is just plain bad. It's not just bad for physical bad. It's not just bad for physical bad. It's not just bad for physical performance, it's bad for all tissue performance, it's bad for all tissue performance, it's bad for all tissue health. Cells stop functioning, they stop being Cells stop functioning, they stop being Cells stop functioning, they stop being able to generate energy, they stop being able to generate energy, they stop being able to generate energy, they stop being able to digest things, you stop being able to digest things, you stop being able to digest things, you stop being able to think and able to think and able to think and eventually those cells start dying off eventually those cells start dying off eventually those cells start dying off entirely. Now, you don't want to become Now, you don't want to become Now, you don't want to become hypothermic, either. You die from hypothermic, either. You die from hypothermic, either. You die from hypothermia just like you can die from hypothermia just like you can die from hypothermia just like you can die from hyperthermia. However, that you have a lot more that you have a lot more that you have a lot more range to be cold than you do to be too warm. to be cold than you do to be too warm. to be cold than you do to be too warm. Okay? And in general, Okay? And in general, Okay? And in general, the idea is to keep the body and brain the idea is to keep the body and brain the idea is to keep the body and brain in a particular range, but anytime we do in a particular range, but anytime we do in a particular range, but anytime we do anything, our body temperature can shift. So, for our body temperature can shift. So, for our body temperature can shift. So, for instance, if you were to stand next to a campfire, if you were to stand next to a campfire, if you were to stand next to a campfire, or you were outside on a hot day, or you were outside on a hot day, or you were outside on a hot day, various things would happen to dump heat various things would happen to dump heat various things would happen to dump heat from your body. Now, what are those from your body. Now, what are those from your body. Now, what are those things? Well, there are a huge category things? Well, there are a huge category things? Well, there are a huge category of them. But, the simplest way to think of them. But, the simplest way to think of them. But, the simplest way to think about this process is that when we get about this process is that when we get about this process is that when we get cold, we tend to vasoconstrict. We tend to Our we tend to vasoconstrict. We tend to Our we tend to vasoconstrict. We tend to Our blood vessels tend to constrict, and we blood vessels tend to constrict, and we blood vessels tend to constrict, and we tend to push energy toward the core of tend to push energy toward the core of tend to push energy toward the core of our body to preserve our core organs. our body to preserve our core organs. our body to preserve our core organs. Okay? So, our periphery, our hands and Okay? So, our periphery, our hands and Okay? So, our periphery, our hands and our feet and our toes and our legs our feet and our toes and our legs our feet and our toes and our legs become colder, and our core therefore become colder, and our core therefore become colder, and our core therefore can maintain blood to that area, and we can maintain blood to that area, and we can maintain blood to that area, and we are insulating our core. are insulating our core. are insulating our core. Conversely, when we heat up, our blood Conversely, when we heat up, our blood Conversely, when we heat up, our blood vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit, vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit, vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit, and more blood flows to our periphery, and more blood flows to our periphery, and more blood flows to our periphery, and more blood can move throughout the and more blood can move throughout the and more blood can move throughout the body generally, and we will perspire. We body generally, and we will perspire. We body generally, and we will perspire. We will sweat. Water will actually get will sweat. Water will actually get will sweat. Water will actually get pulled out of the blood to some extent, pulled out of the blood to some extent, pulled out of the blood to some extent, moved up through sweat glands, and will moved up through sweat glands, and will moved up through sweat glands, and will be brought to the skin surface so that be brought to the skin surface so that be brought to the skin surface so that it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. So, it's very important that if you want to it's very important that if you want to it's very important that if you want to understand how you can leverage understand how you can leverage understand how you can leverage temperature for physical performance, temperature for physical performance, temperature for physical performance, you have to understand that you have you have to understand that you have you have to understand that you have vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasodilation to dump heat, that you have vasodilation to dump heat, that you have vasodilation to dump heat, that you have sweating to dump heat, and you have sweating to dump heat, and you have sweating to dump heat, and you have conservation of fluids conservation of fluids conservation of fluids in order to preserve heat. in order to preserve heat. in order to preserve heat. That's the most important thing in terms That's the most important thing in terms That's the most important thing in terms of understanding the mechanisms of understanding the mechanisms of understanding the mechanisms of maintaining and dumping heat. And now, maintaining and dumping heat. And now, maintaining and dumping heat. And now, the important thing to understand is the important thing to understand is the important thing to understand is that if you get too hot, your ability to that if you get too hot, your ability to that if you get too hot, your ability to contract your muscles stops. Okay? I'm contract your muscles stops. Okay? I'm contract your muscles stops. Okay? I'm going to repeat this because it's going to repeat this because it's going to repeat this because it's vitally important. ATP vitally important. ATP vitally important. ATP is involved in the process of generating is involved in the process of generating is involved in the process of generating muscle contractions. The range of muscle contractions. The range of muscle contractions. The range of temperatures within which ATP can temperatures within which ATP can temperatures within which ATP can function and muscles can contract is function and muscles can contract is function and muscles can contract is very narrow. Somewhere around 39 or 40° very narrow. Somewhere around 39 or 40° very narrow. Somewhere around 39 or 40° C it drops off and you will not be able to it drops off and you will not be able to it drops off and you will not be able to generate more contractions. generate more contractions. generate more contractions. Now, that's pretty hot, but it can that Now, that's pretty hot, but it can that Now, that's pretty hot, but it can that temperature can be generated locally temperature can be generated locally temperature can be generated locally really fast. Put simply, if you get too really fast. Put simply, if you get too really fast. Put simply, if you get too hot, you stop exercising. hot, you stop exercising. hot, you stop exercising. You may not even realize it, but your You may not even realize it, but your You may not even realize it, but your will to exercise further, your ability will to exercise further, your ability will to exercise further, your ability to push harder is entirely dependent on to push harder is entirely dependent on to push harder is entirely dependent on the heat of the muscle both locally and the heat of the muscle both locally and the heat of the muscle both locally and your whole system. If you can keep your whole system. If you can keep your whole system. If you can keep temperature in range, however, in a temperature in range, however, in a temperature in range, however, in a proper range, you will be able to do proper range, you will be able to do proper range, you will be able to do more work. You will be able to create more work. You will be able to create more work. You will be able to create greater output. You'll be able to lift greater output. You'll be able to lift greater output. You'll be able to lift more weight, more sets, more reps. more weight, more sets, more reps. more weight, more sets, more reps. And you'll be able to run further. And you'll be able to run further. And you'll be able to run further. Now, there are data that I'm going to Now, there are data that I'm going to Now, there are data that I'm going to talk about in a little bit that are talk about in a little bit that are talk about in a little bit that are absolutely striking that underscore that absolutely striking that underscore that absolutely striking that underscore that statement. They are data from my statement. They are data from my statement. They are data from my colleague Craig Heller's lab in the colleague Craig Heller's lab in the colleague Craig Heller's lab in the Department of Biology at Stanford. Many, Department of Biology at Stanford. Many, Department of Biology at Stanford. Many, if not all of the NFL teams are now if not all of the NFL teams are now if not all of the NFL teams are now using this technology as well as using this technology as well as using this technology as well as military uses it and not just for sports military uses it and not just for sports military uses it and not just for sports performance, but also firefighters, performance, but also firefighters, performance, but also firefighters, construction workers, other professions construction workers, other professions construction workers, other professions where elevated heat becomes a barrier to where elevated heat becomes a barrier to where elevated heat becomes a barrier to performance and you can leverage this to performance and you can leverage this to performance and you can leverage this to really improve your workouts. So, how do really improve your workouts. So, how do really improve your workouts. So, how do you dump heat in order to perform longer you dump heat in order to perform longer you dump heat in order to perform longer safely? Well, in order to understand that, you Well, in order to understand that, you Well, in order to understand that, you have to understand that the body has have to understand that the body has have to understand that the body has three main compartments for regulating three main compartments for regulating three main compartments for regulating temperature. Okay? We don't just have a temperature. Okay? We don't just have a temperature. Okay? We don't just have a center and a periphery, we have three center and a periphery, we have three center and a periphery, we have three main compartments. And there's one main compartments. And there's one main compartments. And there's one compartment in particular that compartment in particular that compartment in particular that all of you or most all of you, I have to all of you or most all of you, I have to all of you or most all of you, I have to assume, have. assume, have. assume, have. And if you can understand how that And if you can understand how that And if you can understand how that works, you can do tremendous things for works, you can do tremendous things for works, you can do tremendous things for your performance and for your recovery. your performance and for your recovery. your performance and for your recovery. One is your core. We already talked One is your core. We already talked One is your core. We already talked about that. Your core organs, your about that. Your core organs, your about that. Your core organs, your heart, your lungs, your pancreas, your heart, your lungs, your pancreas, your heart, your lungs, your pancreas, your liver. It's the core of your body. liver. It's the core of your body. liver. It's the core of your body. The other is your periphery, The other is your periphery, The other is your periphery, which are obviously your arms and your which are obviously your arms and your which are obviously your arms and your legs and your feet and your hands. legs and your feet and your hands. legs and your feet and your hands. But then there's a third component, But then there's a third component, But then there's a third component, which is there are three locations on which is there are three locations on which is there are three locations on your body that are far better at passing your body that are far better at passing your body that are far better at passing heat out of the body and bringing cool heat out of the body and bringing cool heat out of the body and bringing cool into the body such that you can heat up into the body such that you can heat up into the body such that you can heat up or cool your body everywhere very or cool your body everywhere very or cool your body everywhere very quickly. Those three areas are your face, Those three areas are your face, Those three areas are your face, the palms of your hands and the bottoms the palms of your hands and the bottoms the palms of your hands and the bottoms of your feet. of your feet. of your feet. Now, the skin on your hands and on the Now, the skin on your hands and on the Now, the skin on your hands and on the bottoms of your feet and to some extent bottoms of your feet and to some extent bottoms of your feet and to some extent on your face are called glabrous skin. on your face are called glabrous skin. on your face are called glabrous skin. That's g l a b o r o u s glabrous skin. That's g l a b o r o u s glabrous skin. That's g l a b o r o u s glabrous skin. And what's special about those areas of And what's special about those areas of And what's special about those areas of your body and the glabrous skin your body and the glabrous skin your body and the glabrous skin is that is that is that the arrangement of vasculature, the arrangement of vasculature, the arrangement of vasculature, of blood vessels, capillaries, and of blood vessels, capillaries, and of blood vessels, capillaries, and arteries that serve those regions is arteries that serve those regions is arteries that serve those regions is very different than it is elsewhere in very different than it is elsewhere in very different than it is elsewhere in your body. your body. your body. In these three regions of your hands, In these three regions of your hands, In these three regions of your hands, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a very special pattern of vasculature. very special pattern of vasculature. very special pattern of vasculature. AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. a r AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. a r AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. a r t e r i o arteriovenous t e r i o arteriovenous t e r i o arteriovenous v e n o u s v e n o u s v e n o u s arteriovenous anastomoses a n a s t o m o s e s anastomoses a n a s t o m o s e s anastomoses a n a s t o m o s e s arteriovenous anastomoses. Okay, you arteriovenous anastomoses. Okay, you arteriovenous anastomoses. Okay, you want to know about arteriovenous want to know about arteriovenous want to know about arteriovenous anastomoses. Trust me. AVAs are direct anastomoses. Trust me. AVAs are direct anastomoses. Trust me. AVAs are direct connections between the small arteries connections between the small arteries connections between the small arteries and the small veins. and the small veins. and the small veins. They bypass the capillaries to some They bypass the capillaries to some They bypass the capillaries to some extent. They're little short vessel segments. They're little short vessel segments. They're little short vessel segments. They have a big large inner diameter. They have a big large inner diameter. They have a big large inner diameter. And they have this very thick muscular And they have this very thick muscular And they have this very thick muscular wall. And they get input from what are called And they get input from what are called And they get input from what are called adrenergic neurons. They get input from adrenergic neurons. They get input from adrenergic neurons. They get input from neurons that release norepinephrine and neurons that release norepinephrine and neurons that release norepinephrine and epinephrine. Which allows them to contract or dilate. Which allows them to contract or dilate. Which allows them to contract or dilate. Now, there's some rules of physics that Now, there's some rules of physics that Now, there's some rules of physics that talk about how the radius of a pipe and talk about how the radius of a pipe and talk about how the radius of a pipe and small changes in the radius of a pipe small changes in the radius of a pipe small changes in the radius of a pipe leads to leads to leads to massive increases in the rate and amount massive increases in the rate and amount massive increases in the rate and amount of stuff that can flow through that of stuff that can flow through that of stuff that can flow through that pipe. Okay? That's a rule of physics pipe. Okay? That's a rule of physics pipe. Okay? That's a rule of physics that says essentially that uh the radius that says essentially that uh the radius that says essentially that uh the radius is uh proportional to the amount of is uh proportional to the amount of is uh proportional to the amount of stuff that can flow through something to stuff that can flow through something to stuff that can flow through something to the fourth power. What you need to know, the fourth power. What you need to know, the fourth power. What you need to know, even if you don't want to know any of even if you don't want to know any of even if you don't want to know any of the underlying physics, is that these the underlying physics, is that these the underlying physics, is that these AVAs allow more heat to leave the body AVAs allow more heat to leave the body AVAs allow more heat to leave the body more quickly and more cool to enter the more quickly and more cool to enter the more quickly and more cool to enter the body more quickly body more quickly body more quickly than other venous arterial capillary beds venous arterial capillary beds venous arterial capillary beds throughout the body. In other words, you throughout the body. In other words, you throughout the body. In other words, you can heat up best at the face, the palms, can heat up best at the face, the palms, can heat up best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of the feet. And you can and the bottoms of the feet. And you can and the bottoms of the feet. And you can cool down best at the face, the palms, cool down best at the face, the palms, cool down best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of the feet than you can and the bottoms of the feet than you can and the bottoms of the feet than you can anywhere else on your body. These three anywhere else on your body. These three anywhere else on your body. These three compartments of your body, palms, compartments of your body, palms, compartments of your body, palms, bottoms of feet, and face, are your best bottoms of feet, and face, are your best bottoms of feet, and face, are your best leverage points for manipulating leverage points for manipulating leverage points for manipulating temperature to vastly improve physical temperature to vastly improve physical temperature to vastly improve physical performance. So, what Craig and his colleagues did So, what Craig and his colleagues did So, what Craig and his colleagues did really illustrates perfectly what these really illustrates perfectly what these really illustrates perfectly what these body surfaces can do and why. body surfaces can do and why. body surfaces can do and why. They were studying overheating in They were studying overheating in They were studying overheating in athletes and in military and in athletes and in military and in athletes and in military and in construction workers and trying to construction workers and trying to construction workers and trying to prevent it. What they essentially found prevent it. What they essentially found prevent it. What they essentially found was that cooling the palms, palmar was that cooling the palms, palmar was that cooling the palms, palmar cooling, allowed people, athletes, and recreational people, athletes, and recreational people, athletes, and recreational athletes to run much further, athletes to run much further, athletes to run much further, to lift more weight, and to do more sets to lift more weight, and to do more sets to lift more weight, and to do more sets and reps and reps and reps to a absolutely staggering degree. to a absolutely staggering degree. to a absolutely staggering degree. Let's talk for a second a bit more about Let's talk for a second a bit more about Let's talk for a second a bit more about why we stop, why we shut why we stop, why we shut why we stop, why we shut when we get too hot. When muscle heats when we get too hot. When muscle heats when we get too hot. When muscle heats up, enzymes start getting disrupted, and ATP enzymes start getting disrupted, and ATP enzymes start getting disrupted, and ATP in muscles can't work so well, and those in muscles can't work so well, and those in muscles can't work so well, and those muscles can't contract. The enzyme muscles can't contract. The enzyme muscles can't contract. The enzyme that's involved here is something called that's involved here is something called that's involved here is something called pyruvate kinase. pyruvate kinase. pyruvate kinase. And pyruvate kinase And pyruvate kinase And pyruvate kinase is essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a critical step that you can't bypass if critical step that you can't bypass if critical step that you can't bypass if you want muscles to contract, and it's you want muscles to contract, and it's you want muscles to contract, and it's very temperature sensitive. Therefore, if you can keep temperature Therefore, if you can keep temperature Therefore, if you can keep temperature lower, you can do more work per unit lower, you can do more work per unit lower, you can do more work per unit time. You can do more pull-ups. What time. You can do more pull-ups. What time. You can do more pull-ups. What they essentially did is they brought they essentially did is they brought they essentially did is they brought someone into their laboratory someone into their laboratory someone into their laboratory who could do who could do who could do 10 pull-ups on the first set, and they 10 pull-ups on the first set, and they 10 pull-ups on the first set, and they were able to get 10, rest 2 or 3 were able to get 10, rest 2 or 3 were able to get 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes, get another 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes, get another 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes, get another 10, rest 2 or 3 minutes. And if you've ever tried this, minutes. And if you've ever tried this, minutes. And if you've ever tried this, what you find is that you start dropping what you find is that you start dropping what you find is that you start dropping to eight, seven, six, etc. Now, the to eight, seven, six, etc. Now, the to eight, seven, six, etc. Now, the person might not necessarily feel like person might not necessarily feel like person might not necessarily feel like they're overheating, but the muscle is they're overheating, but the muscle is they're overheating, but the muscle is heating up. heating up. heating up. Then, with their knowledge that these Then, with their knowledge that these Then, with their knowledge that these AVAs, that these AVAs, that these AVAs, that these that these portals in the palms are that these portals in the palms are that these portals in the palms are great way to both heat the body, but great way to both heat the body, but great way to both heat the body, but also to dump heat from the body, also to dump heat from the body, also to dump heat from the body, they used a device, and I'll talk about they used a device, and I'll talk about they used a device, and I'll talk about what you can do at home, but a device what you can do at home, but a device what you can do at home, but a device where they had people hold on to what where they had people hold on to what where they had people hold on to what was essentially a cold tube. was essentially a cold tube. was essentially a cold tube. Now, this is crucial. The tube can't be Now, this is crucial. The tube can't be Now, this is crucial. The tube can't be so cold that it causes vasoconstriction so cold that it causes vasoconstriction so cold that it causes vasoconstriction because then the cold won't pass from because then the cold won't pass from because then the cold won't pass from the tube to the hand and to the core. the tube to the hand and to the core. the tube to the hand and to the core. But, if it's the right temperature, it's But, if it's the right temperature, it's But, if it's the right temperature, it's neither too hot nor too cold, neither too hot nor too cold, neither too hot nor too cold, that cool from the cold tube passes into that cool from the cold tube passes into that cool from the cold tube passes into the hand, the hand, the hand, these so-called palmar regions, and then these so-called palmar regions, and then these so-called palmar regions, and then cools the core, and in theory, by cools the core, and in theory, by cools the core, and in theory, by lowering body temperature, would allow lowering body temperature, would allow lowering body temperature, would allow the person or the athlete to do more the person or the athlete to do more the person or the athlete to do more work. And indeed, that's what they saw. work. And indeed, that's what they saw. work. And indeed, that's what they saw. The actual data, the specific data The actual data, the specific data The actual data, the specific data showed that subjects could do, at least showed that subjects could do, at least showed that subjects could do, at least the subjects they worked with, on their the subjects they worked with, on their the subjects they worked with, on their first day with no cooling, about 100 first day with no cooling, about 100 first day with no cooling, about 100 pull-ups across the pull-ups across the pull-ups across the very the time frame that they the very the time frame that they the very the time frame that they had. Then, they came back and did the Then, they came back and did the Then, they came back and did the cooling. They did it the very next day, cooling. They did it the very next day, cooling. They did it the very next day, which, if you've ever trained a muscle which, if you've ever trained a muscle which, if you've ever trained a muscle the very next day, typically, you the very next day, typically, you the very next day, typically, you wouldn't do as well in its training if wouldn't do as well in its training if wouldn't do as well in its training if it took any damage from the previous it took any damage from the previous it took any damage from the previous session, or you at least do as well, but session, or you at least do as well, but session, or you at least do as well, but you probably wouldn't do what they then you probably wouldn't do what they then you probably wouldn't do what they then observed, which was they started cooling observed, which was they started cooling observed, which was they started cooling after every other set. The person would after every other set. The person would after every other set. The person would just hold the cold tube, cool down the just hold the cold tube, cool down the just hold the cold tube, cool down the body after every other set, rest, body after every other set, rest, body after every other set, rest, everything else was kept the same. everything else was kept the same. everything else was kept the same. And they found that they went to 180 And they found that they went to 180 And they found that they went to 180 pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a near doubling. Now, you may be asking, near doubling. Now, you may be asking, near doubling. Now, you may be asking, "What about endurance?" With endurance, "What about endurance?" With endurance, "What about endurance?" With endurance, similar increases have been shown. And similar increases have been shown. And similar increases have been shown. And the way that they would do those tests the way that they would do those tests the way that they would do those tests are a little bit different, and they are a little bit different, and they are a little bit different, and they also point to a really important also point to a really important also point to a really important mechanism of why we stop doing work at mechanism of why we stop doing work at mechanism of why we stop doing work at all when we perceive that we are putting all when we perceive that we are putting all when we perceive that we are putting in too much effort. So, it gets right to in too much effort. So, it gets right to in too much effort. So, it gets right to the heart of the relationship between the heart of the relationship between the heart of the relationship between temperature in muscles and your temperature in muscles and your temperature in muscles and your willpower. Those are directly related. willpower. Those are directly related. willpower. Those are directly related. Your body heat and your willpower are Your body heat and your willpower are Your body heat and your willpower are linked in a physiological way. Okay, so linked in a physiological way. Okay, so linked in a physiological way. Okay, so let's talk about willpower and heat and let's talk about willpower and heat and let's talk about willpower and heat and how heat shuts you down. how heat shuts you down. how heat shuts you down. In other words, if you are cool, if your In other words, if you are cool, if your In other words, if you are cool, if your body temperature is in a particular body temperature is in a particular body temperature is in a particular range, not only can you go further, but range, not only can you go further, but range, not only can you go further, but you will go further you will go further you will go further if you want to. if you want to. if you want to. Said differently, if you heat up too Said differently, if you heat up too Said differently, if you heat up too much, you will stop or you will die. you will stop or you will die. you will stop or you will die. But there's a reflex But there's a reflex But there's a reflex that relates the body to the brain that relates the body to the brain that relates the body to the brain and the brain to the body that shuts off and the brain to the body that shuts off and the brain to the body that shuts off our effort when we get too hot. our effort when we get too hot. our effort when we get too hot. So, what Craigan and his colleagues and So, what Craigan and his colleagues and So, what Craigan and his colleagues and now others have done is to do a test in now others have done is to do a test in now others have done is to do a test in the laboratory where rather than ask the laboratory where rather than ask the laboratory where rather than ask people to run outside until they people to run outside until they people to run outside until they absolutely don't want to run anymore, absolutely don't want to run anymore, absolutely don't want to run anymore, you put them on a treadmill and you set you put them on a treadmill and you set you put them on a treadmill and you set the speed. the speed. the speed. Okay? So, they have to keep up with the Okay? So, they have to keep up with the Okay? So, they have to keep up with the treadmill and at some point they quit. treadmill and at some point they quit. treadmill and at some point they quit. And you take groups and you do those And you take groups and you do those And you take groups and you do those in different temperature environments. in different temperature environments. in different temperature environments. So, some people are running in a nice So, some people are running in a nice So, some people are running in a nice chilly laboratory. chilly laboratory. chilly laboratory. They get their heart rate up, so they're They get their heart rate up, so they're They get their heart rate up, so they're getting into a steady state cadence or getting into a steady state cadence or getting into a steady state cadence or rhythm and their heart is beating at rhythm and their heart is beating at rhythm and their heart is beating at more or less a steady state. more or less a steady state. more or less a steady state. People will continue People will continue People will continue at that temperature at that temperature at that temperature and at that heart rate and at that heart rate and at that heart rate unless you start turning up the unless you start turning up the unless you start turning up the temperature in the room. temperature in the room. temperature in the room. And at some point they will stop and And at some point they will stop and And at some point they will stop and they'll stop much earlier they'll stop much earlier they'll stop much earlier when it gets hot because of something when it gets hot because of something when it gets hot because of something called cardiac drift. Okay? So, let's called cardiac drift. Okay? So, let's called cardiac drift. Okay? So, let's say I'm running and I'm running at a say I'm running and I'm running at a say I'm running and I'm running at a steady cadence on this treadmill and my steady cadence on this treadmill and my steady cadence on this treadmill and my heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 beats per minute, doesn't matter. Let's beats per minute, doesn't matter. Let's beats per minute, doesn't matter. Let's say 100 just for the sake of example. say 100 just for the sake of example. say 100 just for the sake of example. Well, just making the room hotter is Well, just making the room hotter is Well, just making the room hotter is going to increase my heart rate further going to increase my heart rate further going to increase my heart rate further even though I'm at the same output. And even though I'm at the same output. And even though I'm at the same output. And the brain the brain the brain does a computation. It somehow figures does a computation. It somehow figures does a computation. It somehow figures out that there's a heat component that's out that there's a heat component that's out that there's a heat component that's increasing heart rate and there's an increasing heart rate and there's an increasing heart rate and there's an effort component from running that's effort component from running that's effort component from running that's driving heart rate. And if the heat driving heart rate. And if the heat driving heart rate. And if the heat component and the and the heart rate component and the and the heart rate component and the and the heart rate output from the effort get to hit a output from the effort get to hit a output from the effort get to hit a certain threshold, I stop. certain threshold, I stop. certain threshold, I stop. Increasing temperature Increasing temperature Increasing temperature increases the rate of quitting in part, increases the rate of quitting in part, increases the rate of quitting in part, not entirely, but in part because of not entirely, but in part because of not entirely, but in part because of this thing called cardiac drift. Heat this thing called cardiac drift. Heat this thing called cardiac drift. Heat increases heart rate. increases heart rate. increases heart rate. Effort increases heart rate. Effort increases heart rate. Effort increases heart rate. At a steady effort, you'll have a steady At a steady effort, you'll have a steady At a steady effort, you'll have a steady heart rate. If you increase the heat heart rate. If you increase the heat heart rate. If you increase the heat in the environment that you're in the environment that you're in the environment that you're engaging in that steady heart rate, your engaging in that steady heart rate, your engaging in that steady heart rate, your heart rate will now go up due to cardiac heart rate will now go up due to cardiac heart rate will now go up due to cardiac drift and you will quit. Okay? So, drift and you will quit. Okay? So, drift and you will quit. Okay? So, Heller and colleagues Heller and colleagues Heller and colleagues have done experiments where they do have done experiments where they do have done experiments where they do palmar cooling under these environments. palmar cooling under these environments. palmar cooling under these environments. And that's wonderful because not only And that's wonderful because not only And that's wonderful because not only does it enable people to go further and does it enable people to go further and does it enable people to go further and faster for much longer, that's been shown for much longer, that's been shown for much longer, that's been shown statistically significant every time, statistically significant every time, statistically significant every time, but it also protects the brain and body but it also protects the brain and body but it also protects the brain and body against hyperthermia, overheating, coma, against hyperthermia, overheating, coma, against hyperthermia, overheating, coma, nerve injury, nerve death, and actual nerve injury, nerve death, and actual nerve injury, nerve death, and actual death. Okay? So, you can see why this is death. Okay? So, you can see why this is death. Okay? So, you can see why this is such a valuable tool. such a valuable tool. such a valuable tool. So, how can you start to incorporate So, how can you start to incorporate So, how can you start to incorporate this? Well, this? Well, this? Well, first of all, first of all, first of all, I always get asked how cold should the I always get asked how cold should the I always get asked how cold should the water be? Should it be ice water? Should water be? Should it be ice water? Should water be? Should it be ice water? Should it be very cold water? it be very cold water? it be very cold water? The answer is no. The answer is no. The answer is no. If you want to experience some of this If you want to experience some of this If you want to experience some of this effect without a device, one thing you effect without a device, one thing you effect without a device, one thing you could do would be for instance to do, I could do would be for instance to do, I could do would be for instance to do, I don't know, I'll use the gym or don't know, I'll use the gym or don't know, I'll use the gym or the treadmill as an example. You could the treadmill as an example. You could the treadmill as an example. You could do your maximum number of pull-ups, do your maximum number of pull-ups, do your maximum number of pull-ups, stop, and then you could actually put stop, and then you could actually put stop, and then you could actually put your hands into or on the surface of your hands into or on the surface of your hands into or on the surface of a sink that is presumably stopped up a sink that is presumably stopped up a sink that is presumably stopped up with cool water. So, not ice water, not cool water. So, not ice water, not cool water. So, not ice water, not freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly cooler than body temperature before you started than body temperature before you started than body temperature before you started training would be a good place to start. training would be a good place to start. training would be a good place to start. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. Then you could go back and do your next Then you could go back and do your next Then you could go back and do your next set. You would repeat the cooling. You set. You would repeat the cooling. You set. You would repeat the cooling. You would want to extend the amount of would want to extend the amount of would want to extend the amount of cooling somewhat, so you might want to cooling somewhat, so you might want to cooling somewhat, so you might want to do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This is not going to be perfect. You're going is not going to be perfect. You're going is not going to be perfect. You're going to have to play with how cold to make it to have to play with how cold to make it to have to play with how cold to make it in order to get the optimal effect, but in order to get the optimal effect, but in order to get the optimal effect, but you ought to see an effect nonetheless. you ought to see an effect nonetheless. you ought to see an effect nonetheless. The same is true if you're running and The same is true if you're running and The same is true if you're running and you're fatiguing. Obviously, you don't you're fatiguing. Obviously, you don't you're fatiguing. Obviously, you don't want to become hyperthermic. Cooling the want to become hyperthermic. Cooling the want to become hyperthermic. Cooling the hands or the bottoms of your feet or the hands or the bottoms of your feet or the hands or the bottoms of your feet or the face would be the ideal way to dump heat face would be the ideal way to dump heat face would be the ideal way to dump heat in order to be able to generate more in order to be able to generate more in order to be able to generate more output. Now, the face is something that output. Now, the face is something that output. Now, the face is something that we haven't talked a lot about. we haven't talked a lot about. we haven't talked a lot about. Everything I've told you up until now Everything I've told you up until now Everything I've told you up until now also says that if you are somebody who also says that if you are somebody who also says that if you are somebody who tends to get cold when you are outside, tends to get cold when you are outside, tends to get cold when you are outside, say in the winter or even in the fall, say in the winter or even in the fall, say in the winter or even in the fall, you tend to run cold, warming your face you tend to run cold, warming your face you tend to run cold, warming your face is going to be the most important thing is going to be the most important thing is going to be the most important thing that you can do. Now you understand the that you can do. Now you understand the that you can do. Now you understand the principle and the locations at which to principle and the locations at which to principle and the locations at which to deliver heat and cold. So, let's say deliver heat and cold. So, let's say deliver heat and cold. So, let's say that you are out for a run and you want that you are out for a run and you want that you are out for a run and you want to incorporate this cooling mechanism. I to incorporate this cooling mechanism. I to incorporate this cooling mechanism. I talked to Craig about this. I said, talked to Craig about this. I said, talked to Craig about this. I said, "What would be the kind of uh poor "What would be the kind of uh poor "What would be the kind of uh poor person's approach to this?" And he said, person's approach to this?" And he said, person's approach to this?" And he said, "Well, you could take a frozen "Well, you could take a frozen "Well, you could take a frozen uh juice can if you have one of those or uh juice can if you have one of those or uh juice can if you have one of those or a very cold can of soda and you would a very cold can of soda and you would a very cold can of soda and you would want to pass it back and forth between want to pass it back and forth between want to pass it back and forth between your two hands." The reason the passing your two hands." The reason the passing your two hands." The reason the passing back and forth is really important is back and forth is really important is back and forth is really important is because you again you don't want to be because you again you don't want to be because you again you don't want to be so cold that you constrict those venous so cold that you constrict those venous so cold that you constrict those venous portals that will allow cold to go into portals that will allow cold to go into portals that will allow cold to go into the body. Now, there are certainly the body. Now, there are certainly the body. Now, there are certainly people that are working on bike handles people that are working on bike handles people that are working on bike handles and that can actually cool the hands. and that can actually cool the hands. and that can actually cool the hands. Here's what you don't want to do. You Here's what you don't want to do. You Here's what you don't want to do. You don't want to cool the core if you want don't want to cool the core if you want don't want to cool the core if you want to cool the body, right? If it's a very to cool the body, right? If it's a very to cool the body, right? If it's a very hot day and you're going to train, hot day and you're going to train, hot day and you're going to train, getting into an ice bath first, sure, it getting into an ice bath first, sure, it getting into an ice bath first, sure, it will it will cool you down, but that's will it will cool you down, but that's will it will cool you down, but that's not going to be as effective as cooling not going to be as effective as cooling not going to be as effective as cooling the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the face. the face. the face. The one that I've tried, because in The one that I've tried, because in The one that I've tried, because in anticipation of this episode, was the anticipation of this episode, was the anticipation of this episode, was the dips where then I would cool my hands. I dips where then I would cool my hands. I dips where then I would cool my hands. I actually decided to cool the bottoms of actually decided to cool the bottoms of actually decided to cool the bottoms of my feet as well, because it just feels my feet as well, because it just feels my feet as well, because it just feels good and it's particularly hot out good and it's particularly hot out good and it's particularly hot out lately. So, no shoes or socks on, put my lately. So, no shoes or socks on, put my lately. So, no shoes or socks on, put my feet into feet into feet into uh the bottoms of my feet just kind of uh the bottoms of my feet just kind of uh the bottoms of my feet just kind of hovering about a centimeter or two below hovering about a centimeter or two below hovering about a centimeter or two below the surface of a bucket of water that the surface of a bucket of water that the surface of a bucket of water that was just slightly it felt cool, slightly was just slightly it felt cool, slightly was just slightly it felt cool, slightly cooler than um body temperature. Um or cooler than um body temperature. Um or cooler than um body temperature. Um or so, just basically what came out of the so, just basically what came out of the so, just basically what came out of the spigot after I let it run for a little spigot after I let it run for a little spigot after I let it run for a little bit. And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the number of dips I can do in a single number of dips I can do in a single number of dips I can do in a single session. So, it's actually a quite session. So, it's actually a quite session. So, it's actually a quite significant effect, and you don't have significant effect, and you don't have significant effect, and you don't have to be perfectly precise in order to do to be perfectly precise in order to do to be perfectly precise in order to do it. So, up until now, we've been talking it. So, up until now, we've been talking it. So, up until now, we've been talking about how to use cold during a workout about how to use cold during a workout about how to use cold during a workout in order to improve performance. Now, I in order to improve performance. Now, I in order to improve performance. Now, I want to talk about the use of want to talk about the use of want to talk about the use of temperature, in particular cold, to temperature, in particular cold, to temperature, in particular cold, to improve the speed improve the speed improve the speed and the depth of recovery. and the depth of recovery. and the depth of recovery. Recovery is obviously vital. Recovery is obviously vital. Recovery is obviously vital. Right? During a weight training session Right? During a weight training session Right? During a weight training session or during an endurance session, that's or during an endurance session, that's or during an endurance session, that's just the stimulus for getting better the just the stimulus for getting better the just the stimulus for getting better the next time. And if you don't recover, you next time. And if you don't recover, you next time. And if you don't recover, you not only won't get better, but you'll not only won't get better, but you'll not only won't get better, but you'll get worse. get worse. get worse. There's a lot of interest in the use of There's a lot of interest in the use of There's a lot of interest in the use of cold in order to improve recovery in the in order to improve recovery in the in order to improve recovery in the short term. We see this, and probably short term. We see this, and probably short term. We see this, and probably the best example of this would be the best example of this would be the best example of this would be fighters in combat sports between rounds fighters in combat sports between rounds fighters in combat sports between rounds or athletes during uh in between quarters athletes during uh in between quarters athletes during uh in between quarters or half time. That's one form of or half time. That's one form of or half time. That's one form of recovery. The ability to go back into recovery. The ability to go back into recovery. The ability to go back into the sport very soon on an order of the sport very soon on an order of the sport very soon on an order of minutes, anywhere from like 1 minute in minutes, anywhere from like 1 minute in minutes, anywhere from like 1 minute in between rounds in typical combat sports, between rounds in typical combat sports, between rounds in typical combat sports, or several minutes at a half time, et or several minutes at a half time, et or several minutes at a half time, et cetera. And then, of course, there's recovery And then, of course, there's recovery And then, of course, there's recovery that occurs from session to session. So, that occurs from session to session. So, that occurs from session to session. So, outside of the game or the match or the outside of the game or the match or the outside of the game or the match or the or the exercise um or the exercise um or the exercise um session. And many people are now relying on And many people are now relying on And many people are now relying on things like cryotherapy, which requires things like cryotherapy, which requires things like cryotherapy, which requires a lot of expensive equipment, big, you a lot of expensive equipment, big, you a lot of expensive equipment, big, you know, um, know, um, know, um, liquid nitrogen driven, uh, machine. liquid nitrogen driven, uh, machine. liquid nitrogen driven, uh, machine. That Those aren't so common for most That Those aren't so common for most That Those aren't so common for most people or accessible for most people, people or accessible for most people, people or accessible for most people, but a lot of people are using cold baths but a lot of people are using cold baths but a lot of people are using cold baths or ice baths or cold showers. or ice baths or cold showers. or ice baths or cold showers. And again, that's not going to optimize And again, that's not going to optimize And again, that's not going to optimize recovery. In fact, it's going to have an recovery. In fact, it's going to have an recovery. In fact, it's going to have an additional effect that is going to additional effect that is going to additional effect that is going to potentially block the training stimulus. potentially block the training stimulus. potentially block the training stimulus. When you get into an ice bath, you are When you get into an ice bath, you are When you get into an ice bath, you are indeed blocking some of the inflammation indeed blocking some of the inflammation indeed blocking some of the inflammation that occurs because of the training that occurs because of the training that occurs because of the training session. But in doing so, you also are session. But in doing so, you also are session. But in doing so, you also are blocking pathways such as mTOR, blocking pathways such as mTOR, blocking pathways such as mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin, which are mammalian target of rapamycin, which are mammalian target of rapamycin, which are involved in the adaptation for a muscle involved in the adaptation for a muscle involved in the adaptation for a muscle to become stronger or bigger. Put to become stronger or bigger. Put to become stronger or bigger. Put simply, covering the body in cold or immersing covering the body in cold or immersing covering the body in cold or immersing the body in cold after training the body in cold after training the body in cold after training can short-circuit or prevent the can short-circuit or prevent the can short-circuit or prevent the hypertrophy or muscle growth response. hypertrophy or muscle growth response. hypertrophy or muscle growth response. It has other effects that can be It has other effects that can be It has other effects that can be positive, right? It can induce positive, right? It can induce positive, right? It can induce thermogenesis, etc. It can reduce thermogenesis, etc. It can reduce thermogenesis, etc. It can reduce inflammation, but it can prevent some of inflammation, but it can prevent some of inflammation, but it can prevent some of the positive effects of exercise. Now, the positive effects of exercise. Now, the positive effects of exercise. Now, it hasn't been examined so much for it hasn't been examined so much for it hasn't been examined so much for endurance work, endurance work, endurance work, but let's say you come back from a round but let's say you come back from a round but let's say you come back from a round of endurance work, a run or a bike of endurance work, a run or a bike of endurance work, a run or a bike or a swim, getting into a cool bath or a swim, getting into a cool bath or a swim, getting into a cool bath or cooling the palms, the bottoms of cooling the palms, the bottoms of cooling the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the face, in my opinion, the feet, or the face, in my opinion, the feet, or the face, in my opinion, based on the science, would be better based on the science, would be better based on the science, would be better than completely immersing the body in than completely immersing the body in than completely immersing the body in the ice bath. If you can cool the body the ice bath. If you can cool the body the ice bath. If you can cool the body back to its resting temperature back to its resting temperature back to its resting temperature for a for a for a and rest By resting temperature, I mean and rest By resting temperature, I mean and rest By resting temperature, I mean within the range that you would see at within the range that you would see at within the range that you would see at any time of waking day, but not in any time of waking day, but not in any time of waking day, but not in exercise. If you can do that, the sooner you can If you can do that, the sooner you can If you can do that, the sooner you can do that after a workout, the sooner that do that after a workout, the sooner that do that after a workout, the sooner that the muscle will recover, that the muscle will recover, that the muscle will recover, that the tendons will recover, and that the tendons will recover, and that the tendons will recover, and that the person, you, can get back into more person, you, can get back into more person, you, can get back into more endurance training, more weight endurance training, more weight endurance training, more weight training, etc. So, cold actually can be training, etc. So, cold actually can be training, etc. So, cold actually can be a very powerful tool for recovery, but a very powerful tool for recovery, but a very powerful tool for recovery, but to maximize return to baseline levels of to maximize return to baseline levels of to maximize return to baseline levels of temperature, just simply cooling the temperature, just simply cooling the temperature, just simply cooling the entire body by jumping into an ice bath entire body by jumping into an ice bath entire body by jumping into an ice bath or a cold shower is not the best way to or a cold shower is not the best way to or a cold shower is not the best way to go. You really want to rely on one of go. You really want to rely on one of go. You really want to rely on one of these three glabrous skin portals, of these three glabrous skin portals, of these three glabrous skin portals, of the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the face. One of the more commonly used the face. One of the more commonly used the face. One of the more commonly used compounds that's sold over the counter are that's sold over the counter are that's sold over the counter are non-steroid anti-inflammatories. So, non-steroid anti-inflammatories. So, non-steroid anti-inflammatories. So, things like Tylenol and Advil and other things like Tylenol and Advil and other things like Tylenol and Advil and other trade names, naproxen sodium, things of trade names, naproxen sodium, things of trade names, naproxen sodium, things of that sort. Almost all of those drop body that sort. Almost all of those drop body that sort. Almost all of those drop body temperature to some extent. And that's temperature to some extent. And that's temperature to some extent. And that's why it's often recommended that people why it's often recommended that people why it's often recommended that people take them when they have a fever. Now, a take them when they have a fever. Now, a take them when they have a fever. Now, a number of athletes, especially endurance number of athletes, especially endurance number of athletes, especially endurance athletes, will rely on these non-steroid athletes, will rely on these non-steroid athletes, will rely on these non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs specifically to anti-inflammatory drugs specifically to anti-inflammatory drugs specifically to keep body temperature lower during long keep body temperature lower during long keep body temperature lower during long bouts of exertion. bouts of exertion. bouts of exertion. This is a little bit of a pharmacologic This is a little bit of a pharmacologic This is a little bit of a pharmacologic version of dumping heat instead of using version of dumping heat instead of using version of dumping heat instead of using palmar cooling, um, palmar cooling, um, palmar cooling, um, or, you know, face ice pack or, you know, face ice pack or, you know, face ice pack cooling, they're relying on pharmacology cooling, they're relying on pharmacology cooling, they're relying on pharmacology to drop their core body temperature. to drop their core body temperature. to drop their core body temperature. That has certain obvious advantages, That has certain obvious advantages, That has certain obvious advantages, lower temperature allows you to go lower temperature allows you to go lower temperature allows you to go further, harder, with more intensity. further, harder, with more intensity. further, harder, with more intensity. However, they do have effects on the However, they do have effects on the However, they do have effects on the liver, and they can also have effects on the and they can also have effects on the and they can also have effects on the kidneys, and during long bouts of kidneys, and during long bouts of kidneys, and during long bouts of exercise or even short bouts of exercise or even short bouts of exercise or even short bouts of exercise, water balance and salt balance exercise, water balance and salt balance exercise, water balance and salt balance are also going to be vital to maintain are also going to be vital to maintain are also going to be vital to maintain in order to perform well, in order to perform well, in order to perform well, generate the best muscle contraction, generate the best muscle contraction, generate the best muscle contraction, stay mentally alert, and also to stay mentally alert, and also to stay mentally alert, and also to stay alive. You probably want to think alive. You probably want to think alive. You probably want to think carefully about whether or not you want carefully about whether or not you want carefully about whether or not you want to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories before any training session just for the before any training session just for the before any training session just for the performance augmentation effect, unless performance augmentation effect, unless performance augmentation effect, unless you're working carefully with a coach. I you're working carefully with a coach. I you're working carefully with a coach. I personally am more a fan of cooling of personally am more a fan of cooling of personally am more a fan of cooling of the palms, cooling of the of the bottoms the palms, cooling of the of the bottoms the palms, cooling of the of the bottoms of my feet, right? Um, by placing them of my feet, right? Um, by placing them of my feet, right? Um, by placing them into a bucket or, uh, into a cool bath into a bucket or, uh, into a cool bath into a bucket or, uh, into a cool bath after training, or cooling the after training, or cooling the after training, or cooling the face after training, or sometimes even face after training, or sometimes even face after training, or sometimes even during training, it just seems like during training, it just seems like during training, it just seems like there's more of a margin to play with there's more of a margin to play with there's more of a margin to play with the variables to heat up the water or the variables to heat up the water or the variables to heat up the water or cool it down a little bit cool it down a little bit cool it down a little bit to include one palm or the other palm. to include one palm or the other palm. to include one palm or the other palm. There's just all sorts of uh There's just all sorts of uh There's just all sorts of uh good parameter spaces, we call it in good parameter spaces, we call it in good parameter spaces, we call it in science, that you can play with and work science, that you can play with and work science, that you can play with and work with to find what works for you. Whereas with to find what works for you. Whereas with to find what works for you. Whereas when you pop a pill, sure, you can when you pop a pill, sure, you can when you pop a pill, sure, you can adjust the dose and you can adjust it adjust the dose and you can adjust it adjust the dose and you can adjust it next time, but once it's in you, it's in next time, but once it's in you, it's in next time, but once it's in you, it's in you and there's going to be some period you and there's going to be some period you and there's going to be some period of time before you can modulate it. So, of time before you can modulate it. So, of time before you can modulate it. So, it doesn't give you a lot of opportunity it doesn't give you a lot of opportunity it doesn't give you a lot of opportunity to play scientist, which is what I like to play scientist, which is what I like to play scientist, which is what I like to do because what I've always trying to do because what I've always trying to do because what I've always trying to do is trying to dial in that the best do is trying to dial in that the best do is trying to dial in that the best protocols possible based on the protocols possible based on the protocols possible based on the mechanisms and data. And if you can do mechanisms and data. And if you can do mechanisms and data. And if you can do that moment to moment, that places you that moment to moment, that places you that moment to moment, that places you in a position of power. Once again, in a position of power. Once again, in a position of power. Once again, we've covered a lot of material. By now, we've covered a lot of material. By now, we've covered a lot of material. By now, after seeing this episode or listening after seeing this episode or listening after seeing this episode or listening to this episode, to this episode, to this episode, you should understand a lot about how you should understand a lot about how you should understand a lot about how your body heats and cools itself and the your body heats and cools itself and the your body heats and cools itself and the value of that for physical performance. value of that for physical performance. value of that for physical performance. I hope you also appreciate that you have I hope you also appreciate that you have I hope you also appreciate that you have tools at your disposal to vastly improve tools at your disposal to vastly improve tools at your disposal to vastly improve your physical performance. I've given your physical performance. I've given your physical performance. I've given you specific protocols and some you specific protocols and some you specific protocols and some direction, but I've also left it direction, but I've also left it direction, but I've also left it slightly vague because uh as I mentioned slightly vague because uh as I mentioned slightly vague because uh as I mentioned earlier, I don't know all the earlier, I don't know all the earlier, I don't know all the environmental conditions. I don't know environmental conditions. I don't know environmental conditions. I don't know how hot your yoga studio is or how cool how hot your yoga studio is or how cool how hot your yoga studio is or how cool your gym happens to be or your body your gym happens to be or your body your gym happens to be or your body temperature time of day. Remember, your temperature time of day. Remember, your temperature time of day. Remember, your temperature will vary according to time temperature will vary according to time temperature will vary according to time of day. Going forward, we're going to of day. Going forward, we're going to of day. Going forward, we're going to talk more about temperature and other talk more about temperature and other talk more about temperature and other ways to improve physical performance and ways to improve physical performance and ways to improve physical performance and skill learning. We're going to talk skill learning. We're going to talk skill learning. We're going to talk about specific ways to accelerate fat about specific ways to accelerate fat about specific ways to accelerate fat loss, to improve muscle growth, to loss, to improve muscle growth, to loss, to improve muscle growth, to improve suppleness and flexibility. improve suppleness and flexibility. improve suppleness and flexibility. These approaches and mechanisms are These approaches and mechanisms are These approaches and mechanisms are anchored deeply in neuroscience and anchored deeply in neuroscience and anchored deeply in neuroscience and physiology and the relationship between physiology and the relationship between physiology and the relationship between our peripheral organs, which include our peripheral organs, which include our peripheral organs, which include our skin, and our brain and all the organs skin, and our brain and all the organs skin, and our brain and all the organs in between. And last but not least, I to in between. And last but not least, I to in between. And last but not least, I to thank you for your time and attention. I thank you for your time and attention. I thank you for your time and attention. I realize this is a lot of information. I realize this is a lot of information. I realize this is a lot of information. I hope you'll find some of it to be hope you'll find some of it to be hope you'll find some of it to be actionable and useful for you and for actionable and useful for you and for actionable and useful for you and for people that you know. And as always, people that you know. And as always, people that you know. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.