Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Alan Aragon. Alan Aragon is one today is Alan Aragon. Alan Aragon is one today is Alan Aragon. Alan Aragon is one of the most influential and respected of the most influential and respected of the most influential and respected figures in the fields of fitness and figures in the fields of fitness and figures in the fields of fitness and nutrition. The reason for that is nutrition. The reason for that is nutrition. The reason for that is because of his strict reliance on because of his strict reliance on because of his strict reliance on evidence-based information and because evidence-based information and because evidence-based information and because he's co-authored some of the most highly he's co-authored some of the most highly he's co-authored some of the most highly cited and respected studies and reviews cited and respected studies and reviews cited and respected studies and reviews on nutrition and fitness. His expertise on nutrition and fitness. His expertise on nutrition and fitness. His expertise covers nutrition and training for women covers nutrition and training for women covers nutrition and training for women and for men and for anyone who's seeking and for men and for anyone who's seeking and for men and for anyone who's seeking better health, fat loss, muscle and better health, fat loss, muscle and better health, fat loss, muscle and strength gain, or all of the above. And strength gain, or all of the above. And strength gain, or all of the above. And in today's episode, we cover all of that in today's episode, we cover all of that in today's episode, we cover all of that and much more. Allan clarifies the myths and much more. Allan clarifies the myths and much more. Allan clarifies the myths and the facts around things like seed and the facts around things like seed and the facts around things like seed oils, whether or not it's better to do oils, whether or not it's better to do oils, whether or not it's better to do your workouts fasted for sake of fat your workouts fasted for sake of fat your workouts fasted for sake of fat burning, low calorie and artificial burning, low calorie and artificial burning, low calorie and artificial sweeteners, sugar, alcohol, collagen, sweeteners, sugar, alcohol, collagen, sweeteners, sugar, alcohol, collagen, and more. Allan also explains how to and more. Allan also explains how to and more. Allan also explains how to determine your actual protein needs. determine your actual protein needs. determine your actual protein needs. Despite all the discussion nowadays Despite all the discussion nowadays Despite all the discussion nowadays about protein, there's still a lot of about protein, there's still a lot of about protein, there's still a lot of confusion about this. Actually, he confusion about this. Actually, he confusion about this. Actually, he covers the real science on meal timing, covers the real science on meal timing, covers the real science on meal timing, protein and carbohydrate intake relative protein and carbohydrate intake relative protein and carbohydrate intake relative to your training, how women's hormone to your training, how women's hormone to your training, how women's hormone cycles impact their training and cycles impact their training and cycles impact their training and nutrition needs, and eating and training nutrition needs, and eating and training nutrition needs, and eating and training for body composition changes for anyone. for body composition changes for anyone. for body composition changes for anyone. There is just so much advice and There is just so much advice and There is just so much advice and information online, but also in the information online, but also in the information online, but also in the peer-reviewed literature on nutrition peer-reviewed literature on nutrition peer-reviewed literature on nutrition and fitness nowadays, which makes it and fitness nowadays, which makes it and fitness nowadays, which makes it very challenging for anyone seeking to very challenging for anyone seeking to very challenging for anyone seeking to understand and implement what really understand and implement what really understand and implement what really matters toward their fitness and body matters toward their fitness and body matters toward their fitness and body composition goals. If ever there was a composition goals. If ever there was a composition goals. If ever there was a voice of practical reason who is voice of practical reason who is voice of practical reason who is grounded in the peer-reviewed data, but grounded in the peer-reviewed data, but grounded in the peer-reviewed data, but who is also willing to acknowledge who is also willing to acknowledge who is also willing to acknowledge individual differences and preferences individual differences and preferences individual differences and preferences when it comes to fitness and nutrition, when it comes to fitness and nutrition, when it comes to fitness and nutrition, it's Alan Aragon. And today, he shares it's Alan Aragon. And today, he shares it's Alan Aragon. And today, he shares that information with us, and he also that information with us, and he also that information with us, and he also makes it clear and actionable as to what makes it clear and actionable as to what makes it clear and actionable as to what really works. Thanks to Allan, by the really works. Thanks to Allan, by the really works. Thanks to Allan, by the end of today's episode, you will be end of today's episode, you will be end of today's episode, you will be armed with the latest and best knowledge armed with the latest and best knowledge armed with the latest and best knowledge on nutrition and fitness that you can on nutrition and fitness that you can on nutrition and fitness that you can apply. Before we begin, I'd like to apply. Before we begin, I'd like to apply. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Alan And now for my discussion with Alan And now for my discussion with Alan Aragon. Alan Aragon, welcome. Aragon. Alan Aragon, welcome. Aragon. Alan Aragon, welcome. Andrew, it is awesome to be here. Like Andrew, it is awesome to be here. Like Andrew, it is awesome to be here. Like literally awesome. I'm not It's no literally awesome. I'm not It's no literally awesome. I'm not It's no exaggeration. This is uh I'm super exaggeration. This is uh I'm super exaggeration. This is uh I'm super stoked, man. Thank you for having me on stoked, man. Thank you for having me on stoked, man. Thank you for having me on the show. the show. the show. Yeah. Well, I've learned a ton from you Yeah. Well, I've learned a ton from you Yeah. Well, I've learned a ton from you through our online correspondents and through our online correspondents and through our online correspondents and we've met once before in person. Let's we've met once before in person. Let's we've met once before in person. Let's get down to some important um topics get down to some important um topics get down to some important um topics that are very actionable because this is that are very actionable because this is that are very actionable because this is what I love so much about your work. It what I love so much about your work. It what I love so much about your work. It clarifies so much of the confusion that clarifies so much of the confusion that clarifies so much of the confusion that exists out there. Uh I think this is exists out there. Uh I think this is exists out there. Uh I think this is really one of the signatures of your really one of the signatures of your really one of the signatures of your work is that it clarifies. work is that it clarifies. work is that it clarifies. Let's start off with something that many Let's start off with something that many Let's start off with something that many people have heard, which is that we can people have heard, which is that we can people have heard, which is that we can only assimilate 30 grams of protein per only assimilate 30 grams of protein per only assimilate 30 grams of protein per meal. And the simple question is, what meal. And the simple question is, what meal. And the simple question is, what constitutes a meal? Like, if I eat 30 constitutes a meal? Like, if I eat 30 constitutes a meal? Like, if I eat 30 grams of protein and an hour later I eat grams of protein and an hour later I eat grams of protein and an hour later I eat 30 grams of protein, did I just eat two 30 grams of protein, did I just eat two 30 grams of protein, did I just eat two meals? Can I assimilate 30 grams in meals? Can I assimilate 30 grams in meals? Can I assimilate 30 grams in each? And can I assimilate more than 30 each? And can I assimilate more than 30 each? And can I assimilate more than 30 grams of protein under certain grams of protein under certain grams of protein under certain circumstances? So, what's the deal with circumstances? So, what's the deal with circumstances? So, what's the deal with this protein assimilation thing? this protein assimilation thing? this protein assimilation thing? Okay. Well, you elucidated one of the Okay. Well, you elucidated one of the Okay. Well, you elucidated one of the issues right in the question. It's like, issues right in the question. It's like, issues right in the question. It's like, are we talking about isolated, quickly are we talking about isolated, quickly are we talking about isolated, quickly digesting protein or are we talking digesting protein or are we talking digesting protein or are we talking about a slower digesting protein or are about a slower digesting protein or are about a slower digesting protein or are we talking about any one of those within we talking about any one of those within we talking about any one of those within the context of a mixed macronutrient the context of a mixed macronutrient the context of a mixed macronutrient meal with carbohydrate, fat, and fiber? meal with carbohydrate, fat, and fiber? meal with carbohydrate, fat, and fiber? All of those conditions alter the All of those conditions alter the All of those conditions alter the behavior of what happens behavior of what happens behavior of what happens physiologically. And so the origin of the whole you know And so the origin of the whole you know And so the origin of the whole you know 25 grams of protein max is all you can 25 grams of protein max is all you can 25 grams of protein max is all you can use is the confusion of the um two use is the confusion of the um two use is the confusion of the um two separate concepts. So there is digestion separate concepts. So there is digestion separate concepts. So there is digestion and utilization at the kind of entire and utilization at the kind of entire and utilization at the kind of entire body level where protein has various body level where protein has various body level where protein has various metabolic fates for various systems. um metabolic fates for various systems. um metabolic fates for various systems. um and just various homeostatic needs of and just various homeostatic needs of and just various homeostatic needs of the body and then there is the specific the body and then there is the specific the body and then there is the specific phenomenon of the muscle anabolic phenomenon of the muscle anabolic phenomenon of the muscle anabolic response or muscle protein synthesis. So response or muscle protein synthesis. So response or muscle protein synthesis. So we have to separate okay digestion and we have to separate okay digestion and we have to separate okay digestion and absorption in general or muscle protein absorption in general or muscle protein absorption in general or muscle protein synthesis. So the 2530 g cut off it's synthesis. So the 2530 g cut off it's synthesis. So the 2530 g cut off it's usually listed like some people say 20 usually listed like some people say 20 usually listed like some people say 20 uh that refers specifically to muscle uh that refers specifically to muscle uh that refers specifically to muscle protein synthesis where there seems to protein synthesis where there seems to protein synthesis where there seems to be a plateau at 25ish 30-ish g. And we be a plateau at 25ish 30-ish g. And we be a plateau at 25ish 30-ish g. And we thought this all the way until gosh from thought this all the way until gosh from thought this all the way until gosh from uh the late 90s, early 2000s all the uh the late 90s, early 2000s all the uh the late 90s, early 2000s all the way up till 2016ish or so 2016 when way up till 2016ish or so 2016 when way up till 2016ish or so 2016 when Mcnotton and colleagues compared 20 g of Mcnotton and colleagues compared 20 g of Mcnotton and colleagues compared 20 g of protein versus 40 g of protein, but protein versus 40 g of protein, but protein versus 40 g of protein, but instead of doing what previous instead of doing what previous instead of doing what previous researchers did with the training bouts researchers did with the training bouts researchers did with the training bouts being very low volume, like 8 to 12 being very low volume, like 8 to 12 being very low volume, like 8 to 12 sets, you know, a couple a couple sets, you know, a couple a couple sets, you know, a couple a couple different leg exercises, you know, leg different leg exercises, you know, leg different leg exercises, you know, leg extension, is leg presses, 8 to 12 sets extension, is leg presses, 8 to 12 sets extension, is leg presses, 8 to 12 sets total, and then you assess the muscle total, and then you assess the muscle total, and then you assess the muscle protein synthetic response to the protein synthetic response to the protein synthetic response to the protein dose. What McNottton and protein dose. What McNottton and protein dose. What McNottton and colleagues did, they hit the subjects colleagues did, they hit the subjects colleagues did, they hit the subjects with a 24ish set regimen, full body. So with a 24ish set regimen, full body. So with a 24ish set regimen, full body. So it was a little bit more ecologically it was a little bit more ecologically it was a little bit more ecologically valid in the sense that they tried to um valid in the sense that they tried to um valid in the sense that they tried to um mirror what goes on in the real world mirror what goes on in the real world mirror what goes on in the real world with training regimens with people who with training regimens with people who with training regimens with people who are trying to build muscle and really are trying to build muscle and really are trying to build muscle and really elicit this anabolic response. So when elicit this anabolic response. So when elicit this anabolic response. So when they ran this experiment and they ran this experiment and they ran this experiment and they compared 20 versus 40 grams of protein, compared 20 versus 40 grams of protein, compared 20 versus 40 grams of protein, the 40 gram of protein actually had a the 40 gram of protein actually had a the 40 gram of protein actually had a greater muscle protein synthesis greater muscle protein synthesis greater muscle protein synthesis response than the 20 grams. And it took response than the 20 grams. And it took response than the 20 grams. And it took us all the way to 2016 to figure that us all the way to 2016 to figure that us all the way to 2016 to figure that out. And then a series of studies just out. And then a series of studies just out. And then a series of studies just kind of progressed from there and kind of progressed from there and kind of progressed from there and proceeded to kind of debunk this idea proceeded to kind of debunk this idea proceeded to kind of debunk this idea that muscle protein synthesis plateaus that muscle protein synthesis plateaus that muscle protein synthesis plateaus at 20 25 gram. But now and there's at 20 25 gram. But now and there's at 20 25 gram. But now and there's some interesting recent studies on that some interesting recent studies on that some interesting recent studies on that as well up to 100 grams as I recall. as well up to 100 grams as I recall. as well up to 100 grams as I recall. That's exactly the study I was going to That's exactly the study I was going to That's exactly the study I was going to bring up. That's by uh Jordan Tromlan bring up. That's by uh Jordan Tromlan bring up. That's by uh Jordan Tromlan and colleagues where they compared a 25 and colleagues where they compared a 25 and colleagues where they compared a 25 gram dose with a 100 gram dose post gram dose with a 100 gram dose post gram dose with a 100 gram dose post exercise. They used a slow digesting exercise. They used a slow digesting exercise. They used a slow digesting protein. They used milk protein which is protein. They used milk protein which is protein. They used milk protein which is 80% casein which is a slow digesting 20% 80% casein which is a slow digesting 20% 80% casein which is a slow digesting 20% whey which is fast. So mostly a slow whey which is fast. So mostly a slow whey which is fast. So mostly a slow digesting protein and there was digesting protein and there was digesting protein and there was significantly greater muscle protein significantly greater muscle protein significantly greater muscle protein synthesis with the 100 gram dose synthesis with the 100 gram dose synthesis with the 100 gram dose compared to the 25 gram dose. compared to the 25 gram dose. compared to the 25 gram dose. But my big issue with that study is they But my big issue with that study is they But my big issue with that study is they really needed to include an they really needed to include an they really needed to include an intermediate dose to see whether there intermediate dose to see whether there intermediate dose to see whether there would have been a plateau in MPS with would have been a plateau in MPS with would have been a plateau in MPS with something like let's say 40 or 50 grams. something like let's say 40 or 50 grams. something like let's say 40 or 50 grams. And that's because there's a lot of And that's because there's a lot of And that's because there's a lot of other research seeing that plateau other research seeing that plateau other research seeing that plateau somewhere between 30 and 50 grams. So I somewhere between 30 and 50 grams. So I somewhere between 30 and 50 grams. So I wish Jordan at all included an wish Jordan at all included an wish Jordan at all included an intermediate dose with that. intermediate dose with that. intermediate dose with that. Maybe a future study. Let me just uh Maybe a future study. Let me just uh Maybe a future study. Let me just uh pause you for a second and ask a couple pause you for a second and ask a couple pause you for a second and ask a couple questions. Sure. Um, if you can give an questions. Sure. Um, if you can give an questions. Sure. Um, if you can give an acrosstheboard recommendation of how acrosstheboard recommendation of how acrosstheboard recommendation of how much protein people should consume much protein people should consume much protein people should consume postresistance training, let's just postresistance training, let's just postresistance training, let's just leave cardiovascular training separately leave cardiovascular training separately leave cardiovascular training separately for the moment. for the moment. for the moment. Postresistance training, what would that Postresistance training, what would that Postresistance training, what would that number be? Would it be 20, 30, 50 or number be? Would it be 20, 30, 50 or number be? Would it be 20, 30, 50 or 100? Should it scale with body weight? 100? Should it scale with body weight? 100? Should it scale with body weight? And how long after training should one And how long after training should one And how long after training should one consume that protein if the goal is consume that protein if the goal is consume that protein if the goal is muscle protein synthesis? to maximize muscle protein synthesis? to maximize muscle protein synthesis? to maximize muscle protein synthesis regardless of muscle protein synthesis regardless of muscle protein synthesis regardless of whether it's post exercise and MPS whether it's post exercise and MPS whether it's post exercise and MPS will be larger with the protein dosing will be larger with the protein dosing will be larger with the protein dosing post exercise than at resting or post exercise than at resting or post exercise than at resting or fasting to maximize MPS. We really haven't seen to maximize MPS. We really haven't seen to maximize MPS. We really haven't seen doses uh beyond uh 50-ish grams 30 or doses uh beyond uh 50-ish grams 30 or doses uh beyond uh 50-ish grams 30 or so to 50. Um my colleague Brad Show so to 50. Um my colleague Brad Show so to 50. Um my colleague Brad Show Choenfeld and I we scoured the Choenfeld and I we scoured the Choenfeld and I we scoured the literature and we wrote this paper on literature and we wrote this paper on literature and we wrote this paper on what is the maximal what is the maximal what is the maximal anabolic dose of protein per meal for anabolic dose of protein per meal for anabolic dose of protein per meal for the goal of muscle building and we the goal of muscle building and we the goal of muscle building and we boiled it down to somewhere between 04 boiled it down to somewhere between 04 boiled it down to somewhere between 04 to roughly 6 g per kilogram of body to roughly 6 g per kilogram of body to roughly 6 g per kilogram of body weight. And so in uh freedom units uh weight. And so in uh freedom units uh weight. And so in uh freedom units uh we're talking 0.2 to 0.25 gram per pound we're talking 0.2 to 0.25 gram per pound we're talking 0.2 to 0.25 gram per pound and that is what appears to max out and that is what appears to max out and that is what appears to max out muscle protein synthes. muscle protein synthes. muscle protein synthes. 2 to 0.5 grams per 2 to 0.5 grams per 2 to 0.5 grams per 2 to 0.25.25. 2 to 0.25.25. 2 to 0.25.25. Yes. Okay. Yes. Okay. Yes. Okay. Yeah. So like about a quarter of your of Yeah. So like about a quarter of your of Yeah. So like about a quarter of your of your body weight in pounds if you're your body weight in pounds if you're your body weight in pounds if you're looking at grams of protein to maximize looking at grams of protein to maximize looking at grams of protein to maximize muscle protein. That's Yes. Per meal. muscle protein. That's Yes. Per meal. muscle protein. That's Yes. Per meal. Okay. I sorry because I think many Okay. I sorry because I think many Okay. I sorry because I think many people including myself are going to say people including myself are going to say people including myself are going to say okay but this is only in the meal post okay but this is only in the meal post okay but this is only in the meal post workout. I mean I wake up in the workout. I mean I wake up in the workout. I mean I wake up in the morning and I try to work out before I morning and I try to work out before I morning and I try to work out before I eat because I like to do that. Sometimes eat because I like to do that. Sometimes eat because I like to do that. Sometimes I'll have a little bit of protein but I'll have a little bit of protein but I'll have a little bit of protein but let's assume two conditions just for let's assume two conditions just for let's assume two conditions just for simplicity. somebody did resistance training in the somebody did resistance training in the somebody did resistance training in the previous two hours previous two hours previous two hours or and they're trying to evaluate or and they're trying to evaluate or and they're trying to evaluate how much protein to eat at that meal in how much protein to eat at that meal in how much protein to eat at that meal in order to maximize muscle protein order to maximize muscle protein order to maximize muscle protein synthesis or they're eating a meal synthesis or they're eating a meal synthesis or they're eating a meal separate for on a day they're not separate for on a day they're not separate for on a day they're not resistance training, right? So, and then resistance training, right? So, and then resistance training, right? So, and then as just kind of a generic example of a as just kind of a generic example of a as just kind of a generic example of a meal that doesn't follow resistance meal that doesn't follow resistance meal that doesn't follow resistance training in the window of 2 hours or so, training in the window of 2 hours or so, training in the window of 2 hours or so, how much protein should be consumed at how much protein should be consumed at how much protein should be consumed at these two different meals? these two different meals? these two different meals? The answer to that is so weird, Andrew. The answer to that is so weird, Andrew. The answer to that is so weird, Andrew. Honestly, um Honestly, um Honestly, um really, why does it have to be so weird? really, why does it have to be so weird? really, why does it have to be so weird? It's freaking weird and it's It's freaking weird and it's It's freaking weird and it's complicated. Oh. complicated. Oh. complicated. Oh. Uh, that's because, Uh, that's because, Uh, that's because, okay, so okay, so okay, so if we go all the way back to 2003, 2004, if we go all the way back to 2003, 2004, if we go all the way back to 2003, 2004, and then we walk forward 20 years. Um, and then we walk forward 20 years. Um, and then we walk forward 20 years. Um, so John Ivy and Robert Portman put out so John Ivy and Robert Portman put out so John Ivy and Robert Portman put out this book called Nutrient Timing and this book called Nutrient Timing and this book called Nutrient Timing and they focused on this narrow post they focused on this narrow post they focused on this narrow post exercise window of opportunity they exercise window of opportunity they exercise window of opportunity they called it. So the anabolic window called it. So the anabolic window called it. So the anabolic window and the concept was you needed to and the concept was you needed to and the concept was you needed to consume protein and quickly digesting consume protein and quickly digesting consume protein and quickly digesting carbs. So a fast digesting protein, carbs. So a fast digesting protein, carbs. So a fast digesting protein, lightning fast, highly glycemic, highly lightning fast, highly glycemic, highly lightning fast, highly glycemic, highly insulinic carb source together within insulinic carb source together within insulinic carb source together within 30 to 60 minutes post exercise in within 30 to 60 minutes post exercise in within 30 to 60 minutes post exercise in order to maximize the anabolic response order to maximize the anabolic response order to maximize the anabolic response to maximize recovery and then maximize to maximize recovery and then maximize to maximize recovery and then maximize your muscle gain. So that was their your muscle gain. So that was their your muscle gain. So that was their hypothesis. This was all based on subjects who were This was all based on subjects who were This was all based on subjects who were training after an overnight fast. training after an overnight fast. training after an overnight fast. And so what happens when you consume a And so what happens when you consume a And so what happens when you consume a meal pre-ex exercise or at any point, meal pre-ex exercise or at any point, meal pre-ex exercise or at any point, let's say a regular old mixed meal, let's say a regular old mixed meal, let's say a regular old mixed meal, medium size, the anabolic slash anti medium size, the anabolic slash anti medium size, the anabolic slash anti catabolic effect of that meal is going catabolic effect of that meal is going catabolic effect of that meal is going to last anywhere from 3 to 6 hours to last anywhere from 3 to 6 hours to last anywhere from 3 to 6 hours depending on the size of the meal. So, depending on the size of the meal. So, depending on the size of the meal. So, when you're somebody whose goal it is when you're somebody whose goal it is when you're somebody whose goal it is above all the other goals is to gain above all the other goals is to gain above all the other goals is to gain muscle at the quickest rate possible, muscle at the quickest rate possible, muscle at the quickest rate possible, you're almost never going to train you're almost never going to train you're almost never going to train fasted. You're going to have a pre-ex fasted. You're going to have a pre-ex fasted. You're going to have a pre-ex exercise meal at some point, at least a exercise meal at some point, at least a exercise meal at some point, at least a couple hours pre-ex exercise. couple hours pre-ex exercise. couple hours pre-ex exercise. And so, when you're training, you And so, when you're training, you And so, when you're training, you actually still have these substrates in actually still have these substrates in actually still have these substrates in circulation through the exercise bout. circulation through the exercise bout. circulation through the exercise bout. And often times like if somebody has a And often times like if somebody has a And often times like if somebody has a meal like an hour pre-ex exercise, meal like an hour pre-ex exercise, meal like an hour pre-ex exercise, they're still absorbing that pre-ex they're still absorbing that pre-ex they're still absorbing that pre-ex exercise meal post exercise. So we exercise meal post exercise. So we exercise meal post exercise. So we looked at this whole post exercise looked at this whole post exercise looked at this whole post exercise period as something that just doesn't period as something that just doesn't period as something that just doesn't necessarily have any external validity. necessarily have any external validity. necessarily have any external validity. It doesn't have relevance to real world It doesn't have relevance to real world It doesn't have relevance to real world training conditions where people are not training conditions where people are not training conditions where people are not training fasted. And so what we did was training fasted. And so what we did was training fasted. And so what we did was we did a couple of things. First, we did a couple of things. First, we did a couple of things. First, we wrote a narrative review criticizing the wrote a narrative review criticizing the wrote a narrative review criticizing the post exercise anabolic window. And this post exercise anabolic window. And this post exercise anabolic window. And this was in 2013. We kind of pissed off all was in 2013. We kind of pissed off all was in 2013. We kind of pissed off all the researchers who did the seminal work the researchers who did the seminal work the researchers who did the seminal work in that area. in that area. in that area. Sensing a theme here, just teasing. Sensing a theme here, just teasing. Sensing a theme here, just teasing. And then we actually we did a And then we actually we did a And then we actually we did a metaanalysis of the existing literature metaanalysis of the existing literature metaanalysis of the existing literature looking at the anabolic window thing. looking at the anabolic window thing. looking at the anabolic window thing. And um for the listeners um a And um for the listeners um a And um for the listeners um a metaanalysis is a study of the studies. metaanalysis is a study of the studies. metaanalysis is a study of the studies. you collect all of the studies on a you collect all of the studies on a you collect all of the studies on a given question and then you kind of see given question and then you kind of see given question and then you kind of see you look at you know effect sizes and you look at you know effect sizes and you look at you know effect sizes and you sort of see where the evidence leans you sort of see where the evidence leans you sort of see where the evidence leans whether there's an you know a whether there's an you know a whether there's an you know a significant or meaningful effect or not. significant or meaningful effect or not. significant or meaningful effect or not. And so we did this meta analysis and we And so we did this meta analysis and we And so we did this meta analysis and we collected studies that compared a we collected studies that compared a we collected studies that compared a protein timing condition where protein timing condition where protein timing condition where protein was timed within an hour either pre- or was timed within an hour either pre- or was timed within an hour either pre- or post exercise and then the control group post exercise and then the control group post exercise and then the control group of the study would have to have protein of the study would have to have protein of the study would have to have protein a minimum of two hours of nutrient a minimum of two hours of nutrient a minimum of two hours of nutrient neglect on both sides of the training neglect on both sides of the training neglect on both sides of the training bout. So we collected all the studies bout. So we collected all the studies bout. So we collected all the studies that compared these conditions and um we that compared these conditions and um we that compared these conditions and um we had a brilliant stats guy James Kger. had a brilliant stats guy James Kger. had a brilliant stats guy James Kger. He ran the regression analysis and He ran the regression analysis and He ran the regression analysis and essentially we found that as long as essentially we found that as long as essentially we found that as long as total daily protein was about 1.66 total daily protein was about 1.66 total daily protein was about 1.66 1.7 g per kilogram of body weight. So 1.7 g per kilogram of body weight. So 1.7 g per kilogram of body weight. So about.7 g per pound. As long as total about.7 g per pound. As long as total about.7 g per pound. As long as total daily protein was at that or more, then daily protein was at that or more, then daily protein was at that or more, then the timing relative to the training bout the timing relative to the training bout the timing relative to the training bout didn't make a difference. This is didn't make a difference. This is didn't make a difference. This is important for people to hear because important for people to hear because important for people to hear because what this translates to in my ears is a what this translates to in my ears is a what this translates to in my ears is a very simple takeaway, which is that you very simple takeaway, which is that you very simple takeaway, which is that you don't need to obsess about the don't need to obsess about the don't need to obsess about the post-training anabolic window, post-training anabolic window, post-training anabolic window, especially if you're especially if you're especially if you're eating prior to training. eating prior to training. eating prior to training. Yes. Because you have nutrients circulating. Because you have nutrients circulating. Because you have nutrients circulating. Now, if you eat your last bite of food Now, if you eat your last bite of food Now, if you eat your last bite of food at 8:00 p.m. and you wake up at 7 a.m. at 8:00 p.m. and you wake up at 7 a.m. at 8:00 p.m. and you wake up at 7 a.m. and you're training at 10:00 a.m., then and you're training at 10:00 a.m., then and you're training at 10:00 a.m., then perhaps by time you finish your leg perhaps by time you finish your leg perhaps by time you finish your leg workout or whatever resistance training workout or whatever resistance training workout or whatever resistance training workout, you would want to prioritize workout, you would want to prioritize workout, you would want to prioritize getting some protein and other nutrients getting some protein and other nutrients getting some protein and other nutrients into your system. What you're saying into your system. What you're saying into your system. What you're saying basically um it makes it is so logical basically um it makes it is so logical basically um it makes it is so logical now that I hear it, uh which is that you now that I hear it, uh which is that you now that I hear it, uh which is that you have nutrients circulating in your body have nutrients circulating in your body have nutrients circulating in your body and stored in your glycogen and so and stored in your glycogen and so and stored in your glycogen and so you're pulling from a reservoir. If you're pulling from a reservoir. If you're pulling from a reservoir. If fasted doesn't necessarily mean fasted doesn't necessarily mean fasted doesn't necessarily mean starving. General rule of thumb, if you're burping General rule of thumb, if you're burping General rule of thumb, if you're burping your pre-ex exercise meal towards the your pre-ex exercise meal towards the your pre-ex exercise meal towards the end of your workout, then you don't need end of your workout, then you don't need end of your workout, then you don't need to run towards this. to run towards this. to run towards this. This is why I don't uh like to ingest This is why I don't uh like to ingest This is why I don't uh like to ingest anything prior to training. anything prior to training. anything prior to training. Okay, besides caffeine, electrolytes, and besides caffeine, electrolytes, and besides caffeine, electrolytes, and water. The reason why that, you know, water. The reason why that, you know, water. The reason why that, you know, there's a weird and complex answer there's a weird and complex answer there's a weird and complex answer with this is like a single resistance with this is like a single resistance with this is like a single resistance training bout causes this sort of, you training bout causes this sort of, you training bout causes this sort of, you know, this interesting cascade of things know, this interesting cascade of things know, this interesting cascade of things where muscle protein synthesis will peak where muscle protein synthesis will peak where muscle protein synthesis will peak 24 hours after the resistance training 24 hours after the resistance training 24 hours after the resistance training bout. And it'll take as long as 48 to 72 bout. And it'll take as long as 48 to 72 bout. And it'll take as long as 48 to 72 hours to kind of come down to hours to kind of come down to hours to kind of come down to baseline levels to where you had not baseline levels to where you had not baseline levels to where you had not done the resistance training bout. So, done the resistance training bout. So, done the resistance training bout. So, so the anabolic window is actually not so the anabolic window is actually not so the anabolic window is actually not hours but days. So, it it's more a hours but days. So, it it's more a hours but days. So, it it's more a matter of making sure you are matter of making sure you are matter of making sure you are consuming well the first in the consuming well the first in the consuming well the first in the order of importance is total daily order of importance is total daily order of importance is total daily protein. So there's a this hierarchy of protein. So there's a this hierarchy of protein. So there's a this hierarchy of importance. If you get total daily importance. If you get total daily importance. If you get total daily protein right, then the timing of the protein right, then the timing of the protein right, then the timing of the constituent doses of the total are just constituent doses of the total are just constituent doses of the total are just a distant secondary concern. Even if a distant secondary concern. Even if a distant secondary concern. Even if it's only distributed across two meals it's only distributed across two meals it's only distributed across two meals like let's say um I train in the like let's say um I train in the like let's say um I train in the morning, maybe I have a some caffeine and a scoop maybe I have a some caffeine and a scoop maybe I have a some caffeine and a scoop of a you know protein shake before like of a you know protein shake before like of a you know protein shake before like with some whey protein, maybe a few with some whey protein, maybe a few with some whey protein, maybe a few almonds to you know slow digestion down almonds to you know slow digestion down almonds to you know slow digestion down or whatever. um train and then I don't or whatever. um train and then I don't or whatever. um train and then I don't get to eat until 300 p.m. get to eat until 300 p.m. get to eat until 300 p.m. Mhm. And I only train for an hour, let's say. And I only train for an hour, let's say. And I only train for an hour, let's say. And then at 3 p.m. I have a little bit And then at 3 p.m. I have a little bit And then at 3 p.m. I have a little bit of uh chicken breast and a salad, maybe of uh chicken breast and a salad, maybe of uh chicken breast and a salad, maybe a slice of bread cuz I'm on the fly. a slice of bread cuz I'm on the fly. a slice of bread cuz I'm on the fly. And then that night I get home and I'm And then that night I get home and I'm And then that night I get home and I'm hungry and I eat hungry and I eat hungry and I eat two ribeye steaks. I'm exaggerating two ribeye steaks. I'm exaggerating two ribeye steaks. I'm exaggerating here. I wouldn't do that. I'd like to, here. I wouldn't do that. I'd like to, here. I wouldn't do that. I'd like to, but I don't. but I don't. but I don't. Those two ribeye steaks probably give Those two ribeye steaks probably give Those two ribeye steaks probably give you 75 or even 100 grams of protein and you 75 or even 100 grams of protein and you 75 or even 100 grams of protein and a bunch of other things, too. Can you a bunch of other things, too. Can you a bunch of other things, too. Can you use all of that for muscle protein use all of that for muscle protein use all of that for muscle protein synthesis? The short answer is yes. Um, the nuanced The short answer is yes. Um, the nuanced The short answer is yes. Um, the nuanced answer is let me tell you about a couple answer is let me tell you about a couple answer is let me tell you about a couple studies. Okay. Well, as you do that, but let Okay. Well, as you do that, but let Okay. Well, as you do that, but let me ask you a little differently. Not to me ask you a little differently. Not to me ask you a little differently. Not to not to shut down the emphasis on not to shut down the emphasis on not to shut down the emphasis on studies because that's why you're here, studies because that's why you're here, studies because that's why you're here, but is there anything wrong with consuming a is there anything wrong with consuming a is there anything wrong with consuming a high or very high protein meal every high or very high protein meal every high or very high protein meal every once in a while, once in a while, once in a while, especially if you're not eating much or especially if you're not eating much or especially if you're not eating much or consuming much protein throughout the consuming much protein throughout the consuming much protein throughout the day. And the reason I ask this is for day. And the reason I ask this is for day. And the reason I ask this is for practical reasons. Many people find it practical reasons. Many people find it practical reasons. Many people find it difficult to distribute their protein difficult to distribute their protein difficult to distribute their protein evenly through the day. Mhm. evenly through the day. Mhm. evenly through the day. Mhm. Many people also find it difficult to Many people also find it difficult to Many people also find it difficult to get enough protein get enough protein get enough protein in the middle of the day meals or the in the middle of the day meals or the in the middle of the day meals or the morning meals. It can be done and I know morning meals. It can be done and I know morning meals. It can be done and I know people will say, "Well, you have some people will say, "Well, you have some people will say, "Well, you have some eggs and some protein." There ways to do eggs and some protein." There ways to do eggs and some protein." There ways to do it, sure. it, sure. it, sure. But at least in this country, most But at least in this country, most But at least in this country, most people tend to emphasize dinner as their people tend to emphasize dinner as their people tend to emphasize dinner as their largest meal for better or worse. And largest meal for better or worse. And largest meal for better or worse. And you can usually order high quality, high you can usually order high quality, high you can usually order high quality, high protein foods in a restaurant like a protein foods in a restaurant like a protein foods in a restaurant like a steak, chicken breast, fish, etc. steak, chicken breast, fish, etc. steak, chicken breast, fish, etc. So a lot of people stack their protein So a lot of people stack their protein So a lot of people stack their protein heavily towards the end of the day. heavily towards the end of the day. heavily towards the end of the day. Assuming caloric load is appropriate Assuming caloric load is appropriate Assuming caloric load is appropriate etc. Is there anything fundamentally etc. Is there anything fundamentally etc. Is there anything fundamentally wrong or bad about doing that from the wrong or bad about doing that from the wrong or bad about doing that from the perspective of body composition and perspective of body composition and perspective of body composition and health? I would say no. Um and then there's I would say no. Um and then there's I would say no. Um and then there's levels to it, right? Um like what levels to it, right? Um like what levels to it, right? Um like what population are we looking at? Are we population are we looking at? Are we population are we looking at? Are we looking at guys who are trying to win a looking at guys who are trying to win a looking at guys who are trying to win a national competition in bodybuilding for national competition in bodybuilding for national competition in bodybuilding for example? No, we're talking about men and women. No, we're talking about men and women. No, we're talking about men and women. um teens up to 75 years old who are um teens up to 75 years old who are um teens up to 75 years old who are trying to be fit by doing a combination trying to be fit by doing a combination trying to be fit by doing a combination of resistance training and hopefully of resistance training and hopefully of resistance training and hopefully some cardiovascular training as well some cardiovascular training as well some cardiovascular training as well trying to get their steps in. We're trying to get their steps in. We're trying to get their steps in. We're talking about the general population, talking about the general population, talking about the general population, not somebody who's trying to win a not somebody who's trying to win a not somebody who's trying to win a physique competition or run a marathon physique competition or run a marathon physique competition or run a marathon or ultra. or ultra. or ultra. Okay. So, Okay. So, Okay. So, generally, no. And I want to qualify generally, no. And I want to qualify generally, no. And I want to qualify that a little bit. So that a little bit. So that a little bit. So my colleagues and I did a study testing my colleagues and I did a study testing my colleagues and I did a study testing out this anabolic window thing. This was out this anabolic window thing. This was out this anabolic window thing. This was 2014 where we tested immediate pre-ex 2014 where we tested immediate pre-ex 2014 where we tested immediate pre-ex exercise 25 grams of whey protein versus exercise 25 grams of whey protein versus exercise 25 grams of whey protein versus immediate post exercise 25 grams of whey immediate post exercise 25 grams of whey immediate post exercise 25 grams of whey protein. Uh we ran the experiment for 10 protein. Uh we ran the experiment for 10 protein. Uh we ran the experiment for 10 weeks. Yeah. 10 weeks. Yep. Eight or 10. weeks. Yeah. 10 weeks. Yep. Eight or 10. weeks. Yeah. 10 weeks. Yep. Eight or 10. Probably 10. um and there was no Probably 10. um and there was no Probably 10. um and there was no significant advantage of either um significant advantage of either um significant advantage of either um condition. So and our thinking was condition. So and our thinking was condition. So and our thinking was look everybody's harping about this post look everybody's harping about this post look everybody's harping about this post exercise anabolic window. So it really I exercise anabolic window. So it really I exercise anabolic window. So it really I if there is this opportunity to consume if there is this opportunity to consume if there is this opportunity to consume nutrients at prime time to feed the nutrients at prime time to feed the nutrients at prime time to feed the hungry muscles then you would want to hungry muscles then you would want to hungry muscles then you would want to focus on availability focus on availability focus on availability of nutrients in circulation and not when of nutrients in circulation and not when of nutrients in circulation and not when you actually consume the nutrients you actually consume the nutrients you actually consume the nutrients because there's this time course for because there's this time course for because there's this time course for them to for the nutrients to peak in them to for the nutrients to peak in them to for the nutrients to peak in circulation. It's usually somewhere circulation. It's usually somewhere circulation. It's usually somewhere between one and two hours after you between one and two hours after you between one and two hours after you ingest the stuff. So how about we ingest the stuff. So how about we ingest the stuff. So how about we consume protein immediately pre and then consume protein immediately pre and then consume protein immediately pre and then it'll be peaking in the blood like an it'll be peaking in the blood like an it'll be peaking in the blood like an hourish later and then you'll be right hourish later and then you'll be right hourish later and then you'll be right in the anabolic window. So we didn't see in the anabolic window. So we didn't see in the anabolic window. So we didn't see any advantage to the immediate pre-proin any advantage to the immediate pre-proin any advantage to the immediate pre-proin versus the immediate post protein. That versus the immediate post protein. That versus the immediate post protein. That was in 2014. So fast forward to 2024ish was in 2014. So fast forward to 2024ish was in 2014. So fast forward to 2024ish 23 24 uh one of my colleagues Yasin 23 24 uh one of my colleagues Yasin 23 24 uh one of my colleagues Yasin Lockach he took our pre-post model Lockach he took our pre-post model Lockach he took our pre-post model and he kind of like he ran his own uh and he kind of like he ran his own uh and he kind of like he ran his own uh randomized control trial version of it randomized control trial version of it randomized control trial version of it but he wanted to kind of exploit the but he wanted to kind of exploit the but he wanted to kind of exploit the possibility of further protein neglect possibility of further protein neglect possibility of further protein neglect on both sides of the training bout. So on both sides of the training bout. So on both sides of the training bout. So he compared an immediate pre um and post he compared an immediate pre um and post he compared an immediate pre um and post immediate pre and post 25 grams of immediate pre and post 25 grams of immediate pre and post 25 grams of protein sandwiching the resistance protein sandwiching the resistance protein sandwiching the resistance training bout with a group that training bout with a group that training bout with a group that neglected all nutrients for 3 hours neglected all nutrients for 3 hours neglected all nutrients for 3 hours on both sides of the resistance training on both sides of the resistance training on both sides of the resistance training bout. Total daily protein was optimized bout. Total daily protein was optimized bout. Total daily protein was optimized at around close to a gram per pound two at around close to a gram per pound two at around close to a gram per pound two twoish grams per kilogram of body twoish grams per kilogram of body twoish grams per kilogram of body weight. no significant difference, no weight. no significant difference, no weight. no significant difference, no meaningful difference in muscle size and meaningful difference in muscle size and meaningful difference in muscle size and strength gains at the end of the I strength gains at the end of the I strength gains at the end of the I believe it was a 10 or 12 week study. believe it was a 10 or 12 week study. believe it was a 10 or 12 week study. That's very reassuring to me. I mean, That's very reassuring to me. I mean, That's very reassuring to me. I mean, because I have a busy schedule as do because I have a busy schedule as do because I have a busy schedule as do many people and sometimes I'm a little many people and sometimes I'm a little many people and sometimes I'm a little hungry before I train and I'll want hungry before I train and I'll want hungry before I train and I'll want scoop of protein powder and I'll think, scoop of protein powder and I'll think, scoop of protein powder and I'll think, oh, is it better? We'll talk about oh, is it better? We'll talk about oh, is it better? We'll talk about whether or not it's better to train whether or not it's better to train whether or not it's better to train fasted. Uh, for all sorts of reasons. fasted. Uh, for all sorts of reasons. fasted. Uh, for all sorts of reasons. Sometimes people don't like to train Sometimes people don't like to train Sometimes people don't like to train fasted. Sometimes people don't like to fasted. Sometimes people don't like to fasted. Sometimes people don't like to eat immediately after they train. eat immediately after they train. eat immediately after they train. Sometimes you have to shower up and head to dinner you have to shower up and head to dinner you have to shower up and head to dinner after you train or shower up and head to after you train or shower up and head to after you train or shower up and head to a meeting and you a meeting and you a meeting and you don't have the opportunity to ingest the don't have the opportunity to ingest the don't have the opportunity to ingest the this in the quote unquote anabolic this in the quote unquote anabolic this in the quote unquote anabolic window. So what I'm hearing through all window. So what I'm hearing through all window. So what I'm hearing through all these answers, correct me if I'm wrong, these answers, correct me if I'm wrong, these answers, correct me if I'm wrong, is that there's tremendous flexibility is that there's tremendous flexibility is that there's tremendous flexibility as to when you consume the protein that as to when you consume the protein that as to when you consume the protein that we all need, but that it the overall we all need, but that it the overall we all need, but that it the overall protein requirement seems to center protein requirement seems to center protein requirement seems to center somewhere around.7 somewhere around.7 somewhere around.7 to one gram per pound of body weight to one gram per pound of body weight to one gram per pound of body weight somewhere in there total per day. somewhere in there total per day. somewhere in there total per day. If the amount in a given meal is a bit If the amount in a given meal is a bit If the amount in a given meal is a bit higher than 20 or 30 grams, higher than 20 or 30 grams, higher than 20 or 30 grams, you're fine. If it's a bit lower, you're fine. If it's a bit lower, you're fine. If it's a bit lower, you're probably fine. But the thing that also I probably fine. But the thing that also I probably fine. But the thing that also I believe needs highlighting that most believe needs highlighting that most believe needs highlighting that most people don't talk about is people don't talk about is people don't talk about is distinguishing between what's in distinguishing between what's in distinguishing between what's in circulation versus when one ingests circulation versus when one ingests circulation versus when one ingests something. Like we'd love to think that something. Like we'd love to think that something. Like we'd love to think that we drink 30 gram of protein or eat the we drink 30 gram of protein or eat the we drink 30 gram of protein or eat the chicken breast or the piece of steak or chicken breast or the piece of steak or chicken breast or the piece of steak or have the eggs and suddenly those amino have the eggs and suddenly those amino have the eggs and suddenly those amino acids are available. acids are available. acids are available. And it makes so much more rational sense And it makes so much more rational sense And it makes so much more rational sense now that you describe it that eating now that you describe it that eating now that you describe it that eating first makes those amino acids available first makes those amino acids available first makes those amino acids available for the muscles a couple hours later. for the muscles a couple hours later. for the muscles a couple hours later. Yeah. and we just don't learn about it Yeah. and we just don't learn about it Yeah. and we just don't learn about it that way. So, I'm very grateful that way. So, I'm very grateful that way. So, I'm very grateful that you're bringing it up that way. I you're bringing it up that way. I you're bringing it up that way. I realize we could probably drill into realize we could probably drill into realize we could probably drill into protein requirements um ad nauseium, but protein requirements um ad nauseium, but protein requirements um ad nauseium, but think about it this way. The way I think about it this way. The way I think about it this way. The way I like to put it is like to put it is like to put it is total daily protein is the cake. total daily protein is the cake. total daily protein is the cake. The specific timing of protein relative The specific timing of protein relative The specific timing of protein relative to the training belt, that is the icing to the training belt, that is the icing to the training belt, that is the icing on the cake, and it's a very thin layer on the cake, and it's a very thin layer on the cake, and it's a very thin layer of icing on the cake. of icing on the cake. of icing on the cake. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Carbon. acknowledge one of our sponsors, Carbon. acknowledge one of our sponsors, Carbon. Carbon is a diet coaching app built by Carbon is a diet coaching app built by Carbon is a diet coaching app built by nutrition expert Dr. Lane Norton. Now, nutrition expert Dr. Lane Norton. Now, nutrition expert Dr. Lane Norton. Now, I've used Carbon for more than three I've used Carbon for more than three I've used Carbon for more than three years now, and I have to say, having years now, and I have to say, having years now, and I have to say, having been interested in fitness and in my been interested in fitness and in my been interested in fitness and in my nutrition for more than three decades, nutrition for more than three decades, nutrition for more than three decades, it's among the most powerful tools for it's among the most powerful tools for it's among the most powerful tools for nutrition coaching and effective weight nutrition coaching and effective weight nutrition coaching and effective weight management that I've ever encountered. management that I've ever encountered. management that I've ever encountered. Especially if your goal is like mine, Especially if your goal is like mine, Especially if your goal is like mine, which is to maintain or build muscle which is to maintain or build muscle which is to maintain or build muscle while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning 50 years old this September. And even 50 years old this September. And even 50 years old this September. And even though I consider myself in pretty good though I consider myself in pretty good though I consider myself in pretty good shape and I've been training for a long shape and I've been training for a long shape and I've been training for a long time and trying to eat right, one of my time and trying to eat right, one of my time and trying to eat right, one of my goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best shape of my life. To do that, I'm shape of my life. To do that, I'm shape of my life. To do that, I'm dialing in my nutrition using carbon dialing in my nutrition using carbon dialing in my nutrition using carbon with the goals of increasing my muscle with the goals of increasing my muscle with the goals of increasing my muscle mass, increasing my strength while also mass, increasing my strength while also mass, increasing my strength while also decreasing my body fat. I've been raving decreasing my body fat. I've been raving decreasing my body fat. I've been raving about the Carbon app to friends and to about the Carbon app to friends and to about the Carbon app to friends and to family and to members of my Huberman Lab family and to members of my Huberman Lab family and to members of my Huberman Lab team over the last few years. And team over the last few years. And team over the last few years. And everyone who's joined me in using it has everyone who's joined me in using it has everyone who's joined me in using it has found it to be tremendously useful. In found it to be tremendously useful. In found it to be tremendously useful. In fact, some of those people are going to fact, some of those people are going to fact, some of those people are going to join me in my approaching 50 fitness join me in my approaching 50 fitness join me in my approaching 50 fitness goals and body composition goals. My goals and body composition goals. My goals and body composition goals. My birthday is September 26th, and so I'd birthday is September 26th, and so I'd birthday is September 26th, and so I'd like to invite you to join if you would like to invite you to join if you would like to invite you to join if you would like to improve your body composition like to improve your body composition like to improve your body composition and fitness to also use the Carbon app. and fitness to also use the Carbon app. and fitness to also use the Carbon app. Now, there are a lot of apps out there Now, there are a lot of apps out there Now, there are a lot of apps out there that are focused on fitness and that are focused on fitness and that are focused on fitness and nutrition. But what makes Carbon nutrition. But what makes Carbon nutrition. But what makes Carbon different is that it doesn't just hand different is that it doesn't just hand different is that it doesn't just hand you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually learns your metabolism over time, and it learns your metabolism over time, and it learns your metabolism over time, and it adapts your program based on your adapts your program based on your adapts your program based on your results. It also allows you total results. It also allows you total results. It also allows you total flexibility in how you eat. If you're flexibility in how you eat. If you're flexibility in how you eat. If you're plant-based or you're keto, high carb, plant-based or you're keto, high carb, plant-based or you're keto, high carb, low carb, anything in between, or even low carb, anything in between, or even low carb, anything in between, or even if you switch back and forth between if you switch back and forth between if you switch back and forth between different diets, carbon works around different diets, carbon works around different diets, carbon works around your preferences. The other thing I love your preferences. The other thing I love your preferences. The other thing I love about carbon is that it easily adapts to about carbon is that it easily adapts to about carbon is that it easily adapts to whether you're the type of person who whether you're the type of person who whether you're the type of person who likes to put in the specific brand and likes to put in the specific brand and likes to put in the specific brand and the exact number of ounces or grams of the exact number of ounces or grams of the exact number of ounces or grams of food that you ate or if you tend to be a food that you ate or if you tend to be a food that you ate or if you tend to be a little bit looser about that, like you little bit looser about that, like you little bit looser about that, like you ate half a handful of almonds or ate half a handful of almonds or ate half a handful of almonds or something like that, it can learn and something like that, it can learn and something like that, it can learn and adapt to that and still give you adapt to that and still give you adapt to that and still give you accurate recommendations. So, if you're accurate recommendations. So, if you're accurate recommendations. So, if you're looking to take a smarter, more looking to take a smarter, more looking to take a smarter, more personalized approach to your nutrition, personalized approach to your nutrition, personalized approach to your nutrition, I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. To try Carbon, you can go to To try Carbon, you can go to To try Carbon, you can go to joincarbon.com/huberman. While Carbon does not typically offer While Carbon does not typically offer While Carbon does not typically offer trials or promotions, they've agreed to trials or promotions, they've agreed to trials or promotions, they've agreed to give a free 7-day trial to all Huberman give a free 7-day trial to all Huberman give a free 7-day trial to all Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's joincarbon.com/huberman to get a 7-day free trial. Today's to get a 7-day free trial. Today's to get a 7-day free trial. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront for my savings and my investing for my savings and my investing for my savings and my investing for nearly a decade, and I absolutely love nearly a decade, and I absolutely love nearly a decade, and I absolutely love it. At the start of every year, I set it. At the start of every year, I set it. At the start of every year, I set new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money. Since I is to focus on saving money. Since I is to focus on saving money. Since I have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings in my Wealthfront cash account where I'm in my Wealthfront cash account where I'm in my Wealthfront cash account where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield able to earn 4% annual percentage yield able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits. And you can as well. on my deposits. And you can as well. on my deposits. And you can as well. With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on your cash from partner banks until your cash from partner banks until your cash from partner banks until you're ready to either spend that money you're ready to either spend that money you're ready to either spend that money or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also get free instant withdrawals to eligible get free instant withdrawals to eligible get free instant withdrawals to eligible accounts every day, even on weekends and accounts every day, even on weekends and accounts every day, even on weekends and holidays. The 4% APY is not a holidays. The 4% APY is not a holidays. The 4% APY is not a promotional rate, and there's no limit promotional rate, and there's no limit promotional rate, and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn. And to what you can deposit and earn. And to what you can deposit and earn. And you can even get protection for up to $8 you can even get protection for up to $8 you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC insurance provided million through FDIC insurance provided million through FDIC insurance provided through Wealthfront's partner banks. through Wealthfront's partner banks. through Wealthfront's partner banks. Wealthfront gives you free instant Wealthfront gives you free instant Wealthfront gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes withdrawals where it takes just minutes withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible to transfer your money to eligible to transfer your money to eligible external accounts. It also takes just external accounts. It also takes just external accounts. It also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the minutes to transfer your cash from the minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of Wealthfront's cash account to any of Wealthfront's cash account to any of Wealthfront's automated investment accounts when automated investment accounts when automated investment accounts when you're ready to invest. There are you're ready to invest. There are you're ready to invest. There are already a million people using already a million people using already a million people using Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on your cash today. If you'd like to try your cash today. If you'd like to try your cash today. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to Wealthfront, go to Wealthfront, go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your first cash account. deposit into your first cash account. deposit into your first cash account. That's wealthfront.com/huberman That's wealthfront.com/huberman That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started now. This has been a paid to get started now. This has been a paid to get started now. This has been a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is subject to change. For more information, subject to change. For more information, subject to change. For more information, see the episode description. Let's talk see the episode description. Let's talk see the episode description. Let's talk about fasted training, about fasted training, about fasted training, okay? And whether or not it indeed burns more And whether or not it indeed burns more And whether or not it indeed burns more body fat. body fat. body fat. And here, let's expand the conversation And here, let's expand the conversation And here, let's expand the conversation to include cardiovascular training. to include cardiovascular training. to include cardiovascular training. And of course, that's a vast space. And of course, that's a vast space. And of course, that's a vast space. Could be long, slow distance, could be Could be long, slow distance, could be Could be long, slow distance, could be high intensity interval training. high intensity interval training. high intensity interval training. Anything that gets your heart rate Anything that gets your heart rate Anything that gets your heart rate elevated deliberately for 12 uh for 12 elevated deliberately for 12 uh for 12 elevated deliberately for 12 uh for 12 minutes or more is kind of how I put it. minutes or more is kind of how I put it. minutes or more is kind of how I put it. Um, so let's be broad with what we're so let's be broad with what we're so let's be broad with what we're calling training. could be resistance calling training. could be resistance calling training. could be resistance training, circuit training, whole body training, circuit training, whole body training, circuit training, whole body part split, whatever. Let's let's body part split, whatever. Let's let's body part split, whatever. Let's let's take all that and let's define the fast take all that and let's define the fast take all that and let's define the fast as not having eaten either for 4 hours as not having eaten either for 4 hours as not having eaten either for 4 hours during the middle of the day or for during the middle of the day or for during the middle of the day or for 8 hours or to 12 hours including sleep 8 hours or to 12 hours including sleep 8 hours or to 12 hours including sleep the night before, right? Because people the night before, right? Because people the night before, right? Because people then say, "Wait, but I'm fasted because then say, "Wait, but I'm fasted because then say, "Wait, but I'm fasted because I don't eat lunch and then I Okay, it I don't eat lunch and then I Okay, it I don't eat lunch and then I Okay, it gets really murky and then and then we gets really murky and then and then we gets really murky and then and then we could spend 26 hours here and we don't could spend 26 hours here and we don't could spend 26 hours here and we don't want to do that." want to do that." want to do that." So assuming that one trains fasted, So assuming that one trains fasted, So assuming that one trains fasted, does one burn more does one burn more does one burn more body stored body fat body stored body fat body stored body fat in particular or just more in particular or just more in particular or just more dietary fat if there's dietary fat dietary fat if there's dietary fat dietary fat if there's dietary fat circulating and available. Let's just circulating and available. Let's just circulating and available. Let's just say lipids. I think that we when we hear say lipids. I think that we when we hear say lipids. I think that we when we hear the word fat, people think body fat, but the word fat, people think body fat, but the word fat, people think body fat, but there's also dietary fat. So could you there's also dietary fat. So could you there's also dietary fat. So could you please discriminate between those two? please discriminate between those two? please discriminate between those two? Yeah. Okay. So Yeah. Okay. So Yeah. Okay. So picture this. Picture two people eating picture this. Picture two people eating picture this. Picture two people eating the exact same amount of exact same the exact same amount of exact same the exact same amount of exact same diet, identical diet by the end of the diet, identical diet by the end of the diet, identical diet by the end of the day. Same macronutrition, same food day. Same macronutrition, same food day. Same macronutrition, same food selection, everything is identical. selection, everything is identical. selection, everything is identical. One person or one of the groups, let's One person or one of the groups, let's One person or one of the groups, let's say we're running a study, okay? One of say we're running a study, okay? One of say we're running a study, okay? One of the groups trains in a genuinely the groups trains in a genuinely the groups trains in a genuinely post-absorptive fasted state. 8 to 10 hoursish eating fasted state. 8 to 10 hoursish eating fasted state. 8 to 10 hoursish eating nothing. They will burn more fat nothing. They will burn more fat nothing. They will burn more fat during the training bout. Body fat. Yes, during the training bout. Body fat. Yes, during the training bout. Body fat. Yes, they will burn more body fat. They will they will burn more body fat. They will they will burn more body fat. They will burn more intramuscular fat. They will burn more intramuscular fat. They will burn more intramuscular fat. They will just their net fat oxidation will be just their net fat oxidation will be just their net fat oxidation will be higher than the group that has a higher than the group that has a higher than the group that has a breakfast. And the group that has the breakfast. And the group that has the breakfast. And the group that has the breakfast will essentially be, you know, breakfast will essentially be, you know, breakfast will essentially be, you know, burning their breakfast during the burning their breakfast during the burning their breakfast during the training. So yes, during the training training. So yes, during the training training. So yes, during the training there is greater fat burning in the there is greater fat burning in the there is greater fat burning in the fasted group. But once again, we're fasted group. But once again, we're fasted group. But once again, we're looking at two groups who are consuming looking at two groups who are consuming looking at two groups who are consuming the exact same diet. So the group who the exact same diet. So the group who the exact same diet. So the group who consumed their breakfast is going to consumed their breakfast is going to consumed their breakfast is going to consume less stuff, less food, a one consume less stuff, less food, a one consume less stuff, less food, a one less meal in the later part of the day. less meal in the later part of the day. less meal in the later part of the day. So their fat oxidation So their fat oxidation So their fat oxidation is going to be higher in the later part is going to be higher in the later part is going to be higher in the later part of the day and so it all comes out even of the day and so it all comes out even of the day and so it all comes out even by the end of the day. So that is the by the end of the day. So that is the by the end of the day. So that is the kind of the big issue and the big kind of the big issue and the big kind of the big issue and the big principle with uh fasted training principle with uh fasted training principle with uh fasted training having yes it does burn more fat during yes it does burn more fat during yes it does burn more fat during training but you're looking at a training but you're looking at a training but you're looking at a snapshot of time within the course of snapshot of time within the course of snapshot of time within the course of the day. You're not looking at the day. You're not looking at the day. You're not looking at the course of the day. But you know what? course of the day. But you know what? course of the day. But you know what? This was a huge idea that persisted This was a huge idea that persisted This was a huge idea that persisted throughout the late 80s and early 90s. throughout the late 80s and early 90s. throughout the late 80s and early 90s. Um late, you know, even into the 2000s Um late, you know, even into the 2000s Um late, you know, even into the 2000s when uh Bill Phillips came out with Body when uh Bill Phillips came out with Body when uh Bill Phillips came out with Body for Life and stuff. He was big on the for Life and stuff. He was big on the for Life and stuff. He was big on the fasted cardio and stuff. And so, um fasted cardio and stuff. And so, um fasted cardio and stuff. And so, um these this kind of lore is really cool these this kind of lore is really cool these this kind of lore is really cool if you know scientists who are able to if you know scientists who are able to if you know scientists who are able to rope you in and help you, you know, rope you in and help you, you know, rope you in and help you, you know, investigate this stuff. So, uh, once investigate this stuff. So, uh, once investigate this stuff. So, uh, once again, you know, I got to give Brad again, you know, I got to give Brad again, you know, I got to give Brad Shenfeld a lot of credit. Uh, he wanted Shenfeld a lot of credit. Uh, he wanted Shenfeld a lot of credit. Uh, he wanted to test this hypothesis out. And so, um, to test this hypothesis out. And so, um, to test this hypothesis out. And so, um, we took college age subjects, uh, women, we took college age subjects, uh, women, we took college age subjects, uh, women, and we compared fasted cardio with fed and we compared fasted cardio with fed and we compared fasted cardio with fed cardio, and the predominant Laura at the cardio, and the predominant Laura at the cardio, and the predominant Laura at the time was, uh, the fat burning zone, time was, uh, the fat burning zone, time was, uh, the fat burning zone, right? So we're talking low right? So we're talking low right? So we're talking low moderate intensity cardio which they moderate intensity cardio which they moderate intensity cardio which they carried out for um a little less than an carried out for um a little less than an carried out for um a little less than an hour. And we compared immediate an hour. And we compared immediate an hour. And we compared immediate an immediate pre pre-card cardio meal which immediate pre pre-card cardio meal which immediate pre pre-card cardio meal which was a standardized it was like a meal was a standardized it was like a meal was a standardized it was like a meal replacement type of thing with um a uh replacement type of thing with um a uh replacement type of thing with um a uh the same meal consumed postcardio the same meal consumed postcardio the same meal consumed postcardio and then we measured body composition and then we measured body composition and then we measured body composition over it. Hey, people criticize the study over it. Hey, people criticize the study over it. Hey, people criticize the study for being four weeks, but look, for being four weeks, but look, for being four weeks, but look, it's hard to run human studies. I've it's hard to run human studies. I've it's hard to run human studies. I've done it. It's I've done a done it. It's I've done a done it. It's I've done a clinical trial in humans. I've It's very clinical trial in humans. I've It's very clinical trial in humans. I've It's very hard to run long-term studies, hard to run long-term studies, hard to run long-term studies, especially in humans, especially when it especially in humans, especially when it especially in humans, especially when it involves nutrition involves nutrition involves nutrition and training. Yes, and training. Yes, and training. Yes, it's brutal. So, uh hat tip to you it's brutal. So, uh hat tip to you it's brutal. So, uh hat tip to you for tackling it at all. You're not going for tackling it at all. You're not going for tackling it at all. You're not going to catch any heat from me on the four to catch any heat from me on the four to catch any heat from me on the four weeks thing. But I appreciate that you weeks thing. But I appreciate that you weeks thing. But I appreciate that you mentioned the duration of the study mentioned the duration of the study mentioned the duration of the study because uh in thoroughess which you're because uh in thoroughess which you're because uh in thoroughess which you're characterized for in thoroughess um characterized for in thoroughess um characterized for in thoroughess um people should know it. people should know it. people should know it. Yep. So this is uh one of the only existing So this is uh one of the only existing So this is uh one of the only existing studies that looked at this question and studies that looked at this question and studies that looked at this question and controlled you know hypoc caloric and controlled you know hypoc caloric and controlled you know hypoc caloric conditions. Uh I actually conditions. Uh I actually conditions. Uh I actually put together all the studies by hand for put together all the studies by hand for put together all the studies by hand for each of the subjects kind of customizing each of the subjects kind of customizing each of the subjects kind of customizing it to their needs and making sure things it to their needs and making sure things it to their needs and making sure things were hypoc caloric making sure protein were hypoc caloric making sure protein were hypoc caloric making sure protein was optimized. Uh interestingly there was optimized. Uh interestingly there was optimized. Uh interestingly there was no resistance training in involved was no resistance training in involved was no resistance training in involved with the study. They were just doing with the study. They were just doing with the study. They were just doing their cardio. Uh they all subjects in their cardio. Uh they all subjects in their cardio. Uh they all subjects in both groups maintained their lean body both groups maintained their lean body both groups maintained their lean body mass but both groups lost a significant mass but both groups lost a significant mass but both groups lost a significant amount of body fat. No difference in amount of body fat. No difference in amount of body fat. No difference in body fat reduction between groups by the body fat reduction between groups by the body fat reduction between groups by the end of the study whether they did their end of the study whether they did their end of the study whether they did their cardio fed or whether they did it cardio fed or whether they did it cardio fed or whether they did it fasted. And that's because we equated fasted. And that's because we equated fasted. And that's because we equated the total nutrition between the groups. the total nutrition between the groups. the total nutrition between the groups. And you said again the subjects were And you said again the subjects were And you said again the subjects were college age women. college age women. college age women. College age women. Yes. College age women. Yes. College age women. Yes. And what was the cardio? What was the And what was the cardio? What was the And what was the cardio? What was the workout? And the reason I'm asking is workout? And the reason I'm asking is workout? And the reason I'm asking is that it's impressive that they all lost that it's impressive that they all lost that it's impressive that they all lost body fat body fat body fat as long as they ate the uh appropriate as long as they ate the uh appropriate as long as they ate the uh appropriate amount of calories. Didn't matter when amount of calories. Didn't matter when amount of calories. Didn't matter when they distributed those calories relative they distributed those calories relative they distributed those calories relative to the exercise and they maintained lean to the exercise and they maintained lean to the exercise and they maintained lean body mass. Um and if they weren't doing body mass. Um and if they weren't doing body mass. Um and if they weren't doing resistance training, um I'm impressed resistance training, um I'm impressed resistance training, um I'm impressed that the cardiovascular training was that the cardiovascular training was that the cardiovascular training was sufficient to allow them to maintain sufficient to allow them to maintain sufficient to allow them to maintain lean body mass. What was the lean body mass. What was the lean body mass. What was the cardiovascular workout? cardiovascular workout? cardiovascular workout? It was low, moderate intensity um what It was low, moderate intensity um what It was low, moderate intensity um what um might be called zone 2 type of type um might be called zone 2 type of type um might be called zone 2 type of type of cardio where you can still hold a of cardio where you can still hold a of cardio where you can still hold a conversation but um you know it's not conversation but um you know it's not conversation but um you know it's not necessarily a waltz. And so the whole necessarily a waltz. And so the whole necessarily a waltz. And so the whole idea was to be in the fat burning zone. idea was to be in the fat burning zone. idea was to be in the fat burning zone. We want to exploit the whole fat burning We want to exploit the whole fat burning We want to exploit the whole fat burning zone concept uh to keep the intensity zone concept uh to keep the intensity zone concept uh to keep the intensity low moderate so we can give the fasted low moderate so we can give the fasted low moderate so we can give the fasted cardio condition a chance to show cardio condition a chance to show cardio condition a chance to show whatever magic it might have. And so we whatever magic it might have. And so we whatever magic it might have. And so we didn't see that magic by the end of the didn't see that magic by the end of the didn't see that magic by the end of the trial. Um, and yeah, uh, but here's the trial. Um, and yeah, uh, but here's the trial. Um, and yeah, uh, but here's the practical takeaway from that is the practical takeaway from that is the practical takeaway from that is number one, we didn't see a bunch of number one, we didn't see a bunch of number one, we didn't see a bunch of lean mass loss in the fasted cardio lean mass loss in the fasted cardio lean mass loss in the fasted cardio group because there there's this lore group because there there's this lore group because there there's this lore saying that, hey, you better not train saying that, hey, you better not train saying that, hey, you better not train fasted no matter what. You better you fasted no matter what. You better you fasted no matter what. You better you better not do cardio fasted because better not do cardio fasted because better not do cardio fasted because you're going to lose muscle. Well, they you're going to lose muscle. Well, they you're going to lose muscle. Well, they didn't lose any lean body mass. And didn't lose any lean body mass. And didn't lose any lean body mass. And um when you form practical takeaways um when you form practical takeaways um when you form practical takeaways from the findings, we can say that if from the findings, we can say that if from the findings, we can say that if you prefer to train fasted uh and you prefer to train fasted uh and you prefer to train fasted uh and you just feel better doing your cardio in a just feel better doing your cardio in a just feel better doing your cardio in a fasted state, great, do it fasted. If fasted state, great, do it fasted. If fasted state, great, do it fasted. If you can't stand doing fasted cardio and you can't stand doing fasted cardio and you can't stand doing fasted cardio and you'd rather have a breakfast you'd rather have a breakfast you'd rather have a breakfast beforehand, then go ahead and do that. beforehand, then go ahead and do that. beforehand, then go ahead and do that. Just know that that's not going to Just know that that's not going to Just know that that's not going to necessarily hinder your fat loss efforts necessarily hinder your fat loss efforts necessarily hinder your fat loss efforts as long as you're net hypoc caloric by as long as you're net hypoc caloric by as long as you're net hypoc caloric by the end of the day or the end of the end of the day or the end of the end of the day or the end of the week. And I mean that those week. And I mean that those week. And I mean that those recommendations can change with the type recommendations can change with the type recommendations can change with the type of cardio you do, especially higher of cardio you do, especially higher of cardio you do, especially higher intensity stuff or certainly competitive intensity stuff or certainly competitive intensity stuff or certainly competitive types of sports that involve uh you know types of sports that involve uh you know types of sports that involve uh you know endurance performance elements and endurance performance elements and endurance performance elements and stuff. But that's the takeaway from stuff. But that's the takeaway from stuff. But that's the takeaway from our study that fasted versus fed cardio our study that fasted versus fed cardio our study that fasted versus fed cardio doesn't matter. Do it based on personal doesn't matter. Do it based on personal doesn't matter. Do it based on personal preference. I love it. After so many years of trends I love it. After so many years of trends I love it. After so many years of trends coming through, train fasted, don't coming through, train fasted, don't coming through, train fasted, don't train fasted, it seems like as with train fasted, it seems like as with train fasted, it seems like as with protein, what I'm learning from you is protein, what I'm learning from you is protein, what I'm learning from you is that there's a lot more uh flexibility that there's a lot more uh flexibility that there's a lot more uh flexibility in time than we might have once thought, in time than we might have once thought, in time than we might have once thought, but that the absolute calories of course but that the absolute calories of course but that the absolute calories of course matter. prioritizing protein matters and matter. prioritizing protein matters and matter. prioritizing protein matters and I'd like to and that you still have to I'd like to and that you still have to I'd like to and that you still have to train. You got to do something train. You got to do something train. You got to do something and can I add this because I and can I add this because I and can I add this because I know you'll appreciate this. I'm not know you'll appreciate this. I'm not know you'll appreciate this. I'm not going to cherrypick our study and say going to cherrypick our study and say going to cherrypick our study and say that this is the end all result that this is the end all result that this is the end all result that is gospel. So there's actually a that is gospel. So there's actually a that is gospel. So there's actually a later meta analysis a few years later by later meta analysis a few years later by later meta analysis a few years later by I think it's Hagstrom and Hackit who I think it's Hagstrom and Hackit who I think it's Hagstrom and Hackit who looked at fasted versus fed training and looked at fasted versus fed training and looked at fasted versus fed training and they overall found no significant they overall found no significant they overall found no significant differences or significant advantages in differences or significant advantages in differences or significant advantages in terms of body compment fat loss in the terms of body compment fat loss in the terms of body compment fat loss in the fasted versus the fed conditions as long fasted versus the fed conditions as long fasted versus the fed conditions as long as total nutrition is equated between as total nutrition is equated between as total nutrition is equated between the groups. the groups. the groups. Love it. This is music to my ears and Love it. This is music to my ears and Love it. This is music to my ears and I'm sure it's going to be music to I'm sure it's going to be music to I'm sure it's going to be music to everybody's ears because it just says everybody's ears because it just says everybody's ears because it just says there's flexibility. There's there's flexibility. There's there's flexibility. There's flexibility. There's flexibility and flexibility. There's flexibility and flexibility. There's flexibility and life is complicated. So more flexibility life is complicated. So more flexibility life is complicated. So more flexibility is important though too for if you're important though too for if you're important though too for if you're looking for magic, if you're looking for looking for magic, if you're looking for looking for magic, if you're looking for that special little thing you can do that special little thing you can do that special little thing you can do that well maybe the magic is in the training well maybe the magic is in the training well maybe the magic is in the training consistently um the nutrition including protein and um the nutrition including protein and um the nutrition including protein and the knowledge that there's flexibility. the knowledge that there's flexibility. the knowledge that there's flexibility. I have this saying in my mind lately I have this saying in my mind lately I have this saying in my mind lately that the things that make 90% of the that the things that make 90% of the that the things that make 90% of the difference like sleep, exercise, difference like sleep, exercise, difference like sleep, exercise, nutrition, light, stress management, nutrition, light, stress management, nutrition, light, stress management, relationships, etc. in our health are relationships, etc. in our health are relationships, etc. in our health are the things we have to do 90% of the days the things we have to do 90% of the days the things we have to do 90% of the days of our lives. And that's why there of our lives. And that's why there of our lives. And that's why there can continue to be so much discussion can continue to be so much discussion can continue to be so much discussion around them. This is why it isn't just around them. This is why it isn't just around them. This is why it isn't just like here are the basics, okay, you're like here are the basics, okay, you're like here are the basics, okay, you're done. It's because the things that we done. It's because the things that we done. It's because the things that we have to do every day, we often have to have to do every day, we often have to have to do every day, we often have to be reminded to do every day. Um but be reminded to do every day. Um but be reminded to do every day. Um but along those lines, um why is it in your along those lines, um why is it in your along those lines, um why is it in your opinion that opinion that opinion that protein is so critical that you know protein is so critical that you know protein is so critical that you know that protein be treated as like the that protein be treated as like the that protein be treated as like the cornerstone of good nutrition, the cornerstone of good nutrition, the cornerstone of good nutrition, especially if one is cons attempting to especially if one is cons attempting to especially if one is cons attempting to consume calories to maintain or perhaps consume calories to maintain or perhaps consume calories to maintain or perhaps even lose a little bit of body fat, even lose a little bit of body fat, even lose a little bit of body fat, maybe simultaneously maintaining or maybe simultaneously maintaining or maybe simultaneously maintaining or gaining muscle. But let's set aside gaining muscle. But let's set aside gaining muscle. But let's set aside muscle gain for the moment. Let's just muscle gain for the moment. Let's just muscle gain for the moment. Let's just say like maintain muscle. But many say like maintain muscle. But many say like maintain muscle. But many people want to lose a few percentages of people want to lose a few percentages of people want to lose a few percentages of body fat. body fat. body fat. Why is it that protein is so critical to Why is it that protein is so critical to Why is it that protein is so critical to that process? Why is it that indeed that process? Why is it that indeed that process? Why is it that indeed calories in versus calories out reigns calories in versus calories out reigns calories in versus calories out reigns true law of thermodynamics, but that true law of thermodynamics, but that true law of thermodynamics, but that protein is so crucial? protein is so crucial? protein is so crucial? It's mainly just a couple of things to It's mainly just a couple of things to It's mainly just a couple of things to keep in mind and potentially a third keep in mind and potentially a third keep in mind and potentially a third little thing. So the big thing about little thing. So the big thing about little thing. So the big thing about protein and body comp is number one protein and body comp is number one protein and body comp is number one protein directly supports lean body protein directly supports lean body protein directly supports lean body mass. It directly supports all the lean mass. It directly supports all the lean mass. It directly supports all the lean tissues in the body. Uh skeletal muscle tissues in the body. Uh skeletal muscle tissues in the body. Uh skeletal muscle um especially um especially um especially and um skeletal muscle is our basically and um skeletal muscle is our basically and um skeletal muscle is our basically our metabolic engine that we can our metabolic engine that we can our metabolic engine that we can control. Um it manages our body's fuel control. Um it manages our body's fuel control. Um it manages our body's fuel use and so it's super critical to use and so it's super critical to use and so it's super critical to support skeletal muscle. protein does support skeletal muscle. protein does support skeletal muscle. protein does that directly and protein is more that directly and protein is more that directly and protein is more satiating than carbohydrate and fat and satiating than carbohydrate and fat and satiating than carbohydrate and fat and so it's the most satiating so it's the most satiating so it's the most satiating macronutrient. Um the third little detail well Um the third little detail well Um the third little detail well it's got the highest uh cost of it's got the highest uh cost of it's got the highest uh cost of metabolism or cost of processing within metabolism or cost of processing within metabolism or cost of processing within the body. So it's the most energetically the body. So it's the most energetically the body. So it's the most energetically or calorically expensive macronutrient or calorically expensive macronutrient or calorically expensive macronutrient to process within the body. So it has a to process within the body. So it has a to process within the body. So it has a higher so-called thermic effect. And so higher so-called thermic effect. And so higher so-called thermic effect. And so those are basically the three main those are basically the three main those are basically the three main reasons why protein is so critical to reasons why protein is so critical to reasons why protein is so critical to things like body compment. Um high things like body compment. Um high things like body compment. Um high quality weight loss, fat loss. Yeah, quality weight loss, fat loss. Yeah, quality weight loss, fat loss. Yeah, those are great reasons. And what about those are great reasons. And what about those are great reasons. And what about the hierarchy of protein quality? I the hierarchy of protein quality? I the hierarchy of protein quality? I think of protein quality in terms of think of protein quality in terms of think of protein quality in terms of quality of protein, meaning the type and quality of protein, meaning the type and quality of protein, meaning the type and ratios of amino acids, the availability ratios of amino acids, the availability ratios of amino acids, the availability of those amino acids relative to the of those amino acids relative to the of those amino acids relative to the amount of calories one has to ingest to amount of calories one has to ingest to amount of calories one has to ingest to get them because I frankly I've grown get them because I frankly I've grown get them because I frankly I've grown tired and slightly irritated at the oh tired and slightly irritated at the oh tired and slightly irritated at the oh you know these plant-based foods have a you know these plant-based foods have a you know these plant-based foods have a ton of quality protein in them and I go ton of quality protein in them and I go ton of quality protein in them and I go really you have to consume 2,000 really you have to consume 2,000 really you have to consume 2,000 calories of that plant or grain in order calories of that plant or grain in order calories of that plant or grain in order to get the equivalent amino acid profile to get the equivalent amino acid profile to get the equivalent amino acid profile uh from you know a 4 oz piece of steak uh from you know a 4 oz piece of steak uh from you know a 4 oz piece of steak for instance and this is not an argument for instance and this is not an argument for instance and this is not an argument that animal proteins are better that animal proteins are better that animal proteins are better ethically I'm just saying at a ethically I'm just saying at a ethically I'm just saying at a quality as a function of calories ingested I as a function of calories ingested I as a function of calories ingested I feel like animal proteins are superior feel like animal proteins are superior feel like animal proteins are superior but tell me tell me what the data say but tell me tell me what the data say but tell me tell me what the data say sure man this is a lightning rod of a of a man this is a lightning rod of a of a man this is a lightning rod of a of a topic here this Um, topic here this Um, topic here this Um, we have a strong audience. They can we have a strong audience. They can we have a strong audience. They can handle it. handle it. handle it. They can handle it. All right, guys. They can handle it. All right, guys. They can handle it. All right, guys. Buckle up. Brace yourselves, please. Buckle up. Brace yourselves, please. Buckle up. Brace yourselves, please. So, gram for gram as a group, animal gram for gram as a group, animal gram for gram as a group, animal proteins are higher quality. They're proteins are higher quality. They're proteins are higher quality. They're more anabolic. They have a higher more anabolic. They have a higher more anabolic. They have a higher proportion of essential amino acids. proportion of essential amino acids. proportion of essential amino acids. They have a higher amount and proportion They have a higher amount and proportion They have a higher amount and proportion of the anabolic driving the most of the anabolic driving the most of the anabolic driving the most anabolic driving amino acids, the branch anabolic driving amino acids, the branch anabolic driving amino acids, the branch chain amino acids, leucine specifically. chain amino acids, leucine specifically. chain amino acids, leucine specifically. And uh in the majority of the And uh in the majority of the And uh in the majority of the literature, when you compare animal literature, when you compare animal literature, when you compare animal versus plant proteins head-to-head, you versus plant proteins head-to-head, you versus plant proteins head-to-head, you see greater muscle protein synthesis. see greater muscle protein synthesis. see greater muscle protein synthesis. Um, now with muscle protein synthesis Um, now with muscle protein synthesis Um, now with muscle protein synthesis being sort of the short-term indicator being sort of the short-term indicator being sort of the short-term indicator of what might indicate a growth of what might indicate a growth of what might indicate a growth trajectory over time, we have to see if trajectory over time, we have to see if trajectory over time, we have to see if we can corroborate that with these we can corroborate that with these we can corroborate that with these longitudinal trials where you drag the longitudinal trials where you drag the longitudinal trials where you drag the experiment out for weeks and months to experiment out for weeks and months to experiment out for weeks and months to see if there's any superiority with the see if there's any superiority with the see if there's any superiority with the animal versus the plant protein for kind animal versus the plant protein for kind animal versus the plant protein for kind of where the rubber meets the road, of where the rubber meets the road, of where the rubber meets the road, which is increasing muscle mass and/or which is increasing muscle mass and/or which is increasing muscle mass and/or strength. So there have been a lot of strength. So there have been a lot of strength. So there have been a lot of studies comparing animal versus plant studies comparing animal versus plant studies comparing animal versus plant proteins and interestingly uh okay so proteins and interestingly uh okay so proteins and interestingly uh okay so the animal proteins do have the edge in the animal proteins do have the edge in the animal proteins do have the edge in that department and that's been reported that department and that's been reported that department and that's been reported in a couple meta analyses now um uh one in a couple meta analyses now um uh one in a couple meta analyses now um uh one of them compared whey and soy and didn't of them compared whey and soy and didn't of them compared whey and soy and didn't find a staggering difference between find a staggering difference between find a staggering difference between the two anabolically. So we can call soy the two anabolically. So we can call soy the two anabolically. So we can call soy actually a high quality protein but when actually a high quality protein but when actually a high quality protein but when you look at the individual studies there you look at the individual studies there you look at the individual studies there it whey still has an edge in terms of it whey still has an edge in terms of it whey still has an edge in terms of because metaanalyses just like take the because metaanalyses just like take the because metaanalyses just like take the data and cram it all together into a data and cram it all together into a data and cram it all together into a single conclusion. single conclusion. single conclusion. And so um it's also important to look at And so um it's also important to look at And so um it's also important to look at the individual studies too. So here's the individual studies too. So here's the individual studies too. So here's where the story gets interesting where the story gets interesting where the story gets interesting there. There there are two studies now there. There there are two studies now there. There there are two studies now that compared a and this is what what's that compared a and this is what what's that compared a and this is what what's been missing from the literature. been missing from the literature. been missing from the literature. Usually we take two groups of omnivores Usually we take two groups of omnivores Usually we take two groups of omnivores and we supplement them with let's say and we supplement them with let's say and we supplement them with let's say whey protein and then we supplement the whey protein and then we supplement the whey protein and then we supplement the other group with uh some sort of a plant other group with uh some sort of a plant other group with uh some sort of a plant protein pa protein. pa protein. pa protein. Yeah. Pa protein. And interesting thing Yeah. Pa protein. And interesting thing Yeah. Pa protein. And interesting thing about pea protein it actually about pea protein it actually about pea protein it actually outperformed whey in one study. So, in outperformed whey in one study. So, in outperformed whey in one study. So, in this 2015 study where um pea protein this 2015 study where um pea protein this 2015 study where um pea protein supplementation outperformed whey for supplementation outperformed whey for supplementation outperformed whey for increasing muscle thickness, it was increasing muscle thickness, it was increasing muscle thickness, it was really sad. I was really sad to see that really sad. I was really sad to see that really sad. I was really sad to see that cuz I was weighing it up and I was like, cuz I was weighing it up and I was like, cuz I was weighing it up and I was like, "Oh god." Yeah. "Oh god." Yeah. "Oh god." Yeah. What are we doing here? What are we doing here? What are we doing here? That study has not been replicated. But, That study has not been replicated. But, That study has not been replicated. But, okay, so the interesting part, we okay, so the interesting part, we okay, so the interesting part, we finally have studies where we're looking finally have studies where we're looking finally have studies where we're looking at completely vegan regimen, a group at completely vegan regimen, a group at completely vegan regimen, a group who's totally vegan, no animal who's totally vegan, no animal who's totally vegan, no animal products at all in the diet versus an products at all in the diet versus an products at all in the diet versus an omnivore group. and uh put them on a omnivore group. and uh put them on a omnivore group. and uh put them on a resistance training regimen 12 weeks. resistance training regimen 12 weeks. resistance training regimen 12 weeks. This was uh done by Lraine and This was uh done by Lraine and This was uh done by Lraine and colleagues. This was a few years back. colleagues. This was a few years back. colleagues. This was a few years back. And so they optimized protein or at And so they optimized protein or at And so they optimized protein or at least made it at the bottom of optimal least made it at the bottom of optimal least made it at the bottom of optimal at 1.6 gram per kilogram of body weight at 1.6 gram per kilogram of body weight at 1.6 gram per kilogram of body weight per day in both groups. Okay. And so, per day in both groups. Okay. And so, per day in both groups. Okay. And so, but the unique thing about this study, but the unique thing about this study, but the unique thing about this study, it was the first time ever we're compare it was the first time ever we're compare it was the first time ever we're compare comparing vegans with omnivores. So, comparing vegans with omnivores. So, comparing vegans with omnivores. So, there were no significant differences there were no significant differences there were no significant differences between groups in muscle size and between groups in muscle size and between groups in muscle size and strength gains by the end of 12 weeks strength gains by the end of 12 weeks strength gains by the end of 12 weeks where they put on a progressive where they put on a progressive where they put on a progressive resistance training program. resistance training program. resistance training program. It was isocaloric. So, It was isocaloric. So, It was isocaloric. So, isocaloric meaning uh for those that isocaloric meaning uh for those that isocaloric meaning uh for those that don't know what that means is total don't know what that means is total don't know what that means is total number of calories ingested per day, number of calories ingested per day, number of calories ingested per day, same in the vegan versus omnivore group. same in the vegan versus omnivore group. same in the vegan versus omnivore group. Yes, that's right. Isocaloric, isomacron Yes, that's right. Isocaloric, isomacron Yes, that's right. Isocaloric, isomacron nutritional. you know, isopropaic nutritional. you know, isopropaic nutritional. you know, isopropaic everything is equated between everything is equated between everything is equated between the groups nut macronutrition wise the groups nut macronutrition wise the groups nut macronutrition wise no significant differences in the size no significant differences in the size no significant differences in the size and strength gains and um they're and strength gains and um they're and strength gains and um they're suspecting oh and by the way the vegan suspecting oh and by the way the vegan suspecting oh and by the way the vegan group their protein intake was boosted group their protein intake was boosted group their protein intake was boosted up to 1.6 g per kilo or.7 g per pound. up to 1.6 g per kilo or.7 g per pound. up to 1.6 g per kilo or.7 g per pound. It was boosted up by uh soy protein It was boosted up by uh soy protein It was boosted up by uh soy protein supplementation. So apparently, I mean, we're beginning So apparently, I mean, we're beginning So apparently, I mean, we're beginning to see that at a dose a total daily to see that at a dose a total daily to see that at a dose a total daily protein at 1.6 six grams per kilogram of protein at 1.6 six grams per kilogram of protein at 1.6 six grams per kilogram of body weight. the totally vegan group was body weight. the totally vegan group was body weight. the totally vegan group was able to hang in there uh against the able to hang in there uh against the able to hang in there uh against the omnivore group for muscle size and omnivore group for muscle size and omnivore group for muscle size and strength gains at least within the strength gains at least within the strength gains at least within the conditions of the study and at least for conditions of the study and at least for conditions of the study and at least for those 12 weeks and at least for the those 12 weeks and at least for the those 12 weeks and at least for the subjects that were used who weren't subjects that were used who weren't subjects that were used who weren't necessarily you know these highle necessarily you know these highle necessarily you know these highle athletes or athletes or athletes or so you can if you construct it properly so you can if you construct it properly so you can if you construct it properly you can follow a vegan diet as long as you can follow a vegan diet as long as you can follow a vegan diet as long as you get.7 gram per pound of body weight you get.7 gram per pound of body weight you get.7 gram per pound of body weight and the weird thing man is the vegan and the weird thing man is the vegan and the weird thing man is the vegan diet overall had significantly less diet overall had significantly less diet overall had significantly less essential amino acid content essential amino acid content essential amino acid content and significantly less branch chain and significantly less branch chain and significantly less branch chain amino acid content. But apparently the amino acid content. But apparently the amino acid content. But apparently the resistance training stimulus is robust resistance training stimulus is robust resistance training stimulus is robust enough to make protein effects ah almost enough to make protein effects ah almost enough to make protein effects ah almost secondary. Interesting. Um getting right back to exercise Um getting right back to exercise Um getting right back to exercise probably being the major lever in probably being the major lever in probably being the major lever in everything. Oh well sleep I would argue everything. Oh well sleep I would argue everything. Oh well sleep I would argue is the major lever uh over time. I would is the major lever uh over time. I would is the major lever uh over time. I would agree, man. agree, man. agree, man. Yeah. But I will say this because then Yeah. But I will say this because then Yeah. But I will say this because then people think if they get one bad night's people think if they get one bad night's people think if they get one bad night's sleep to not train. I don't know if sleep to not train. I don't know if sleep to not train. I don't know if you're familiar with these recent you're familiar with these recent you're familiar with these recent studies showing that you can offset the studies showing that you can offset the studies showing that you can offset the inflammation that arrives from getting inflammation that arrives from getting inflammation that arrives from getting five or fewer hours of sleep the five or fewer hours of sleep the five or fewer hours of sleep the previous night previous night previous night with exercise. You just don't want to with exercise. You just don't want to with exercise. You just don't want to get into a habit of it. get into a habit of it. get into a habit of it. So, um but if you're So, um but if you're So, um but if you're easier said than done, easier said than done, easier said than done, I know if you're on the fence about I know if you're on the fence about I know if you're on the fence about whether or not to train because you're whether or not to train because you're whether or not to train because you're sleepd deprived, train. But don't do sleepd deprived, train. But don't do sleepd deprived, train. But don't do that more than one to two days per week that more than one to two days per week that more than one to two days per week ideally. And even better would be ideally. And even better would be ideally. And even better would be to get great sleep and train. But um to get great sleep and train. But um to get great sleep and train. But um I know you're gearing up to I know you're gearing up to I know you're gearing up to hit the next thing. I want to hit the next thing. I want to hit the next thing. I want to mention that this study I just talked mention that this study I just talked mention that this study I just talked about was not a one-off. A couple years about was not a one-off. A couple years about was not a one-off. A couple years later, Montene and colleagues did the later, Montene and colleagues did the later, Montene and colleagues did the same thing, but they used mop protein same thing, but they used mop protein same thing, but they used mop protein for the vegan group. for the vegan group. for the vegan group. Moprotein. It's a fungusbased protein. So, you've It's a fungusbased protein. So, you've It's a fungusbased protein. So, you've seen that um that I think it's seen that um that I think it's seen that um that I think it's on is it on Netflix or HBO? The Last of on is it on Netflix or HBO? The Last of on is it on Netflix or HBO? The Last of Us where that fungus makes people Us where that fungus makes people Us where that fungus makes people anabolic. I haven't seen that. That's what this I haven't seen that. That's what this I haven't seen that. That's what this is. It's based on this. is. It's based on this. is. It's based on this. I'm doing a joke about a fictional show. I'm doing a joke about a fictional show. I'm doing a joke about a fictional show. Some some of the audience will Some some of the audience will Some some of the audience will chuckle or just think I just busted the chuckle or just think I just busted the chuckle or just think I just busted the most terrible dad joke ever. But, um most terrible dad joke ever. But, um most terrible dad joke ever. But, um it's a fungus based protein. Uh it's a fungus based protein. Uh it's a fungus based protein. Uh commercially it's called corn. So, quo commercially it's called corn. So, quo commercially it's called corn. So, quo rn. Okay. It's one of these weird uh types Okay. It's one of these weird uh types Okay. It's one of these weird uh types of products that is unfortunately of products that is unfortunately of products that is unfortunately expensive and um so the and um so the and um so the plant-based or the animal free group plant-based or the animal free group plant-based or the animal free group their protein intake was boosted with their protein intake was boosted with their protein intake was boosted with this mop protein and then they were this mop protein and then they were this mop protein and then they were compared against omnivores with mixed compared against omnivores with mixed compared against omnivores with mixed protein sources and by the end of mixed protein sources and by the end of mixed protein sources and by the end of the study I believe it was a 12-week the study I believe it was a 12-week the study I believe it was a 12-week study no differences there's no study no differences there's no study no differences there's no significant differences in increases in significant differences in increases in significant differences in increases in muscle size and strength and they, you muscle size and strength and they, you muscle size and strength and they, you know, progressive resistance training know, progressive resistance training know, progressive resistance training regimen. Once again, not necessarily regimen. Once again, not necessarily regimen. Once again, not necessarily highly trained people, but we basically highly trained people, but we basically highly trained people, but we basically saw the same thing. Um, as long as total saw the same thing. Um, as long as total saw the same thing. Um, as long as total daily protein is where it needs to be, daily protein is where it needs to be, daily protein is where it needs to be, then apparently the animal free then apparently the animal free then apparently the animal free group can hang with the omnivores, at group can hang with the omnivores, at group can hang with the omnivores, at least for the conditions of that study. least for the conditions of that study. least for the conditions of that study. So, I always look at these things So, I always look at these things So, I always look at these things skeptically. Um, skeptically. Um, skeptically. Um, but the mop protein also outperformed but the mop protein also outperformed but the mop protein also outperformed milk protein for muscle protein milk protein for muscle protein milk protein for muscle protein synthesis in this acute study that synthesis in this acute study that synthesis in this acute study that preceded this longitudinal study. And so preceded this longitudinal study. And so preceded this longitudinal study. And so there's some weird stuff that we can there's some weird stuff that we can there's some weird stuff that we can look at aside from animal protein that look at aside from animal protein that look at aside from animal protein that could be just as anabolic. could be just as anabolic. could be just as anabolic. Um, so yeah, that that's the story with Um, so yeah, that that's the story with Um, so yeah, that that's the story with animal versus plant andor fungus-based animal versus plant andor fungus-based animal versus plant andor fungus-based protein. And so, so yeah, I just I just protein. And so, so yeah, I just I just protein. And so, so yeah, I just I just had to throw in the montine. had to throw in the montine. had to throw in the montine. That's very interesting. You know, I That's very interesting. You know, I That's very interesting. You know, I think when people hear soy, you know, think when people hear soy, you know, think when people hear soy, you know, there's just has been this, you know, there's just has been this, you know, there's just has been this, you know, kind of assault on soy for years. And um kind of assault on soy for years. And um kind of assault on soy for years. And um and I've avoided it, not for any and I've avoided it, not for any and I've avoided it, not for any specific reason, but because I prefer specific reason, but because I prefer specific reason, but because I prefer other sources of calories. Um I like other sources of calories. Um I like other sources of calories. Um I like meat and berries and eggs and this kind meat and berries and eggs and this kind meat and berries and eggs and this kind of thing. Um, but it's interesting that of thing. Um, but it's interesting that of thing. Um, but it's interesting that some of these engineered proteins and some of these engineered proteins and some of these engineered proteins and soy protein and pea protein when you soy protein and pea protein when you soy protein and pea protein when you really put them to the test under the really put them to the test under the really put them to the test under the right conditions, right conditions, right conditions, you know, they seem to gram for gram, you know, they seem to gram for gram, you know, they seem to gram for gram, they seem to uh to perform just as well they seem to uh to perform just as well they seem to uh to perform just as well as the animal proteins. You did mention, as the animal proteins. You did mention, as the animal proteins. You did mention, however, that satiation however, that satiation however, that satiation uh satiety rather is a key factor. So, uh satiety rather is a key factor. So, uh satiety rather is a key factor. So, I'd be curious in this study, I don't I'd be curious in this study, I don't I'd be curious in this study, I don't know if they measured this, whether the know if they measured this, whether the know if they measured this, whether the people in the vegan group felt that they people in the vegan group felt that they people in the vegan group felt that they were um happy with what they were eating were um happy with what they were eating were um happy with what they were eating as compared to the animal uh protein as compared to the animal uh protein as compared to the animal uh protein group. You know, at the end of the day, group. You know, at the end of the day, group. You know, at the end of the day, are they still craving more food? Do are they still craving more food? Do are they still craving more food? Do they feel um like they desperately want they feel um like they desperately want they feel um like they desperately want a ribeye steak? In order to follow a ribeye steak? In order to follow a ribeye steak? In order to follow a fairly strict diet of any kind, but in fairly strict diet of any kind, but in fairly strict diet of any kind, but in particular plant-based, one has to have particular plant-based, one has to have particular plant-based, one has to have a good reason. a good reason. a good reason. You know, I think that otherwise you You know, I think that otherwise you You know, I think that otherwise you just kind of fall into the you just kind of fall into the you just kind of fall into the availability issue. You know, it's a lot availability issue. You know, it's a lot availability issue. You know, it's a lot easier to eat an omnivore diet. easier to eat an omnivore diet. easier to eat an omnivore diet. Yeah. Um that wasn't measured in Yeah. Um that wasn't measured in Yeah. Um that wasn't measured in either of the studies. And I always either of the studies. And I always either of the studies. And I always look at these things skeptically when look at these things skeptically when look at these things skeptically when you used essentially untrained subjects you used essentially untrained subjects you used essentially untrained subjects because untrained subjects are always because untrained subjects are always because untrained subjects are always going to kind of incur this newbie gains going to kind of incur this newbie gains going to kind of incur this newbie gains effect for the training regimen where effect for the training regimen where effect for the training regimen where the gains that you get from the gains that you get from the gains that you get from the resistance training alone are going to resistance training alone are going to resistance training alone are going to just mask any potential advantage of just mask any potential advantage of just mask any potential advantage of either protein type. And so, um, you either protein type. And so, um, you either protein type. And so, um, you know, people would, well, Steu Phillips know, people would, well, Steu Phillips know, people would, well, Steu Phillips will argue with me on that all day long. will argue with me on that all day long. will argue with me on that all day long. We did a two-day long, uh, Twitter We did a two-day long, uh, Twitter We did a two-day long, uh, Twitter argument about that. argument about that. argument about that. You spend two days in an argument on You spend two days in an argument on You spend two days in an argument on like Stu is a freaking legend, man. like Stu is a freaking legend, man. like Stu is a freaking legend, man. He is he is a legend in the protein He is he is a legend in the protein He is he is a legend in the protein research area, but he will argue with research area, but he will argue with research area, but he will argue with two to three days on Twitter. And so, two to three days on Twitter. And so, two to three days on Twitter. And so, you know, we always end up at the same you know, we always end up at the same you know, we always end up at the same spot where um look, we need more spot where um look, we need more spot where um look, we need more research to see whether um and this research to see whether um and this research to see whether um and this wasn't about this wasn't about vegan uh wasn't about this wasn't about vegan uh wasn't about this wasn't about vegan uh versus uh animal proteins, plant versus uh animal proteins, plant versus uh animal proteins, plant versus animal. This was about just total daily animal. This was about just total daily animal. This was about just total daily protein intake period. protein intake period. protein intake period. Um we just need more research on uh Um we just need more research on uh Um we just need more research on uh highly trained, highly resistance highly trained, highly resistance highly trained, highly resistance trained subjects to see whether uh in trained subjects to see whether uh in trained subjects to see whether uh in fact a completely plant-based protein fact a completely plant-based protein fact a completely plant-based protein regimen that's optimized calorically and regimen that's optimized calorically and regimen that's optimized calorically and total daily protein amount wise can total daily protein amount wise can total daily protein amount wise can really run with um the animal-based really run with um the animal-based really run with um the animal-based stuff like the high quality stuff like the high quality stuff like the high quality animal-based proteins. And so, uh, it animal-based proteins. And so, uh, it animal-based proteins. And so, uh, it almost depends on where you want to almost depends on where you want to almost depends on where you want to place your bets and where you where place your bets and where you where place your bets and where you where you want to, uh, take your risks. So, if you want to, uh, take your risks. So, if you want to, uh, take your risks. So, if you're if gold is on the line, if you're if gold is on the line, if you're if gold is on the line, if first place at a professional or first place at a professional or first place at a professional or national level is on the line, yeah, I national level is on the line, yeah, I national level is on the line, yeah, I don't know. I don't know if I would, but don't know. I don't know if I would, but don't know. I don't know if I would, but uh, everybody's ideology is what it is, uh, everybody's ideology is what it is, uh, everybody's ideology is what it is, and some people are just kind of and some people are just kind of and some people are just kind of governed by what they want to stick to. governed by what they want to stick to. governed by what they want to stick to. So, it really depends on the population So, it really depends on the population So, it really depends on the population and what the goal is. and what the goal is. and what the goal is. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in As somebody who's been involved in research science for almost three research science for almost three research science for almost three decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. and I've been taking it every day since. and I've been taking it every day since. I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune system health, as well as to improve system health, as well as to improve system health, as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just one supplement, what that supplement one supplement, what that supplement one supplement, what that supplement would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink ag.com/huberman to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by David. episode is also brought to us by David. episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 gram of protein, only other. It has 28 gram of protein, only other. It has 28 gram of protein, only 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from protein. This of its calories come from protein. This of its calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest is 50% higher than the next closest is 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also protein bar. David protein bars also protein bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is taste amazing. Even the texture is taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the amazing. My favorite bar is the amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough, but then chocolate chip cookie dough, but then chocolate chip cookie dough, but then again, I also like the new chocolate again, I also like the new chocolate again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all brownie flavored. Basically, I like all brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all the flavors a lot. They're all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of one gram easy to hit my protein goals of one gram easy to hit my protein goals of one gram of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack and I always keep one with me when snack and I always keep one with me when snack and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. I'm out of the house or traveling. I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. I'd like to talk a little bit about body I'd like to talk a little bit about body I'd like to talk a little bit about body recomposition. Um, simple question to start off. Is it Um, simple question to start off. Is it Um, simple question to start off. Is it possible to quote unquote gain muscle possible to quote unquote gain muscle possible to quote unquote gain muscle while at the same time losing fat? while at the same time losing fat? while at the same time losing fat? Yes. Great. That will be reassuring to Great. That will be reassuring to Great. That will be reassuring to people. Um, does it require a caloric deficit? Um, does it require a caloric deficit? Um, does it require a caloric deficit? This is the weird part. No. This is the weird part. No. This is the weird part. No. And, um, just super interesting, No. And, um, just super interesting, No. And, um, just super interesting, man. um my friend and colleague Chris man. um my friend and colleague Chris man. um my friend and colleague Chris Barericat he collected all the studies Barericat he collected all the studies Barericat he collected all the studies that witnessed this recomposition that witnessed this recomposition that witnessed this recomposition phenomenon with a recomposition we call phenomenon with a recomposition we call phenomenon with a recomposition we call it recomp you know with simultaneous it recomp you know with simultaneous it recomp you know with simultaneous gain in lean mass and loss in fat mass gain in lean mass and loss in fat mass gain in lean mass and loss in fat mass so he collected all the studies he so he collected all the studies he so he collected all the studies he collected 10 studies and this was a five collected 10 studies and this was a five collected 10 studies and this was a five this review was put out 5 years ago so this review was put out 5 years ago so this review was put out 5 years ago so you can imagine there's probably a few you can imagine there's probably a few you can imagine there's probably a few more studies that have shown recmp now more studies that have shown recmp now more studies that have shown recmp now so we can say at least a dozen studies so we can say at least a dozen studies so we can say at least a dozen studies have shown this phenomenon which we have shown this phenomenon which we have shown this phenomenon which we didn't necessarily think was possible. didn't necessarily think was possible. didn't necessarily think was possible. Uh like 10 years ago, you know, we Uh like 10 years ago, you know, we Uh like 10 years ago, you know, we thought, okay, you need a caloric thought, okay, you need a caloric thought, okay, you need a caloric surplus to gain muscle and you need a surplus to gain muscle and you need a surplus to gain muscle and you need a caloric deficit to lose fat. But what caloric deficit to lose fat. But what caloric deficit to lose fat. But what happened in these studies is the happened in these studies is the happened in these studies is the recomposition phenomenon is I think recomposition phenomenon is I think recomposition phenomenon is I think seven out of the 10 studies was a lean seven out of the 10 studies was a lean seven out of the 10 studies was a lean mass gain dominant recomposition. So in mass gain dominant recomposition. So in mass gain dominant recomposition. So in other words, more lean mass was gained other words, more lean mass was gained other words, more lean mass was gained than fat was lost. So there were net than fat was lost. So there were net than fat was lost. So there were net gains in body mass by the end of these gains in body mass by the end of these gains in body mass by the end of these trials, which would at least very these trials, which would at least very these trials, which would at least very strongly imply that fat was lost in a strongly imply that fat was lost in a strongly imply that fat was lost in a caloric surplus. If you were going to caloric surplus. If you were going to caloric surplus. If you were going to suggest to somebody uh the best way to suggest to somebody uh the best way to suggest to somebody uh the best way to approach this approach this approach this um let's say somebody um let's say somebody um let's say somebody loosely speaking and this is not a loosely speaking and this is not a loosely speaking and this is not a competitive athlete. This could be a man competitive athlete. This could be a man competitive athlete. This could be a man or a woman assuming that the same advice or a woman assuming that the same advice or a woman assuming that the same advice would pertain to both. Um is willing to would pertain to both. Um is willing to would pertain to both. Um is willing to do resistance training three to four do resistance training three to four do resistance training three to four times per week. Let's say three times per week. Let's say three times per week. Let's say three times per week. do some cardio three times per week. do some cardio three times per week. do some cardio three times per week um for about an hour each session week um for about an hour each session week um for about an hour each session for those um and they for those um and they for those um and they are willing to eat maintenance calories are willing to eat maintenance calories are willing to eat maintenance calories or slightly over and their goal is to or slightly over and their goal is to or slightly over and their goal is to gain some muscle and lose some fat. gain some muscle and lose some fat. gain some muscle and lose some fat. Where would you set the calories Where would you set the calories Where would you set the calories relative to uh their needs? Would it be relative to uh their needs? Would it be relative to uh their needs? Would it be an extra 2 to 500 calories? I realize an extra 2 to 500 calories? I realize an extra 2 to 500 calories? I realize that's hard to say cuz we should talk in that's hard to say cuz we should talk in that's hard to say cuz we should talk in percentages, but let's just let's just percentages, but let's just let's just percentages, but let's just let's just keep it broad for sake of a broad keep it broad for sake of a broad keep it broad for sake of a broad audience. Um, how much more than maintenance Um, how much more than maintenance Um, how much more than maintenance should somebody ingest? And and let's should somebody ingest? And and let's should somebody ingest? And and let's assume that when they go in the gym, assume that when they go in the gym, assume that when they go in the gym, they know what they're doing. They warm they know what they're doing. They warm they know what they're doing. They warm up for 5 10 minutes and then they train up for 5 10 minutes and then they train up for 5 10 minutes and then they train hard. They take the sets close to hard. They take the sets close to hard. They take the sets close to failure. They're doing, you know, three failure. They're doing, you know, three failure. They're doing, you know, three to six sets per body part. They're to six sets per body part. They're to six sets per body part. They're they're training me with meaningful they're training me with meaningful they're training me with meaningful effort. And when they do their cardio, effort. And when they do their cardio, effort. And when they do their cardio, they're somewhere between zone two and they're somewhere between zone two and they're somewhere between zone two and maybe they throw in a you know a max maybe they throw in a you know a max maybe they throw in a you know a max heart rate workout once a week. They do heart rate workout once a week. They do heart rate workout once a week. They do some sprints in the middle of their some sprints in the middle of their some sprints in the middle of their zone two and go back to you know this I zone two and go back to you know this I zone two and go back to you know this I think is pretty typical of what a lot of think is pretty typical of what a lot of think is pretty typical of what a lot of people are willing to do or currently people are willing to do or currently people are willing to do or currently doing. I would say sort of the simple doing. I would say sort of the simple doing. I would say sort of the simple and direct answer is you try to keep the and direct answer is you try to keep the and direct answer is you try to keep the caloric surplus caloric surplus caloric surplus pretty judicious. So 10%ish above pretty judicious. So 10%ish above pretty judicious. So 10%ish above maintenance conditions could which could maintenance conditions could which could maintenance conditions could which could be for somewhere between uh 200 possibly be for somewhere between uh 200 possibly be for somewhere between uh 200 possibly 300 calories 300 calories 300 calories above what you see as maintenance. above what you see as maintenance. above what you see as maintenance. And the common thread amongst these And the common thread amongst these And the common thread amongst these recomposition studies was that protein recomposition studies was that protein recomposition studies was that protein was very high. Protein was somewhere was very high. Protein was somewhere was very high. Protein was somewhere between a gram to a gram and a half per between a gram to a gram and a half per between a gram to a gram and a half per pound of body weight. pound of body weight. pound of body weight. Interesting. So now we've upped the Interesting. So now we've upped the Interesting. So now we've upped the protein intake. protein intake. protein intake. Yes. Could we even say that the caloric Yes. Could we even say that the caloric Yes. Could we even say that the caloric uh this 10% above maintenance should uh this 10% above maintenance should uh this 10% above maintenance should come from quality protein? come from quality protein? come from quality protein? Exactly. Yes. And um there's a Exactly. Yes. And um there's a Exactly. Yes. And um there's a series of studies done by Joey Antonio series of studies done by Joey Antonio series of studies done by Joey Antonio and colleagues where they fed the and colleagues where they fed the and colleagues where they fed the subjects 4 to 800 calories above and beyond their 4 to 800 calories above and beyond their 4 to 800 calories above and beyond their habitual intakes just in protein. habitual intakes just in protein. habitual intakes just in protein. and either recomposition happened or no and either recomposition happened or no and either recomposition happened or no significant change in body composition significant change in body composition significant change in body composition happened. Were they training? Were they training? Were they training? They were training. They were resistance They were training. They were resistance They were training. They were resistance training. And so what protein apparently training. And so what protein apparently training. And so what protein apparently does when you consume very high amounts does when you consume very high amounts does when you consume very high amounts of it up to, you know, a gram, a gram of it up to, you know, a gram, a gram of it up to, you know, a gram, a gram and a half per pound of body weight is and a half per pound of body weight is and a half per pound of body weight is it just sort of spontaneously it just sort of spontaneously it just sort of spontaneously does some magical things. It it'll drive does some magical things. It it'll drive does some magical things. It it'll drive down your intake of the other macros. It down your intake of the other macros. It down your intake of the other macros. It will potentially will potentially will potentially increase your increase your increase your exercise uh energy expenditure and or exercise uh energy expenditure and or exercise uh energy expenditure and or your nonex exercise energy expenditure. your nonex exercise energy expenditure. your nonex exercise energy expenditure. Um it will do odd things like I talked Um it will do odd things like I talked Um it will do odd things like I talked to Joey Antonio when he got some to Joey Antonio when he got some to Joey Antonio when he got some feedback from subjects on his very high feedback from subjects on his very high feedback from subjects on his very high protein study where he subjected them to protein study where he subjected them to protein study where he subjected them to two grams per pound for an 8week period two grams per pound for an 8week period two grams per pound for an 8week period and he had subjects coming to him and he had subjects coming to him and he had subjects coming to him saying, "Hey, I'm like sweating saying, "Hey, I'm like sweating saying, "Hey, I'm like sweating while I'm sleeping." When you say two while I'm sleeping." When you say two while I'm sleeping." When you say two grams of protein per pound of body grams of protein per pound of body grams of protein per pound of body weight, are we talking about increasing total are we talking about increasing total are we talking about increasing total caloric intake or just um using more of caloric intake or just um using more of caloric intake or just um using more of one's daily caloric uh needs uh devoting one's daily caloric uh needs uh devoting one's daily caloric uh needs uh devoting more of that to quality protein? more of that to quality protein? more of that to quality protein? See, that's the super interesting and See, that's the super interesting and See, that's the super interesting and kind of mysterious part. They're kind of mysterious part. They're kind of mysterious part. They're literally saying, "Okay, maintain your literally saying, "Okay, maintain your literally saying, "Okay, maintain your usual dietary habits and then just add usual dietary habits and then just add usual dietary habits and then just add 50 to 100 grams of protein on top." So, 50 to 100 grams of protein on top." So, 50 to 100 grams of protein on top." So, you're eating an extra chicken breast you're eating an extra chicken breast you're eating an extra chicken breast and a couple scoops of whey protein or and a couple scoops of whey protein or and a couple scoops of whey protein or maybe some eggs as well. And so, you're maybe some eggs as well. And so, you're maybe some eggs as well. And so, you're just adding more quality protein just adding more quality protein just adding more quality protein on top of what you're already eating. on top of what you're already eating. on top of what you're already eating. And we already learned that we can And we already learned that we can And we already learned that we can distribute that pretty much wherever we distribute that pretty much wherever we distribute that pretty much wherever we want. Get get just do what's most comfortable Get get just do what's most comfortable Get get just do what's most comfortable for you relative to your training and for you relative to your training and for you relative to your training and other needs. And you're saying then, but other needs. And you're saying then, but other needs. And you're saying then, but they're sweating in their sleep. they're sweating in their sleep. they're sweating in their sleep. They're sweating in their sleep. Extra They're sweating in their sleep. Extra They're sweating in their sleep. Extra 80 to 100 grams of protein. Just add it. 80 to 100 grams of protein. Just add it. 80 to 100 grams of protein. Just add it. And it's a look, it's a it's a free And it's a look, it's a it's a free And it's a look, it's a it's a free living study. So we're not surveilling living study. So we're not surveilling living study. So we're not surveilling people in a metabolic ward. Uh so the people in a metabolic ward. Uh so the people in a metabolic ward. Uh so the increase in protein could have increase in protein could have increase in protein could have translated to greater energy expenditure translated to greater energy expenditure translated to greater energy expenditure through a you know a number of pathways through a you know a number of pathways through a you know a number of pathways non-ex exercise pathways or exercise non-ex exercise pathways or exercise non-ex exercise pathways or exercise pathways. It could have put more power pathways. It could have put more power pathways. It could have put more power to the ground during their training. Um to the ground during their training. Um to the ground during their training. Um there could have been some you know just there could have been some you know just there could have been some you know just sort of some magic thermic stuff going sort of some magic thermic stuff going sort of some magic thermic stuff going on. Who knows? But um and also we on. Who knows? But um and also we on. Who knows? But um and also we can't discount the fact that look when can't discount the fact that look when can't discount the fact that look when you're telling people to add let's say you're telling people to add let's say you're telling people to add let's say 80 or 100 grams of protein to their 80 or 100 grams of protein to their 80 or 100 grams of protein to their habitual intake. habitual intake. habitual intake. The weird thing about subjects The weird thing about subjects The weird thing about subjects self-reporting is they tend to over self-reporting is they tend to over self-reporting is they tend to over report the healthy stuff that you report the healthy stuff that you report the healthy stuff that you assign them and under reportport the assign them and under reportport the assign them and under reportport the unhealthy stuff. unhealthy stuff. unhealthy stuff. The good pupil phenomenon. The good pupil phenomenon. The good pupil phenomenon. Yeah. Exactly. And so, Yeah. Exactly. And so, Yeah. Exactly. And so, um, there could be some misreporting um, there could be some misreporting um, there could be some misreporting going on there, but over a series of going on there, but over a series of going on there, but over a series of like fiveish studies now, just stack the like fiveish studies now, just stack the like fiveish studies now, just stack the protein on top, nobody gains fat, and protein on top, nobody gains fat, and protein on top, nobody gains fat, and some people lose fat. Awesome. It's some people lose fat. Awesome. It's some people lose fat. Awesome. It's Yeah, it's it is pretty freaking Yeah, it's it is pretty freaking Yeah, it's it is pretty freaking awesome. Now, here's the thing awesome. Now, here's the thing awesome. Now, here's the thing that needs to be said. Okay, so there that needs to be said. Okay, so there that needs to be said. Okay, so there was a metabolic ward study done in was a metabolic ward study done in was a metabolic ward study done in 2013ish by Bray and colleagues where 2013ish by Bray and colleagues where 2013ish by Bray and colleagues where they subjected the uh participants to they subjected the uh participants to they subjected the uh participants to escalating amounts of protein. escalating amounts of protein. escalating amounts of protein. Um and the it was a protein Um and the it was a protein Um and the it was a protein overfeeding study. There there were overfeeding study. There there were overfeeding study. There there were three levels of protein intakes. There three levels of protein intakes. There three levels of protein intakes. There was 5% protein diet um a 15% protein was 5% protein diet um a 15% protein was 5% protein diet um a 15% protein diet and a 30-ish% protein diet. diet and a 30-ish% protein diet. diet and a 30-ish% protein diet. The calories total calories escalated The calories total calories escalated The calories total calories escalated too. There was no exercise involved with too. There was no exercise involved with too. There was no exercise involved with this metabolic ward study and the this metabolic ward study and the this metabolic ward study and the subjects gained both lean mass and fat subjects gained both lean mass and fat subjects gained both lean mass and fat mass with the escalating protein mass with the escalating protein mass with the escalating protein amounts. So, there's different stuff amounts. So, there's different stuff amounts. So, there's different stuff going on. When you lock people up in a going on. When you lock people up in a going on. When you lock people up in a metabolic ward and they can't train and metabolic ward and they can't train and metabolic ward and they can't train and then you're escalating their protein then you're escalating their protein then you're escalating their protein intakes and calories, they will gain fat intakes and calories, they will gain fat intakes and calories, they will gain fat and lean mass. But in free living and lean mass. But in free living and lean mass. But in free living conditions with resistance training, if conditions with resistance training, if conditions with resistance training, if you just overprotein the subjects, you just overprotein the subjects, you just overprotein the subjects, they actually have a tendency to lose they actually have a tendency to lose they actually have a tendency to lose fat. Uh, and it it's a really interesting Uh, and it it's a really interesting Uh, and it it's a really interesting phenomena because it's been seen phenomena because it's been seen phenomena because it's been seen repeatedly with men and women. with men and women. with men and women. Men and women. Yes. Men and women. Yes. Men and women. Yes. The message I'm getting is if you're The message I'm getting is if you're The message I'm getting is if you're going to add calories, add quality going to add calories, add quality going to add calories, add quality protein. Yeah. Make sure your resistance training here. Make sure your resistance training here. Make sure your resistance training here. I'm building on the previous things we I'm building on the previous things we I'm building on the previous things we talked about. The distribution of the talked about. The distribution of the talked about. The distribution of the protein probably doesn't matter as much protein probably doesn't matter as much protein probably doesn't matter as much uh as just getting the total protein uh as just getting the total protein uh as just getting the total protein uh correct. And I find it very reassuring that I can And I find it very reassuring that I can And I find it very reassuring that I can train fasted or not fasted. Mostly train fasted or not fasted. Mostly train fasted or not fasted. Mostly because very few of us have total because very few of us have total because very few of us have total control of our schedule. So sometimes we control of our schedule. So sometimes we control of our schedule. So sometimes we need to train first thing in the morning need to train first thing in the morning need to train first thing in the morning and we got to catch a flight or head to and we got to catch a flight or head to and we got to catch a flight or head to work and sometimes people only have time work and sometimes people only have time work and sometimes people only have time in the evening and this kind of thing. in the evening and this kind of thing. in the evening and this kind of thing. Um I want to make sure that we talk Um I want to make sure that we talk Um I want to make sure that we talk about some of the other macronutrients. about some of the other macronutrients. about some of the other macronutrients. Sure. Um because Um because Um because carbohydrates do exist. Um we won't talk carbohydrates do exist. Um we won't talk carbohydrates do exist. Um we won't talk about fiber just now. I think can we about fiber just now. I think can we about fiber just now. I think can we actually put fiber um onto the shelf actually put fiber um onto the shelf actually put fiber um onto the shelf quickly by saying we fiber is good, quickly by saying we fiber is good, quickly by saying we fiber is good, right? Yes. Okay. Fiber is good. Get fiber. Okay. Fiber is good. Get fiber. Okay. Fiber is good. Get fiber. Short answer. The short answer is Short answer. The short answer is Short answer. The short answer is it's good. it's good. it's good. Get fiber. Um, and get it through fruits Get fiber. Um, and get it through fruits Get fiber. Um, and get it through fruits and vegetables. And if you if you're not and vegetables. And if you if you're not and vegetables. And if you if you're not doing that, get it through some doing that, get it through some doing that, get it through some supplement, but ideally through fruits supplement, but ideally through fruits supplement, but ideally through fruits and vegetables, right? and vegetables, right? and vegetables, right? Fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains. Fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains. Fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains. Grains are a double-edged sword because Grains are a double-edged sword because Grains are a double-edged sword because they're high calorie. You got the, you they're high calorie. You got the, you they're high calorie. You got the, you know, you got the refined grains, the know, you got the refined grains, the know, you got the refined grains, the flour foods, and then you have the whole flour foods, and then you have the whole flour foods, and then you have the whole grains. But even some of the whole grains. But even some of the whole grains. But even some of the whole grains, there's such thing as whole grains, there's such thing as whole grains, there's such thing as whole grain uh goldfish crackers. So, you grain uh goldfish crackers. So, you grain uh goldfish crackers. So, you know, a bit of a treacherous little area know, a bit of a treacherous little area know, a bit of a treacherous little area there for people who are trying to there for people who are trying to there for people who are trying to economize on the junk and the economize on the junk and the economize on the junk and the calories that they consume. You can calories that they consume. You can calories that they consume. You can still have a whole grain diet that has still have a whole grain diet that has still have a whole grain diet that has just a bunch of crap, just a bunch of crap, just a bunch of crap, right? So, fruits, vegetables, right? So, fruits, vegetables, right? So, fruits, vegetables, get but get your fiber. Fiber is key. get but get your fiber. Fiber is key. get but get your fiber. Fiber is key. But when we talk about carbohydrates, But when we talk about carbohydrates, But when we talk about carbohydrates, let's divide them crudely. let's divide them crudely. let's divide them crudely. Sure. into starchy carbohydrates. So Sure. into starchy carbohydrates. So Sure. into starchy carbohydrates. So stuff that stuff that stuff that basically will melt in your mouth. basically will melt in your mouth. basically will melt in your mouth. That's the way I think about it, right? That's the way I think about it, right? That's the way I think about it, right? A piece of cooked potato, a piece of A piece of cooked potato, a piece of A piece of cooked potato, a piece of cooked yam, you know, if you Yes. If you cooked yam, you know, if you Yes. If you cooked yam, you know, if you Yes. If you put a piece of cooked pasta in your put a piece of cooked pasta in your put a piece of cooked pasta in your mouth long enough or even uncooked mouth long enough or even uncooked mouth long enough or even uncooked pasta, it'll eventually dissolve or just pasta, it'll eventually dissolve or just pasta, it'll eventually dissolve or just inhale it, inhale it, inhale it, right? Or well, don't do that. Um or, right? Or well, don't do that. Um or, right? Or well, don't do that. Um or, you know, a piece of broccoli, which you know, a piece of broccoli, which you know, a piece of broccoli, which you know, most of it is not going to melt in know, most of it is not going to melt in know, most of it is not going to melt in your mouth. You you'll be waiting your mouth. You you'll be waiting your mouth. You you'll be waiting several weeks for, you know, because several weeks for, you know, because several weeks for, you know, because there's a lot of fiber there. So um this there's a lot of fiber there. So um this there's a lot of fiber there. So um this is the uh crude way of distinguishing is the uh crude way of distinguishing is the uh crude way of distinguishing between fibers and non- fibers uh you between fibers and non- fibers uh you between fibers and non- fibers uh you know so starchy and non-starchy know so starchy and non-starchy know so starchy and non-starchy carbohydrates. Starches in some sense are a great fuel. Starches in some sense are a great fuel. Starches in some sense are a great fuel. They've put glycogen in our liver and They've put glycogen in our liver and They've put glycogen in our liver and muscles. They can fuel things like muscles. They can fuel things like muscles. They can fuel things like resistance training. resistance training. resistance training. Um they can help us think. All the Um they can help us think. All the Um they can help us think. All the ketogenic folks have been like I think ketogenic folks have been like I think ketogenic folks have been like I think best fasted or I think best keto but um best fasted or I think best keto but um best fasted or I think best keto but um brain likes glucose. What is your take brain likes glucose. What is your take brain likes glucose. What is your take on carbohydrates with respect to on carbohydrates with respect to on carbohydrates with respect to maintaining or losing body fat? Meaning, maintaining or losing body fat? Meaning, maintaining or losing body fat? Meaning, do carbohydrates make it harder to do carbohydrates make it harder to do carbohydrates make it harder to do that? Um, if one is doing everything that? Um, if one is doing everything that? Um, if one is doing everything else equally? Uh, meaning you're getting else equally? Uh, meaning you're getting else equally? Uh, meaning you're getting exercise, you're um, you know, you're exercise, you're um, you know, you're exercise, you're um, you know, you're not exceeding your choric daily caloric not exceeding your choric daily caloric not exceeding your choric daily caloric intake. Uh, is it are starches intake. Uh, is it are starches intake. Uh, is it are starches inherently bad? That's a great question. inherently bad? That's a great question. inherently bad? That's a great question. Um I'm in I defer to the evidence, you I'm in I defer to the evidence, you I'm in I defer to the evidence, you know, you've got and of course evidence know, you've got and of course evidence know, you've got and of course evidence is its own thing. You've got is its own thing. You've got is its own thing. You've got research here and then you have research here and then you have research here and then you have observations and anecdote here, right? observations and anecdote here, right? observations and anecdote here, right? Well, let's talk primarily about Well, let's talk primarily about Well, let's talk primarily about research and I mean anecdote is great. research and I mean anecdote is great. research and I mean anecdote is great. Um but it generally tends to circle Um but it generally tends to circle Um but it generally tends to circle around to what people find has worked around to what people find has worked around to what people find has worked best for them. And I'm happy to talk best for them. And I'm happy to talk best for them. And I'm happy to talk about that. I'm sure you're happy to about that. I'm sure you're happy to about that. I'm sure you're happy to talk about that. But I think um what I talk about that. But I think um what I talk about that. But I think um what I like to emphasize on this podcast and like to emphasize on this podcast and like to emphasize on this podcast and what you do so beautifully is to talk what you do so beautifully is to talk what you do so beautifully is to talk about like what does the best possible about like what does the best possible about like what does the best possible set of controlled studies say? set of controlled studies say? set of controlled studies say? Yeah. When kind of lumped together unless When kind of lumped together unless When kind of lumped together unless there's one study that kind of rises there's one study that kind of rises there's one study that kind of rises above the rest because it was done so above the rest because it was done so above the rest because it was done so well. I mean I think I mean I think I mean I think it's so hard to do quality studies in it's so hard to do quality studies in it's so hard to do quality studies in humans. So we have to have that caveat. So we have to have that caveat. So we have to have that caveat. The more you control the less natural The more you control the less natural The more you control the less natural the conditions are, right? the more the conditions are, right? the more the conditions are, right? the more natural the conditions are, the less can natural the conditions are, the less can natural the conditions are, the less can be controlled. This is why there will be controlled. This is why there will be controlled. This is why there will never there will always be jobs for never there will always be jobs for never there will always be jobs for people in nutrition and fitness because people in nutrition and fitness because people in nutrition and fitness because ultimately you bring people into a ultimately you bring people into a ultimately you bring people into a metabolic ward, metabolic ward, metabolic ward, it's very unnatural. You let them free it's very unnatural. You let them free it's very unnatural. You let them free range and just tell you what they ate, range and just tell you what they ate, range and just tell you what they ate, they lie or they forget or they and they lie or they forget or they and they lie or they forget or they and they cheat. They like sneak a they sneak a uh cheat. They like sneak a they sneak a uh cheat. They like sneak a they sneak a uh some Starburst and they don't tell you some Starburst and they don't tell you some Starburst and they don't tell you about it. So that's just life, you know. about it. So that's just life, you know. about it. So that's just life, you know. even clients who are paying you a lot of even clients who are paying you a lot of even clients who are paying you a lot of money, you can't necessarily money, you can't necessarily money, you can't necessarily trust 100% of what they're reporting to trust 100% of what they're reporting to trust 100% of what they're reporting to you, you know, much less like a group of you, you know, much less like a group of you, you know, much less like a group of subjects in a study. So, um yeah, the subjects in a study. So, um yeah, the subjects in a study. So, um yeah, the carbohydrate thing, starch, whe the carbohydrate thing, starch, whe the carbohydrate thing, starch, whe whether it's starches, whether it's whether it's starches, whether it's whether it's starches, whether it's sugars, I mean, we either one. So, the sugars, I mean, we either one. So, the sugars, I mean, we either one. So, the body of research on carbohydrate and fat body of research on carbohydrate and fat body of research on carbohydrate and fat loss, you can distill it down like this. loss, you can distill it down like this. loss, you can distill it down like this. As long as between the two groups you As long as between the two groups you As long as between the two groups you have equated total calories and you've have equated total calories and you've have equated total calories and you've equated protein intake between the equated protein intake between the equated protein intake between the groups, then body fat reduction by the groups, then body fat reduction by the groups, then body fat reduction by the end of every well-controlled trial in end of every well-controlled trial in end of every well-controlled trial in existence basically shows no significant existence basically shows no significant existence basically shows no significant difference in fat loss between the difference in fat loss between the difference in fat loss between the groups. So protein is kind of the great groups. So protein is kind of the great groups. So protein is kind of the great equalizer that pro protein and total equalizer that pro protein and total equalizer that pro protein and total calories. Now here's the little calories. Now here's the little calories. Now here's the little wrinkle to that answer. If you take wrinkle to that answer. If you take wrinkle to that answer. If you take somebody who's on a standard western somebody who's on a standard western somebody who's on a standard western diet and you put them on a ketogenic diet and you put them on a ketogenic diet and you put them on a ketogenic diet, or if you control the experiment with or if you control the experiment with or if you control the experiment with like kind of a high carb uh low-fat type like kind of a high carb uh low-fat type like kind of a high carb uh low-fat type of regular run-of-the-mill control diet of regular run-of-the-mill control diet of regular run-of-the-mill control diet versus a ketogenic diet and you don't versus a ketogenic diet and you don't versus a ketogenic diet and you don't equate protein, then the ketogenic diet equate protein, then the ketogenic diet equate protein, then the ketogenic diet will beat the crap out of the control will beat the crap out of the control will beat the crap out of the control diet every time with fat loss and weight diet every time with fat loss and weight diet every time with fat loss and weight loss because it has more protein. And in loss because it has more protein. And in loss because it has more protein. And in some cases, uh, you know, if you go as some cases, uh, you know, if you go as some cases, uh, you know, if you go as extreme as like carnivore type diet and extreme as like carnivore type diet and extreme as like carnivore type diet and stuff like that, then you're looking at stuff like that, then you're looking at stuff like that, then you're looking at a narrowing of your options. So the a narrowing of your options. So the a narrowing of your options. So the reduction in variety and possibilities reduction in variety and possibilities reduction in variety and possibilities also leads to less total caloric intake. also leads to less total caloric intake. also leads to less total caloric intake. So with ketogenic diets, there routinely So with ketogenic diets, there routinely So with ketogenic diets, there routinely is when it is an ad libitum ketogenic is when it is an ad libitum ketogenic is when it is an ad libitum ketogenic diet that you put the subjects on. Can diet that you put the subjects on. Can diet that you put the subjects on. Can you maybe explain ad libbitum um to you maybe explain ad libbitum um to you maybe explain ad libbitum um to people whose Latin is lacking or having people whose Latin is lacking or having people whose Latin is lacking or having worked in a lab. Yeah. worked in a lab. Yeah. worked in a lab. Yeah. Okay. No, thanks Yeah. Okay. No, thanks Yeah. Okay. No, thanks for that. Um so ad libbitum means that for that. Um so ad libbitum means that for that. Um so ad libbitum means that you are not consciously calculating or you are not consciously calculating or you are not consciously calculating or restricting. You are just eating restricting. You are just eating restricting. You are just eating as desired. as desired. as desired. As desired. And so when you assign As desired. And so when you assign As desired. And so when you assign somebody a ketogenic diet where you say, somebody a ketogenic diet where you say, somebody a ketogenic diet where you say, "Hey, avoid this, and this, and "Hey, avoid this, and this, and "Hey, avoid this, and this, and that carb, fruit, avoid carbs, and that carb, fruit, avoid carbs, and that carb, fruit, avoid carbs, and that you can eat as much as you feel like you can eat as much as you feel like you can eat as much as you feel like with the proteins and the fats, go do with the proteins and the fats, go do with the proteins and the fats, go do it." What happens when you assign it." What happens when you assign it." What happens when you assign somebody that is they spontaneously eat somebody that is they spontaneously eat somebody that is they spontaneously eat across the range of studies somewhere across the range of studies somewhere across the range of studies somewhere between four to all the way 900 calories between four to all the way 900 calories between four to all the way 900 calories less per day compared to their habitual less per day compared to their habitual less per day compared to their habitual intakes or compared to the control diet intakes or compared to the control diet intakes or compared to the control diet intakes. That's just what happens. intakes. That's just what happens. intakes. That's just what happens. That's interesting, right? Because they That's interesting, right? Because they That's interesting, right? Because they could eat more if they want. they could eat more if they want. they could eat more if they want. They're not being restricted. They're not being restricted. They're not being restricted. Yeah. I think this speaks to how satiating I think this speaks to how satiating I think this speaks to how satiating protein is protein is protein is and especially how satiating protein and especially how satiating protein and especially how satiating protein and fats are in combination. I mean I mean fats are in combination. I mean I mean fats are in combination. I mean I mean if I'm hungry if I'm hungry if I'm hungry on a long drive and I can only eat one on a long drive and I can only eat one on a long drive and I can only eat one thing, I'm assuming I have water, which thing, I'm assuming I have water, which thing, I'm assuming I have water, which I would want with me. I would like I'm I would want with me. I would like I'm I would want with me. I would like I'm out on the road. I'm on Interstate 5. I out on the road. I'm on Interstate 5. I out on the road. I'm on Interstate 5. I got no food with me. Everything's got no food with me. Everything's got no food with me. Everything's closed. It's Christmas Day. But there's closed. It's Christmas Day. But there's closed. It's Christmas Day. But there's a In-N-Out burger. They're probably a In-N-Out burger. They're probably a In-N-Out burger. They're probably close, too. And I can get two hamburger close, too. And I can get two hamburger close, too. And I can get two hamburger patties. That's my pick. Not the French patties. That's my pick. Not the French patties. That's my pick. Not the French fries. Um even though calorie for fries. Um even though calorie for fries. Um even though calorie for calorie odd that, you know, probably calorie odd that, you know, probably calorie odd that, you know, probably landing about the same place, more or landing about the same place, more or landing about the same place, more or less, because there's just something so less, because there's just something so less, because there's just something so inherently satiating about protein. inherently satiating about protein. inherently satiating about protein. Yeah. So, that makes sense that the keto diet So, that makes sense that the keto diet So, that makes sense that the keto diet um makes sense. The issue I uh have with um makes sense. The issue I uh have with um makes sense. The issue I uh have with the keto diet is that the keto diet is that the keto diet is that until pretty recently, it was tougher to until pretty recently, it was tougher to until pretty recently, it was tougher to uh remain in the general social context uh remain in the general social context uh remain in the general social context of life. I mean, you can't have a of life. I mean, you can't have a of life. I mean, you can't have a cracker. Mhm. You I don't like crackers, but you can't You I don't like crackers, but you can't You I don't like crackers, but you can't have a piece of sourdough bread. have a piece of sourdough bread. have a piece of sourdough bread. That That's a That's That That's a That's That That's a That's rough. That's rough. That's rough. That's rough, right? That's rough, right? That's rough, right? We love sourdough around here. We love sourdough around here. We love sourdough around here. Yeah. And then people struggle a lot Yeah. And then people struggle a lot Yeah. And then people struggle a lot with holidays, right? I think I think with holidays, right? I think I think with holidays, right? I think I think the keto is tough for people around the keto is tough for people around the keto is tough for people around the holidays. um as long as we're in this holidays. um as long as we're in this holidays. um as long as we're in this category of discussion. category of discussion. category of discussion. Yeah. Um what are your thoughts about what are your thoughts about what are your thoughts about inflammation? And and here's why I ask inflammation? And and here's why I ask inflammation? And and here's why I ask and I ask it this way is and I ask it this way is and I ask it this way is I know many people who've struggled I know many people who've struggled I know many people who've struggled with their weight for a very long time. with their weight for a very long time. with their weight for a very long time. Uh a lot of male friends, some female Uh a lot of male friends, some female Uh a lot of male friends, some female friends who when they adopt a diet of the who when they adopt a diet of the who when they adopt a diet of the following things, meat, fish, eggs, following things, meat, fish, eggs, following things, meat, fish, eggs, parmesan cheese as the only category of parmesan cheese as the only category of parmesan cheese as the only category of dairy. So, hard cheese, fruit, and dairy. So, hard cheese, fruit, and dairy. So, hard cheese, fruit, and vegetables, olive oil, butter, coffee, vegetables, olive oil, butter, coffee, vegetables, olive oil, butter, coffee, tea, fine, but no sodas or anything tea, fine, but no sodas or anything tea, fine, but no sodas or anything except diet sodas. They lose significant except diet sodas. They lose significant except diet sodas. They lose significant amounts of body fat. Probably some amounts of body fat. Probably some amounts of body fat. Probably some water, too. So, they're not eating any water, too. So, they're not eating any water, too. So, they're not eating any starches. No rice, no oatmeal, no bread, starches. No rice, no oatmeal, no bread, starches. No rice, no oatmeal, no bread, no pizza, nothing. But they have all no pizza, nothing. But they have all no pizza, nothing. But they have all managed, this is anecdote, but they've managed, this is anecdote, but they've managed, this is anecdote, but they've all managed to lose anywhere from 25 to all managed to lose anywhere from 25 to all managed to lose anywhere from 25 to 50 or even 60 pounds. They're exercising 50 or even 60 pounds. They're exercising 50 or even 60 pounds. They're exercising typically, sometimes just cardio. typically, sometimes just cardio. typically, sometimes just cardio. So significant amounts of body weight So significant amounts of body weight So significant amounts of body weight and they keep it off and a number of and they keep it off and a number of and they keep it off and a number of their health challenges seem to resolve their health challenges seem to resolve their health challenges seem to resolve themselves perhaps secondarily to the themselves perhaps secondarily to the themselves perhaps secondarily to the weight loss. But I often wonder whether weight loss. But I often wonder whether weight loss. But I often wonder whether or not this quote unquote what some or not this quote unquote what some or not this quote unquote what some people call a low inflammation diet people call a low inflammation diet people call a low inflammation diet because there's so few processed and because there's so few processed and because there's so few processed and highly processed foods in this regimen highly processed foods in this regimen highly processed foods in this regimen has additional benefits that start to has additional benefits that start to has additional benefits that start to synergize with the fat loss. And you synergize with the fat loss. And you synergize with the fat loss. And you know, it's remarkable how much know, it's remarkable how much know, it's remarkable how much better they look, how much better they better they look, how much better they better they look, how much better they feel, and they can maintain that pretty feel, and they can maintain that pretty feel, and they can maintain that pretty well cuz you can say, you know, I'll well cuz you can say, you know, I'll well cuz you can say, you know, I'll pass on the on the bread and the and the pass on the on the bread and the and the pass on the on the bread and the and the pie, but you know, I'm going to have pie, but you know, I'm going to have pie, but you know, I'm going to have double serving of turkey and Brussels double serving of turkey and Brussels double serving of turkey and Brussels sprouts. And I, you know, it's kind of sprouts. And I, you know, it's kind of sprouts. And I, you know, it's kind of remarkable what can be accomplished with remarkable what can be accomplished with remarkable what can be accomplished with what I just described. And yet, I don't what I just described. And yet, I don't what I just described. And yet, I don't know a name for that diet, and it's not know a name for that diet, and it's not know a name for that diet, and it's not my it's not what I follow. I eat my it's not what I follow. I eat my it's not what I follow. I eat starches. But um what are your thoughts starches. But um what are your thoughts starches. But um what are your thoughts on inflammation and how certain on inflammation and how certain on inflammation and how certain macronutrient profiles perhaps are macronutrient profiles perhaps are macronutrient profiles perhaps are pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory or pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory or pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory or something people rarely talk about which something people rarely talk about which something people rarely talk about which is inflammatory neutral kind of keep you is inflammatory neutral kind of keep you is inflammatory neutral kind of keep you in a neither high nor low inflammation in a neither high nor low inflammation in a neither high nor low inflammation state but just kind of a normal state but just kind of a normal state but just kind of a normal fluctuations in inflammation. fluctuations in inflammation. fluctuations in inflammation. Long question but I feel like it's one Long question but I feel like it's one Long question but I feel like it's one I've wanted to ask for a while and I've wanted to ask for a while and I've wanted to ask for a while and you're the guy to ask. you're the guy to ask. you're the guy to ask. Okay. So I'm going to speculate a Okay. So I'm going to speculate a Okay. So I'm going to speculate a little bit. Uh I think that any diet little bit. Uh I think that any diet little bit. Uh I think that any diet that facilitates substantial fat loss is that facilitates substantial fat loss is that facilitates substantial fat loss is going to lower the amount of going to lower the amount of going to lower the amount of inflammatory cytoines circulating and inflammatory cytoines circulating and inflammatory cytoines circulating and emanating from the atapost tissue. And emanating from the atapost tissue. And emanating from the atapost tissue. And so if you can get that body fat down so if you can get that body fat down so if you can get that body fat down then you can get chronic lowgrade then you can get chronic lowgrade then you can get chronic lowgrade inflammation down. uh if that body fat inflammation down. uh if that body fat inflammation down. uh if that body fat is reduced from everywhere the is reduced from everywhere the is reduced from everywhere the subcutaneous space especially the subcutaneous space especially the subcutaneous space especially the visceral space then you're going to do a visceral space then you're going to do a visceral space then you're going to do a lot of good things for long-term health. lot of good things for long-term health. lot of good things for long-term health. Um the reason why the diet that you Um the reason why the diet that you Um the reason why the diet that you described is so effective at this is described is so effective at this is described is so effective at this is because it lacks hyper palatability. because it lacks hyper palatability. because it lacks hyper palatability. And so the way that you create hyper And so the way that you create hyper And so the way that you create hyper palatability, hyper palatability is palatability, hyper palatability is palatability, hyper palatability is basically the tendency for a food to be basically the tendency for a food to be basically the tendency for a food to be very flavorful, very delicious, and very flavorful, very delicious, and very flavorful, very delicious, and very easy to passively over consume. And so easy to passively over consume. And so easy to passively over consume. And so the formula for hyper palatability is the formula for hyper palatability is the formula for hyper palatability is basically refined carbs, refined carbs, refined carbs, fat, mixed together, fat, mixed together, fat, mixed together, salt it, and or make it sweet. And salt it, and or make it sweet. And salt it, and or make it sweet. And there's your formula for food that is there's your formula for food that is there's your formula for food that is easily passively over consumed. easily passively over consumed. easily passively over consumed. And the diet that you described doesn't And the diet that you described doesn't And the diet that you described doesn't have these ultrarocessed, highly have these ultrarocessed, highly have these ultrarocessed, highly engineered fat, carb, refined carb and fat combo fat, carb, refined carb and fat combo fat, carb, refined carb and fat combo foods that we are just kind of driven to foods that we are just kind of driven to foods that we are just kind of driven to just inhale down. Um, just inhale down. Um, just inhale down. Um, and so I think that my view could and so I think that my view could and so I think that my view could possibly be a little bit too simplistic, possibly be a little bit too simplistic, possibly be a little bit too simplistic, but I think the inflammation issue is but I think the inflammation issue is but I think the inflammation issue is really tied to uh an excess body fat really tied to uh an excess body fat really tied to uh an excess body fat issue. I'm very grateful for that answer and I'm very grateful for that answer and I'm very grateful for that answer and um again, I've seen so many friends and um again, I've seen so many friends and um again, I've seen so many friends now lose significant amounts of body fat now lose significant amounts of body fat now lose significant amounts of body fat and stick with this diet. It's also one and stick with this diet. It's also one and stick with this diet. It's also one that if one were to have a slice of cake that if one were to have a slice of cake that if one were to have a slice of cake or a piece of pizza, you're not really or a piece of pizza, you're not really or a piece of pizza, you're not really deviating that far from the from the deviating that far from the from the deviating that far from the from the total contour of the nutritional plan. total contour of the nutritional plan. total contour of the nutritional plan. It's not like you're suddenly out of It's not like you're suddenly out of It's not like you're suddenly out of keto or something. Um, and they don't keto or something. Um, and they don't keto or something. Um, and they don't tend to cascade into binges and things tend to cascade into binges and things tend to cascade into binges and things of that sort. I will say that most of that sort. I will say that most of that sort. I will say that most of these people also quit drinking alcohol these people also quit drinking alcohol these people also quit drinking alcohol at the same time, which probably has its at the same time, which probably has its at the same time, which probably has its own benefits. We'll return to alcohol a own benefits. We'll return to alcohol a own benefits. We'll return to alcohol a little bit later. And there are some little bit later. And there are some little bit later. And there are some nutrients that are directly nutrients that are directly nutrients that are directly anti-inflammatory like omega-3 fatty anti-inflammatory like omega-3 fatty anti-inflammatory like omega-3 fatty acids. Huge literature on their acids. Huge literature on their acids. Huge literature on their anti-inflammatory effects. anti-inflammatory effects. anti-inflammatory effects. Do you supplement with those personally? Do you supplement with those personally? Do you supplement with those personally? I you take fish oil? I you take fish oil? I you take fish oil? I do. And I know that there is some uh I do. And I know that there is some uh I do. And I know that there is some uh controversy and some infighting controversy and some infighting controversy and some infighting with uh the idea of supplementing with uh the idea of supplementing with uh the idea of supplementing with fish oil. Now people are afraid of fish oil. Now people are afraid of fish oil. Now people are afraid of atrial fibrillation and things like atrial fibrillation and things like atrial fibrillation and things like that. But h you know I' I've been doing that. But h you know I' I've been doing that. But h you know I' I've been doing it and um and if you look at the it and um and if you look at the it and um and if you look at the literature especially uh the literature especially uh the literature especially uh the randomized control trials um it is randomized control trials um it is randomized control trials um it is mostly good stuff man I mean you can mostly good stuff man I mean you can mostly good stuff man I mean you can find negative literature on almost find negative literature on almost find negative literature on almost anything that you do. anything that you do. anything that you do. Sure. But uh on balance, I am still Sure. But uh on balance, I am still Sure. But uh on balance, I am still comfortable with supplementing with fish comfortable with supplementing with fish comfortable with supplementing with fish oil at this point in time. Regardless of oil at this point in time. Regardless of oil at this point in time. Regardless of uh the mounting evidence that oh, it uh the mounting evidence that oh, it uh the mounting evidence that oh, it might not do anything or oh, it might not do anything or oh, it might not do anything or oh, it might have this or that potentially adverse have this or that potentially adverse have this or that potentially adverse effect. I kind of think it's a effect. I kind of think it's a effect. I kind of think it's a no-brainer if you're not somebody who no-brainer if you're not somebody who no-brainer if you're not somebody who eats fatty fish regularly through the eats fatty fish regularly through the eats fatty fish regularly through the week. Yeah, the high quality sources of fatty Yeah, the high quality sources of fatty Yeah, the high quality sources of fatty fish tend to be very expensive. fish tend to be very expensive. fish tend to be very expensive. Um and they're harder and harder to Um and they're harder and harder to Um and they're harder and harder to find. and talk about controversy. You find. and talk about controversy. You find. and talk about controversy. You get into this debate about whether like get into this debate about whether like get into this debate about whether like different sources of salmon and it gets different sources of salmon and it gets different sources of salmon and it gets really messy. Um I'm sure there are really messy. Um I'm sure there are really messy. Um I'm sure there are great sources out there, but that's a great sources out there, but that's a great sources out there, but that's a whole discussion into itself. I take whole discussion into itself. I take whole discussion into itself. I take fish oil also have for many years. I fish oil also have for many years. I fish oil also have for many years. I plan to continue doing it and um you plan to continue doing it and um you plan to continue doing it and um you know, so I'm grateful to hear that you know, so I'm grateful to hear that you know, so I'm grateful to hear that you do as well because we're both on that do as well because we're both on that do as well because we're both on that train. We're rebels. train. We're rebels. train. We're rebels. Yeah. So the um the Yeah, the Yeah. So the um the Yeah, the Yeah. So the um the Yeah, the anti-inflammation effect if nothing else anti-inflammation effect if nothing else anti-inflammation effect if nothing else um seems to warrant that. I'd like to um seems to warrant that. I'd like to um seems to warrant that. I'd like to um I'd like to talk about I'd like to talk about I'd like to talk about sugar. I've had people on this podcast um sit I've had people on this podcast um sit I've had people on this podcast um sit where you're sitting and basically paint where you're sitting and basically paint where you're sitting and basically paint a picture of sugar that it is not quite a picture of sugar that it is not quite a picture of sugar that it is not quite as bad as crack cocaine and meth, but as bad as crack cocaine and meth, but as bad as crack cocaine and meth, but not too far from that. not too far from that. not too far from that. Kind of exaggerating. And I've had um Kind of exaggerating. And I've had um Kind of exaggerating. And I've had um people who land in the more um kind of people who land in the more um kind of people who land in the more um kind of tempered response to sugar. But let's tempered response to sugar. But let's tempered response to sugar. But let's define sugar. Um, we're not talking when define sugar. Um, we're not talking when define sugar. Um, we're not talking when I say sugar, I'm not talking about I say sugar, I'm not talking about I say sugar, I'm not talking about fructose in fruit because in fruit fructose in fruit because in fruit fructose in fruit because in fruit you've got uh fructose, but you've got you've got uh fructose, but you've got you've got uh fructose, but you've got fiber and there's a high water content. fiber and there's a high water content. fiber and there's a high water content. And some sure some fruits have higher And some sure some fruits have higher And some sure some fruits have higher fructose content than others. Mangoes fructose content than others. Mangoes fructose content than others. Mangoes versus apples for instance or something versus apples for instance or something versus apples for instance or something of that sort. But when I'm talking about of that sort. But when I'm talking about of that sort. But when I'm talking about sugar, I'm talking about if one looks at sugar, I'm talking about if one looks at sugar, I'm talking about if one looks at a package or a label and sees added a package or a label and sees added a package or a label and sees added sugars. How bad are added sugars? Because those How bad are added sugars? Because those How bad are added sugars? Because those are really the ones that tend to, are really the ones that tend to, are really the ones that tend to, you know, fall into this bin of quote you know, fall into this bin of quote you know, fall into this bin of quote unquote bad sugar in a lot of people's unquote bad sugar in a lot of people's unquote bad sugar in a lot of people's minds. Okay, so they dilute the uh Okay, so they dilute the uh Okay, so they dilute the uh the nutrative value of the diet and they the nutrative value of the diet and they the nutrative value of the diet and they contribute to hyper palatability. If contribute to hyper palatability. If contribute to hyper palatability. If you're talking about exttrinsic sugars you're talking about exttrinsic sugars you're talking about exttrinsic sugars added to the diet, you know, they added to the diet, you know, they added to the diet, you know, they only really only two sources of only really only two sources of only really only two sources of intrinsic um sugars are in fruit and in milk. um sugars are in fruit and in milk. um sugars are in fruit and in milk. Um everything else you you're pretty Um everything else you you're pretty Um everything else you you're pretty much adding it with the exception of much adding it with the exception of much adding it with the exception of like maybe agave, but that's kind of a like maybe agave, but that's kind of a like maybe agave, but that's kind of a rare esoteric thing, but added sugars to rare esoteric thing, but added sugars to rare esoteric thing, but added sugars to the diet should be consumed judiciously. the diet should be consumed judiciously. the diet should be consumed judiciously. uh the working um recommendation is to uh the working um recommendation is to uh the working um recommendation is to try to limit added sugars to the diet to try to limit added sugars to the diet to try to limit added sugars to the diet to 10% of total calories. So if you're 10% of total calories. So if you're 10% of total calories. So if you're somebody who likes to put maple syrup on somebody who likes to put maple syrup on somebody who likes to put maple syrup on whatever you might do or somebody who whatever you might do or somebody who whatever you might do or somebody who likes to put honey on whatever you might likes to put honey on whatever you might likes to put honey on whatever you might do, then you may want to limit that to do, then you may want to limit that to do, then you may want to limit that to typical let's say 2,000 calorie diet. typical let's say 2,000 calorie diet. typical let's say 2,000 calorie diet. You may want to limit it to like a You may want to limit it to like a You may want to limit it to like a maximum of 40 50 grams a day. maximum of 40 50 grams a day. maximum of 40 50 grams a day. That still seems high. That still seems high. That still seems high. It does. 40 50 gram. It does. 40 50 gram. It does. 40 50 gram. Who's eating that much sugar? Who's eating that much sugar? Who's eating that much sugar? If that me. If that me. If that me. Oh, really? You have a sweet tooth? Oh, really? You have a sweet tooth? Oh, really? You have a sweet tooth? No. I love honey and I and I love No. I love honey and I and I love No. I love honey and I and I love maple syrup. maple syrup. maple syrup. See, I have a savory tooth. Like if I See, I have a savory tooth. Like if I See, I have a savory tooth. Like if I have to try and not eat the entire block have to try and not eat the entire block have to try and not eat the entire block of Parmesan cheese. of Parmesan cheese. of Parmesan cheese. I have both, man. I' I've I have both, man. I' I've I have both, man. I' I've I always joke that I have inner fat boy I always joke that I have inner fat boy I always joke that I have inner fat boy within me, but I actually have been within me, but I actually have been within me, but I actually have been technically obese by BMI standards like technically obese by BMI standards like technically obese by BMI standards like uh 10 yearsish back. uh 10 yearsish back. uh 10 yearsish back. You're how old now? You're how old now? You're how old now? 53. Great. Well, you seem to be in great Great. Well, you seem to be in great Great. Well, you seem to be in great shape. No hormone augmentation. We shape. No hormone augmentation. We shape. No hormone augmentation. We clarified that earlier. I asked this is clarified that earlier. I asked this is clarified that earlier. I asked this is what guys ask each other nowadays. You what guys ask each other nowadays. You what guys ask each other nowadays. You on are you doing any hormone on are you doing any hormone on are you doing any hormone augmentation? No. So, um Allan says no. augmentation? No. So, um Allan says no. augmentation? No. So, um Allan says no. And I believe him completely. But yeah, And I believe him completely. But yeah, And I believe him completely. But yeah, you're in great shape at 53. you're in great shape at 53. you're in great shape at 53. Um and you have a sweet tooth and a Um and you have a sweet tooth and a Um and you have a sweet tooth and a savory tooth. So, so how do you contend savory tooth. So, so how do you contend savory tooth. So, so how do you contend with it? with it? with it? I do. O. Okay. So, that's a great I do. O. Okay. So, that's a great I do. O. Okay. So, that's a great question cuz I can dish out something question cuz I can dish out something question cuz I can dish out something practical here. Protein powder. protein practical here. Protein powder. protein practical here. Protein powder. protein powder satisfies the heck out of my powder satisfies the heck out of my powder satisfies the heck out of my sweet tooth. And um I actually don't sweet tooth. And um I actually don't sweet tooth. And um I actually don't have the full 50 grams of uh added have the full 50 grams of uh added have the full 50 grams of uh added sugar. I might add like a tablespoon of sugar. I might add like a tablespoon of sugar. I might add like a tablespoon of um maple syrup to my coffee um maple syrup to my coffee um maple syrup to my coffee in the day. Yeah, dude. Dude. Okay. So, in the day. Yeah, dude. Dude. Okay. So, in the day. Yeah, dude. Dude. Okay. So, you know those mocha pot thingies? you know those mocha pot thingies? you know those mocha pot thingies? Oh, mocha pot. Sorry. Oh, mocha pot. Sorry. Oh, mocha pot. Sorry. It's called mocha pot. Um it's like some It's called mocha pot. Um it's like some It's called mocha pot. Um it's like some It's a piece of hardware. It's a piece of hardware. It's a piece of hardware. Yeah. It's the thing where Yeah. It's the thing where Yeah. It's the thing where you It's this odd like it's like an you It's this odd like it's like an you It's this odd like it's like an hourglass shaped coffee. hourglass shaped coffee. hourglass shaped coffee. Yes. Okay. So, I have that. And um what I'm So, I have that. And um what I'm So, I have that. And um what I'm trying to do, I'm trying to duplicate trying to do, I'm trying to duplicate trying to do, I'm trying to duplicate the uh the Thai coffee. Is it Thai? the uh the Thai coffee. Is it Thai? the uh the Thai coffee. Is it Thai? What is it? It's Thai iced tea. What is it? It's Thai iced tea. What is it? It's Thai iced tea. Really freaking good coffee. That Really freaking good coffee. That Really freaking good coffee. That either Vietnamese coffee Vietnamese either Vietnamese coffee Vietnamese either Vietnamese coffee Vietnamese coffee. Yeah. I love Vietnamese food. I don't Yeah. I love Vietnamese food. I don't Yeah. I love Vietnamese food. I don't drink the Vietnamese coffee. It's too drink the Vietnamese coffee. It's too drink the Vietnamese coffee. It's too sweet for me, sweet for me, sweet for me, dude. But I I'm trying to do a version dude. But I I'm trying to do a version dude. But I I'm trying to do a version of that with the mocha pot. And if I put of that with the mocha pot. And if I put of that with the mocha pot. And if I put maple syrup in that tablespoon, it's maple syrup in that tablespoon, it's maple syrup in that tablespoon, it's freaking awesome. And I have that with freaking awesome. And I have that with freaking awesome. And I have that with uh with half and half. It's really good. uh with half and half. It's really good. uh with half and half. It's really good. Um so you got a you got a fat sugar so you got a you got a fat sugar so you got a you got a fat sugar combination plus caffeine. You do this combination plus caffeine. You do this combination plus caffeine. You do this in the morning before you train. in the morning before you train. in the morning before you train. I've been doing it. I go through these I've been doing it. I go through these I've been doing it. I go through these phases, but I have that. And so the phases, but I have that. And so the phases, but I have that. And so the extent of added sugar in my diet is that extent of added sugar in my diet is that extent of added sugar in my diet is that tablespoon of maple syrup. So I you tablespoon of maple syrup. So I you tablespoon of maple syrup. So I you know, I do agree with you. 50 grams know, I do agree with you. 50 grams know, I do agree with you. 50 grams could be a little bit up there. could be a little bit up there. could be a little bit up there. Uh, listen, I'm not here to judge. I Uh, listen, I'm not here to judge. I Uh, listen, I'm not here to judge. I like I said, if I had a sweet tooth, I like I said, if I had a sweet tooth, I like I said, if I had a sweet tooth, I What's interesting, I used to have one. What's interesting, I used to have one. What's interesting, I used to have one. I lost it I lost it I lost it over the course of about a decade. over the course of about a decade. over the course of about a decade. I used to love like sour patch gummies I used to love like sour patch gummies I used to love like sour patch gummies and gummies, and I love gummy. I love and gummies, and I love gummy. I love and gummies, and I love gummy. I love fruity taste and that kind of thing. I fruity taste and that kind of thing. I fruity taste and that kind of thing. I lost it by doing something that probably lost it by doing something that probably lost it by doing something that probably has no scientific basis, has no scientific basis, has no scientific basis, but uh I heard years ago that if I took but uh I heard years ago that if I took but uh I heard years ago that if I took a teaspoon of llutamine a teaspoon of llutamine a teaspoon of llutamine and put it in highfat in half and half and put it in highfat in half and half and put it in highfat in half and half in cream basically and took a shot of in cream basically and took a shot of in cream basically and took a shot of that twice a day that it would kill my that twice a day that it would kill my that twice a day that it would kill my sugar cravings. sugar cravings. sugar cravings. And I did that and it weaned me off And I did that and it weaned me off And I did that and it weaned me off sugar and then I increased my protein sugar and then I increased my protein sugar and then I increased my protein intake. So it could have been any intake. So it could have been any intake. So it could have been any combination of things or it could be combination of things or it could be combination of things or it could be total placebo. I mean, so I want to total placebo. I mean, so I want to total placebo. I mean, so I want to acknowledge that. Um although I've acknowledge that. Um although I've acknowledge that. Um although I've recommended this to some self-p recommended this to some self-p recommended this to some self-p profofessed sugar addicts, profofessed sugar addicts, profofessed sugar addicts, okay? And they're like, "Yeah, it kills the And they're like, "Yeah, it kills the And they're like, "Yeah, it kills the sugar craving, but then they always add sugar craving, but then they always add sugar craving, but then they always add the but I still miss my, you know, the but I still miss my, you know, the but I still miss my, you know, whatever." They long for the sugary whatever." They long for the sugary whatever." They long for the sugary thing. I don't any longer. thing. I don't any longer. thing. I don't any longer. This is where I headed off the This is where I headed off the This is where I headed off the sweet stuff. I make protein smoothies sweet stuff. I make protein smoothies sweet stuff. I make protein smoothies and they're just they're artificially and they're just they're artificially and they're just they're artificially sweetened so it satisfies um that you sweetened so it satisfies um that you sweetened so it satisfies um that you know that dessert craving if you will. know that dessert craving if you will. know that dessert craving if you will. Well, along the lines of artificial Well, along the lines of artificial Well, along the lines of artificial sweeteners, um why if you want something sweet, why if you want something sweet, why if you want something sweet, wouldn't you just replace the honey wouldn't you just replace the honey wouldn't you just replace the honey with like stevia? Because it doesn't with like stevia? Because it doesn't with like stevia? Because it doesn't create the same um satiety that the create the same um satiety that the create the same um satiety that the maple syrup does for you. maple syrup does for you. maple syrup does for you. Oh man. Okay. So, maple syrup aside, Oh man. Okay. So, maple syrup aside, Oh man. Okay. So, maple syrup aside, um the you get caloric savings, you um the you get caloric savings, you um the you get caloric savings, you know, if your protein powder is know, if your protein powder is know, if your protein powder is artificially sweetened, let's say with artificially sweetened, let's say with artificially sweetened, let's say with stevia or sucralose or monk fruit with stevia or sucralose or monk fruit with stevia or sucralose or monk fruit or what whatever is being used in the or what whatever is being used in the or what whatever is being used in the product, um you get caloric savings and product, um you get caloric savings and product, um you get caloric savings and you just kind of get the macro you just kind of get the macro you just kind of get the macro savings, if you will, as well. And so savings, if you will, as well. And so savings, if you will, as well. And so protein powders are like I mean in my protein powders are like I mean in my protein powders are like I mean in my opinion they're just such a breakthrough opinion they're just such a breakthrough opinion they're just such a breakthrough because they satisfy the protein because they satisfy the protein because they satisfy the protein requirements or they significantly requirements or they significantly requirements or they significantly augment the protein requirements and augment the protein requirements and augment the protein requirements and they take care of like essentially they take care of like essentially they take care of like essentially having something that is the having something that is the having something that is the experience of a dessert to me anyway. I experience of a dessert to me anyway. I experience of a dessert to me anyway. I make some really good fruit smoothies. I make some really good fruit smoothies. I make some really good fruit smoothies. I use frozen fruit protein powder. Um I use frozen fruit protein powder. Um I use frozen fruit protein powder. Um sometimes I do like a mocha type of sometimes I do like a mocha type of sometimes I do like a mocha type of smoothie. Sometimes I do like a tropical smoothie. Sometimes I do like a tropical smoothie. Sometimes I do like a tropical fruit type of smoothie. milkshake. fruit type of smoothie. milkshake. fruit type of smoothie. milkshake. Yeah, it is like a milkshake, right? Yeah, it is like a milkshake, right? Yeah, it is like a milkshake, right? Mhm. So, you mentioned artificial sweeteners. So, you mentioned artificial sweeteners. So, you mentioned artificial sweeteners. So, let let's uh let's double click So, let let's uh let's double click So, let let's uh let's double click there. Sure. I've seen some literature that points to I've seen some literature that points to I've seen some literature that points to the possibility that they might be quote the possibility that they might be quote the possibility that they might be quote bad for the gut microbiome. Those are bad for the gut microbiome. Those are bad for the gut microbiome. Those are animal data. There are some human data, animal data. There are some human data, animal data. There are some human data, but I think nowadays saying artificial but I think nowadays saying artificial but I think nowadays saying artificial sweeteners is too broad. As we say in sweeteners is too broad. As we say in sweeteners is too broad. As we say in science, there are lumpers and science, there are lumpers and science, there are lumpers and splitters. And I think we need to split splitters. And I think we need to split splitters. And I think we need to split that because there's low calorie that because there's low calorie that because there's low calorie sweeteners like stevia, right? Um that sweeteners like stevia, right? Um that sweeteners like stevia, right? Um that are not artificial. They're so are not artificial. They're so are not artificial. They're so technically plant derived. And then technically plant derived. And then technically plant derived. And then there's artificial sweeteners like there's artificial sweeteners like there's artificial sweeteners like aspartame, sucralose, saccharine. And my aspartame, sucralose, saccharine. And my aspartame, sucralose, saccharine. And my understanding is that sucralose and understanding is that sucralose and understanding is that sucralose and sacchrine have some bad properties if sacchrine have some bad properties if sacchrine have some bad properties if consumed in excess. What is the deal consumed in excess. What is the deal consumed in excess. What is the deal with artificial sweeteners? So we're with artificial sweeteners? So we're with artificial sweeteners? So we're talking aspartame, sucralose, talking aspartame, sucralose, talking aspartame, sucralose, saccharine. Let's just focus on those saccharine. Let's just focus on those saccharine. Let's just focus on those and let's leave aside monk fruit, and let's leave aside monk fruit, and let's leave aside monk fruit, stevia, etc. for the time being. stevia, etc. for the time being. stevia, etc. for the time being. Okay, you can pretty much simplify it by you can pretty much simplify it by you can pretty much simplify it by saying out of all the sweeteners that we saying out of all the sweeteners that we saying out of all the sweeteners that we study, whether they're the natural kind study, whether they're the natural kind study, whether they're the natural kind or whether they're the artificial kind, or whether they're the artificial kind, or whether they're the artificial kind, it's saccharine that is showing a lot of it's saccharine that is showing a lot of it's saccharine that is showing a lot of the adverse potential. the adverse potential. the adverse potential. So, for example, the negative effects on So, for example, the negative effects on So, for example, the negative effects on gut microbiome gut microbiome gut microbiome that have led to impaired glucose that have led to impaired glucose that have led to impaired glucose tolerance in humans over a short period tolerance in humans over a short period tolerance in humans over a short period of time. Of course, they, you know, the of time. Of course, they, you know, the of time. Of course, they, you know, the dose is debatable that they're flooding dose is debatable that they're flooding dose is debatable that they're flooding these humans with, but nevertheless, these humans with, but nevertheless, these humans with, but nevertheless, it's saccharine that showed these it's saccharine that showed these it's saccharine that showed these effects. um with even body weight gain comparing um with even body weight gain comparing um with even body weight gain comparing saccharine sucralose and I believe it saccharine sucralose and I believe it saccharine sucralose and I believe it could have been one of the others could have been one of the others could have been one of the others aspartame the saccharine group apparently maybe the saccharine group apparently maybe the saccharine group apparently maybe appetite was disregulated uh appetite was disregulated uh appetite was disregulated uh actually gained weight and so there is actually gained weight and so there is actually gained weight and so there is something about saccharine that is not something about saccharine that is not something about saccharine that is not great as far as the range of uh low great as far as the range of uh low great as far as the range of uh low calorie sweeteners go calorie sweeteners go calorie sweeteners go but thankfully but thankfully but thankfully Saccharine is almost commercially Saccharine is almost commercially Saccharine is almost commercially extinct. It's hard to find saccharine extinct. It's hard to find saccharine extinct. It's hard to find saccharine unless you go to a Denny's or some sort unless you go to a Denny's or some sort unless you go to a Denny's or some sort of greasy spoon place and you get those of greasy spoon place and you get those of greasy spoon place and you get those pink little pink packets. So, um, now pink little pink packets. So, um, now pink little pink packets. So, um, now we've got this other range of low we've got this other range of low we've got this other range of low calorie sweeteners to choose from and calorie sweeteners to choose from and calorie sweeteners to choose from and it's a little bit of a mystery of which it's a little bit of a mystery of which it's a little bit of a mystery of which of these low calorie sweeteners has the of these low calorie sweeteners has the of these low calorie sweeteners has the best health and um, body composition to best health and um, body composition to best health and um, body composition to it, but they're all pretty much in it, but they're all pretty much in it, but they're all pretty much in the same boat. You can find a bunch of the same boat. You can find a bunch of the same boat. You can find a bunch of good stuff with stevia, like the dirt on good stuff with stevia, like the dirt on good stuff with stevia, like the dirt on artificial sweeteners. You can find a artificial sweeteners. You can find a artificial sweeteners. You can find a bunch of potential dirt on aspartame. bunch of potential dirt on aspartame. bunch of potential dirt on aspartame. You can find a potential a bunch of You can find a potential a bunch of You can find a potential a bunch of potential dirt on sucralose. Um stevia, potential dirt on sucralose. Um stevia, potential dirt on sucralose. Um stevia, it's a little bit harder, too. it's a little bit harder, too. it's a little bit harder, too. Maybe even some benefits of stevia, Maybe even some benefits of stevia, Maybe even some benefits of stevia, right? Yes. Benefits, too. Um Yes. Benefits, too. Um Yes. Benefits, too. Um improve glucose tolerance and things of improve glucose tolerance and things of improve glucose tolerance and things of that sort. So, I I'm not afraid of that sort. So, I I'm not afraid of that sort. So, I I'm not afraid of stevia. I always called it stevia, but stevia. I always called it stevia, but stevia. I always called it stevia, but now it's stevia. now it's stevia. now it's stevia. That's me. Stevia is a me thing. That's me. Stevia is a me thing. That's me. Stevia is a me thing. Okay. So, um, stev I'll call it stevia. Okay. So, um, stev I'll call it stevia. Okay. So, um, stev I'll call it stevia. I'll call it stevia for this I'll call it stevia for this I'll call it stevia for this conversation. Um, conversation. Um, conversation. Um, thank you. thank you. thank you. So, tomato tomato. Um, I've heard So, tomato tomato. Um, I've heard So, tomato tomato. Um, I've heard it's potentially good for us. it's potentially good for us. it's potentially good for us. No good evidence it's bad for us. No good evidence it's bad for us. No good evidence it's bad for us. So, if you don't mind the taste, and I So, if you don't mind the taste, and I So, if you don't mind the taste, and I happen to like the taste, stevia seems happen to like the taste, stevia seems happen to like the taste, stevia seems like a perfectly fine thing to include like a perfectly fine thing to include like a perfectly fine thing to include in one's diet. in one's diet. in one's diet. Yeah, I tend to be amendable to all Yeah, I tend to be amendable to all Yeah, I tend to be amendable to all artificial sweeteners, honestly. um even artificial sweeteners, honestly. um even artificial sweeteners, honestly. um even aspartame. Uh it's you know the aspartame. Uh it's you know the aspartame. Uh it's you know the sheer amounts that you would have to sheer amounts that you would have to sheer amounts that you would have to consume of these things even consume of these things even consume of these things even hypothetically to incur negative health hypothetically to incur negative health hypothetically to incur negative health outcomes is just absurd amounts. outcomes is just absurd amounts. outcomes is just absurd amounts. Um it's probably you know more dangerous Um it's probably you know more dangerous Um it's probably you know more dangerous to step outside and breathe in the to step outside and breathe in the to step outside and breathe in the LA air you know than engage in like some LA air you know than engage in like some LA air you know than engage in like some you know aspartame or sucralose on a you know aspartame or sucralose on a you know aspartame or sucralose on a regular basis at you know one or two regular basis at you know one or two regular basis at you know one or two cans a day. I don't think that can cans a day. I don't think that can cans a day. I don't think that can affect people in the course of a affect people in the course of a affect people in the course of a lifetime. Thank you for that clarification. Thank you for that clarification. Thank you for that clarification. Very hard to study though. It's not like Very hard to study though. It's not like Very hard to study though. It's not like you can find out definitively, you can find out definitively, you can find out definitively, right? Although my read of the right? Although my read of the right? Although my read of the literature of people that drink literature of people that drink literature of people that drink artificially sweetened soda or stevia artificially sweetened soda or stevia artificially sweetened soda or stevia sweetened soda sweetened soda sweetened soda as an augment to their efforts to as an augment to their efforts to as an augment to their efforts to consume fewer than needed calories per consume fewer than needed calories per consume fewer than needed calories per day in order to lose body weight, body day in order to lose body weight, body day in order to lose body weight, body fat in particular, is that diet sodas fat in particular, is that diet sodas fat in particular, is that diet sodas can actually be a great assistance to can actually be a great assistance to can actually be a great assistance to people. Yes. Um, you know, and I went back and Yes. Um, you know, and I went back and Yes. Um, you know, and I went back and forth on this literature because I forth on this literature because I forth on this literature because I thought, no, water would be better, but thought, no, water would be better, but thought, no, water would be better, but they compared water 2 liters a day or a they compared water 2 liters a day or a they compared water 2 liters a day or a liter or more per day of diet soda. And liter or more per day of diet soda. And liter or more per day of diet soda. And seems like it's a pretty good um weight seems like it's a pretty good um weight seems like it's a pretty good um weight loss tool for people that would loss tool for people that would loss tool for people that would otherwise be drinking soda or would otherwise be drinking soda or would otherwise be drinking soda or would otherwise be drinking just water, which otherwise be drinking just water, which otherwise be drinking just water, which really surprised me. I'd love to say really surprised me. I'd love to say really surprised me. I'd love to say water is the best, but for weight loss, water is the best, but for weight loss, water is the best, but for weight loss, maybe diet sodas actually provide an maybe diet sodas actually provide an maybe diet sodas actually provide an important role for people. important role for people. important role for people. Yeah, that was an interesting Yeah, that was an interesting Yeah, that was an interesting finding. Uh I do think that the most if finding. Uh I do think that the most if finding. Uh I do think that the most if not all of the controlled intervention not all of the controlled intervention not all of the controlled intervention trials show positive effects of trials show positive effects of trials show positive effects of artificially sweetened or low calorie artificially sweetened or low calorie artificially sweetened or low calorie sweetened beverages sweetened beverages sweetened beverages um on weight loss and all of the um on weight loss and all of the um on weight loss and all of the consequences of uh the metabolic consequences of uh the metabolic consequences of uh the metabolic consequences of what happens with consequences of what happens with consequences of what happens with weight loss and they're all positive. Uh weight loss and they're all positive. Uh weight loss and they're all positive. Uh there's some observational literature there's some observational literature there's some observational literature that casts some doubt on whether um diet that casts some doubt on whether um diet that casts some doubt on whether um diet sodas are a good thing or not. Then we sodas are a good thing or not. Then we sodas are a good thing or not. Then we have the issue of in quotes reverse have the issue of in quotes reverse have the issue of in quotes reverse causality where uh people who are in poor health where uh people who are in poor health where uh people who are in poor health are sort of seeking out these diet sodas are sort of seeking out these diet sodas are sort of seeking out these diet sodas rather than the diet sodas causing the rather than the diet sodas causing the rather than the diet sodas causing the poor health. poor health. poor health. So um on balance uh artificially So um on balance uh artificially So um on balance uh artificially sweetened beverages sweetened beverages sweetened beverages tend to be a net positive for health. tend to be a net positive for health. tend to be a net positive for health. But but that I know that a lot of people But but that I know that a lot of people But but that I know that a lot of people have a lot of issue with that because have a lot of issue with that because have a lot of issue with that because you know people have just sort of this you know people have just sort of this you know people have just sort of this natural hippie streak within them that natural hippie streak within them that natural hippie streak within them that would want to preach only water water. would want to preach only water water. would want to preach only water water. But and you know what I think it's a But and you know what I think it's a But and you know what I think it's a good idea to practice drinking plain good idea to practice drinking plain good idea to practice drinking plain water to you know to get that water to you know to get that water to you know to get that experience of it being a positive experience of it being a positive experience of it being a positive thing. uh and I encourage it, but um thing. uh and I encourage it, but um thing. uh and I encourage it, but um sort of the vilifying of artificially sort of the vilifying of artificially sort of the vilifying of artificially sweetened beverages is just not sweetened beverages is just not sweetened beverages is just not necessarily founded in especially the necessarily founded in especially the necessarily founded in especially the controlled intervention literature. controlled intervention literature. controlled intervention literature. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. Is to get early access to Function. Is to get early access to Function. Is there any evidence that uh coffee or there any evidence that uh coffee or there any evidence that uh coffee or other caffeinated drinks have a thermic other caffeinated drinks have a thermic other caffeinated drinks have a thermic effect that allows you to burn more fat? effect that allows you to burn more fat? effect that allows you to burn more fat? So, if I drink I I'm a yerba mate fan. So, if I drink I I'm a yerba mate fan. So, if I drink I I'm a yerba mate fan. So, if I drink uh cold brew yerba mate So, if I drink uh cold brew yerba mate So, if I drink uh cold brew yerba mate or a hot brew yerba mate before working or a hot brew yerba mate before working or a hot brew yerba mate before working out, let's forget fasted. I happen to do out, let's forget fasted. I happen to do out, let's forget fasted. I happen to do it fasted and then and then train am I it fasted and then and then train am I it fasted and then and then train am I going to burn mobilize more body fat by going to burn mobilize more body fat by going to burn mobilize more body fat by ingesting a stimulant like caffeine ingesting a stimulant like caffeine ingesting a stimulant like caffeine prior to working out? prior to working out? prior to working out? Yes. And yeah, it's a it's a pretty Yes. And yeah, it's a it's a pretty Yes. And yeah, it's a it's a pretty consistent finding. Um, the consistent finding. Um, the consistent finding. Um, the issue is whether the amount that occurs issue is whether the amount that occurs issue is whether the amount that occurs is something meaningful that would be is something meaningful that would be is something meaningful that would be durable enough over time for us to be durable enough over time for us to be durable enough over time for us to be able to say, "Hey, we can use coffee and able to say, "Hey, we can use coffee and able to say, "Hey, we can use coffee and or caffeine as an agent to enhance fat or caffeine as an agent to enhance fat or caffeine as an agent to enhance fat loss." I I'm not sure if we're loss." I I'm not sure if we're loss." I I'm not sure if we're there yet, but the literature on there yet, but the literature on there yet, but the literature on balance shows a modest effect, a balance shows a modest effect, a balance shows a modest effect, a modest advantage on fat loss with modest advantage on fat loss with modest advantage on fat loss with caffeinated beverages like tea and caffeinated beverages like tea and caffeinated beverages like tea and coffee. Great. I don't think that's coffee. Great. I don't think that's coffee. Great. I don't think that's discussed very often these days. That discussed very often these days. That discussed very often these days. That was kind of more in the 90s, but I think was kind of more in the 90s, but I think was kind of more in the 90s, but I think it's a great thing for people to hear it's a great thing for people to hear it's a great thing for people to hear because 90% of adults worldwide consume because 90% of adults worldwide consume because 90% of adults worldwide consume caffeine every single day. It's the most caffeine every single day. It's the most caffeine every single day. It's the most widely used drug in the world. Man, you widely used drug in the world. Man, you widely used drug in the world. Man, you know, I just looked at this huge know, I just looked at this huge know, I just looked at this huge umbrella uh review on coffee and health umbrella uh review on coffee and health umbrella uh review on coffee and health effects. It's net positive. I was hap I was very It's net positive. I was hap I was very It's net positive. I was hap I was very happy to see happy to see happy to see on what sorts of metrics on what sorts of metrics on what sorts of metrics a range of clinical outcomes a range of clinical outcomes a range of clinical outcomes cardiovascular health um uh different uh cardiovascular health um uh different uh cardiovascular health um uh different uh effects on sort of intermediate markers effects on sort of intermediate markers effects on sort of intermediate markers uh mortality even. So almost everything uh mortality even. So almost everything uh mortality even. So almost everything that we can think of that we gen most that we can think of that we gen most that we can think of that we gen most people generally care about coffee people generally care about coffee people generally care about coffee either has a neutral or positive effect either has a neutral or positive effect either has a neutral or positive effect on it but the threshold of uh benefit on it but the threshold of uh benefit on it but the threshold of uh benefit sort of cuts off at 3 to four cups a sort of cuts off at 3 to four cups a sort of cuts off at 3 to four cups a day. So more much more than that or day. So more much more than that or day. So more much more than that or you know after that threshold then we're you know after that threshold then we're you know after that threshold then we're looking at uh potential detriment. I looking at uh potential detriment. I looking at uh potential detriment. I suppose the only thing is to remind suppose the only thing is to remind suppose the only thing is to remind people to not consume caffeine too close people to not consume caffeine too close people to not consume caffeine too close to bedtime because even if you can fall to bedtime because even if you can fall to bedtime because even if you can fall asleep, it's going to disrupt the asleep, it's going to disrupt the asleep, it's going to disrupt the architecture of your sleep. But I and I architecture of your sleep. But I and I architecture of your sleep. But I and I am sure so many people are so relieved, am sure so many people are so relieved, am sure so many people are so relieved, even delighted to hear that coffee and even delighted to hear that coffee and even delighted to hear that coffee and other forms of caffeine uh are uh other forms of caffeine uh are uh other forms of caffeine uh are uh healthy for us and maybe even healthy for us and maybe even healthy for us and maybe even prolongevity. Coffee and tea. Yes. Coffee and tea. Yes. Coffee and tea. Yes. Sure. Uh whereas it's been debated and it Uh whereas it's been debated and it Uh whereas it's been debated and it continues to be debated whether alcohol continues to be debated whether alcohol continues to be debated whether alcohol uh is good or bad for longevity. last uh is good or bad for longevity. last uh is good or bad for longevity. last week another study saying champagne was week another study saying champagne was week another study saying champagne was good for longevity I think it was or uh good for longevity I think it was or uh good for longevity I think it was or uh but plenty of studies recently showing but plenty of studies recently showing but plenty of studies recently showing that um alcohol increases cancer risk so that um alcohol increases cancer risk so that um alcohol increases cancer risk so much that the um federal government now much that the um federal government now much that the um federal government now is talk uh talking about putting this on is talk uh talking about putting this on is talk uh talking about putting this on any uh on the label of any alcohol any uh on the label of any alcohol any uh on the label of any alcohol containing drink. Um containing drink. Um containing drink. Um I have an issue with that. I have an issue with that. I have an issue with that. Yeah. About putting that on the label. Yeah. About putting that on the label. Yeah. About putting that on the label. Yeah. Please share. So we can't lump Yeah. Please share. So we can't lump Yeah. Please share. So we can't lump alcoholic beverages into this single alcoholic beverages into this single alcoholic beverages into this single bucket. Um the literature on red wine bucket. Um the literature on red wine bucket. Um the literature on red wine specifically, man, you would be hardressed to find man, you would be hardressed to find man, you would be hardressed to find carcinogenic effects from red wine carcinogenic effects from red wine carcinogenic effects from red wine either epidemiologically either epidemiologically either epidemiologically or interventionally or interventionally or interventionally uh and even down to like the mechanistic uh and even down to like the mechanistic uh and even down to like the mechanistic uh in vitro stuff like tumorogenesis, uh in vitro stuff like tumorogenesis, uh in vitro stuff like tumorogenesis, anything like that. it actually has anything like that. it actually has anything like that. it actually has anti-cancer effects. Uh, and you know, anti-cancer effects. Uh, and you know, anti-cancer effects. Uh, and you know, even the brain shrinking threat of even the brain shrinking threat of even the brain shrinking threat of alcohol intake, alcohol intake, alcohol intake, red wine consumers actually in a in a at red wine consumers actually in a in a at red wine consumers actually in a in a at least one controlled trial showed least one controlled trial showed least one controlled trial showed improvements in uh neuroscsychological improvements in uh neuroscsychological improvements in uh neuroscsychological tests. And so, um, I don't think we tests. And so, um, I don't think we tests. And so, um, I don't think we can say alcohol can say alcohol can say alcohol as a group. We we have to sort of look as a group. We we have to sort of look as a group. We we have to sort of look at the individual drinks because I'm at the individual drinks because I'm at the individual drinks because I'm sure there's differences between sure there's differences between sure there's differences between red wine versus some other some other red wine versus some other some other red wine versus some other some other alcoholic beverage. But but people study alcoholic beverage. But but people study alcoholic beverage. But but people study the crap out of red wine and there's the crap out of red wine and there's the crap out of red wine and there's almost nothing but good stuff that comes almost nothing but good stuff that comes almost nothing but good stuff that comes out of the red wine literature. Who out of the red wine literature. Who out of the red wine literature. Who knows how biased it might be knows how biased it might be knows how biased it might be commercially or other. Uh but I that's commercially or other. Uh but I that's commercially or other. Uh but I that's another thing I don't like to dismiss another thing I don't like to dismiss another thing I don't like to dismiss studies based on funding source but the studies based on funding source but the studies based on funding source but the red wine literature is almost all red wine literature is almost all red wine literature is almost all positive. Uh I feel like I have to um push on this Uh I feel like I have to um push on this Uh I feel like I have to um push on this a little bit. Um I think a little bit. Um I think a little bit. Um I think assuming everything about those studies assuming everything about those studies assuming everything about those studies is intact and not biased etc. I is intact and not biased etc. I is intact and not biased etc. I do think that when people are consuming do think that when people are consuming do think that when people are consuming alcohol and thinking about the potential alcohol and thinking about the potential alcohol and thinking about the potential longevity effects of red wine that longevity effects of red wine that longevity effects of red wine that there's some questions that come to there's some questions that come to there's some questions that come to mind. First of all, um what is the mind. First of all, um what is the mind. First of all, um what is the caloric tradeoff? You know, so if you're caloric tradeoff? You know, so if you're caloric tradeoff? You know, so if you're drinking a glass of wine, you're drinking a glass of wine, you're drinking a glass of wine, you're consuming calories. consuming calories. consuming calories. Perhaps not a problem. Perhaps that's Perhaps not a problem. Perhaps that's Perhaps not a problem. Perhaps that's taking up room for quality nutrients taking up room for quality nutrients taking up room for quality nutrients that could come from other sources. I that could come from other sources. I that could come from other sources. I have a theory which is that the um the have a theory which is that the um the have a theory which is that the um the controversies in the alcohol around the controversies in the alcohol around the controversies in the alcohol around the alcohol literature and longevity in my alcohol literature and longevity in my alcohol literature and longevity in my mind could boil down to something as mind could boil down to something as mind could boil down to something as simple as sleep disruption. For simple as sleep disruption. For simple as sleep disruption. For instance, drinkers have more instance, drinkers have more instance, drinkers have more inflammation. Um but in those particular inflammation. Um but in those particular inflammation. Um but in those particular studies perhaps I'm speculating studies perhaps I'm speculating studies perhaps I'm speculating here. Uh they're drinking with dinner here. Uh they're drinking with dinner here. Uh they're drinking with dinner and we know that disrupts sleep and we know that disrupts sleep and we know that disrupts sleep architecture, reduces REM sleep, deep architecture, reduces REM sleep, deep architecture, reduces REM sleep, deep sleep. I mean, this has just been shown sleep. I mean, this has just been shown sleep. I mean, this has just been shown over and over again. And chronically over and over again. And chronically over and over again. And chronically over time, especially on a backdrop of a over time, especially on a backdrop of a over time, especially on a backdrop of a high stress lifestyle, perhaps leads to high stress lifestyle, perhaps leads to high stress lifestyle, perhaps leads to more systemic inflammation and poorer more systemic inflammation and poorer more systemic inflammation and poorer health outcomes. health outcomes. health outcomes. in another culture, maybe in Sardinia or in another culture, maybe in Sardinia or in another culture, maybe in Sardinia or something or in one of these, dare I something or in one of these, dare I something or in one of these, dare I say, blue zones, people perhaps are say, blue zones, people perhaps are say, blue zones, people perhaps are eating um and drinking and um living eating um and drinking and um living eating um and drinking and um living longer and have lower inflammation longer and have lower inflammation longer and have lower inflammation because, you know, they might drink just because, you know, they might drink just because, you know, they might drink just as close to sleep, but they have a as close to sleep, but they have a as close to sleep, but they have a smoother uh lower stress entrance into smoother uh lower stress entrance into smoother uh lower stress entrance into the next day. And so, the disruption in the next day. And so, the disruption in the next day. And so, the disruption in sleep might not be a problem. There's an sleep might not be a problem. There's an sleep might not be a problem. There's an afternoon nap in many of those cultures. afternoon nap in many of those cultures. afternoon nap in many of those cultures. So when I look at sleep as kind of the So when I look at sleep as kind of the So when I look at sleep as kind of the foundation of mental health and physical foundation of mental health and physical foundation of mental health and physical health, which is clear it's at least one health, which is clear it's at least one health, which is clear it's at least one of the layers of the foundation, of the layers of the foundation, of the layers of the foundation, I then wonder whether or not that the I then wonder whether or not that the I then wonder whether or not that the alcohol studies can be evaluated just alcohol studies can be evaluated just alcohol studies can be evaluated just strictly on the basis of the measures strictly on the basis of the measures strictly on the basis of the measures that are being taken and that if we that are being taken and that if we that are being taken and that if we start to think about the context in start to think about the context in start to think about the context in which alcohol consumption is occurring, which alcohol consumption is occurring, which alcohol consumption is occurring, social context, sleep hours, stress and social context, sleep hours, stress and social context, sleep hours, stress and lifestyle, genetic predisposition to lifestyle, genetic predisposition to lifestyle, genetic predisposition to cancer, etc. high processed food, you cancer, etc. high processed food, you cancer, etc. high processed food, you know, and on and on and on. I wonder know, and on and on and on. I wonder know, and on and on and on. I wonder whether or not some of this is going to whether or not some of this is going to whether or not some of this is going to shake out in the noise, as we say. shake out in the noise, as we say. shake out in the noise, as we say. I need to qualify. I agree with all I need to qualify. I agree with all I need to qualify. I agree with all that. And and here's the thing, like my that. And and here's the thing, like my that. And and here's the thing, like my statements on alcohol mainly had to do statements on alcohol mainly had to do statements on alcohol mainly had to do with red, wine, and cancer. M with red, wine, and cancer. M with red, wine, and cancer. M so if we look at a typical what so if we look at a typical what so if we look at a typical what would be considered a moderate amount of would be considered a moderate amount of would be considered a moderate amount of drinking um one to two glasses a day for drinking um one to two glasses a day for drinking um one to two glasses a day for little people and then let's say two to little people and then let's say two to little people and then let's say two to three glasses a day for larger people three glasses a day for larger people three glasses a day for larger people that is sort of the kind of the that is sort of the kind of the that is sort of the kind of the moderation models for those two moderation models for those two moderation models for those two regardless red wine or not or something regardless red wine or not or something regardless red wine or not or something else there is a degree of disinhibition else there is a degree of disinhibition else there is a degree of disinhibition that occurs with um drinking that can that occurs with um drinking that can that occurs with um drinking that can make you say ah screw it and potentially make you say ah screw it and potentially make you say ah screw it and potentially have you just wipe out the entire pasta have you just wipe out the entire pasta have you just wipe out the entire pasta plate for example. And so there's that plate for example. And so there's that plate for example. And so there's that the dis disinhibition piece and there's the dis disinhibition piece and there's the dis disinhibition piece and there's also the inherent calories piece to also the inherent calories piece to also the inherent calories piece to where I don't know a whole lot of guys where I don't know a whole lot of guys where I don't know a whole lot of guys who I am aspiring who I am aspiring who I am aspiring to become look like body comprise who to become look like body comprise who to become look like body comprise who are regular significant drinkers. Most are regular significant drinkers. Most are regular significant drinkers. Most of most of them barely drink. Okay. So of most of them barely drink. Okay. So of most of them barely drink. Okay. So that's sort of the observational side of that's sort of the observational side of that's sort of the observational side of things. And then there's the addiction things. And then there's the addiction things. And then there's the addiction side of things where you read the stats side of things where you read the stats side of things where you read the stats on the percentage of the general on the percentage of the general on the percentage of the general population that has some degree of population that has some degree of population that has some degree of alcohol use disorder. It's a staggering alcohol use disorder. It's a staggering alcohol use disorder. It's a staggering percent 10%. So in a room of 10 people, percent 10%. So in a room of 10 people, percent 10%. So in a room of 10 people, chances are one of them is going to have chances are one of them is going to have chances are one of them is going to have alcohol use disorder. That's gnarly. Um alcohol use disorder. That's gnarly. Um alcohol use disorder. That's gnarly. Um the easiest addiction to mask the easiest addiction to mask the easiest addiction to mask because you know alcohol is so freely because you know alcohol is so freely because you know alcohol is so freely available. It's everywhere and people available. It's everywhere and people available. It's everywhere and people don't glamorize. It's the one alcohol don't glamorize. It's the one alcohol don't glamorize. It's the one alcohol intake, at least until recently, things intake, at least until recently, things intake, at least until recently, things are changing, is the one It's the one are changing, is the one It's the one are changing, is the one It's the one drug because alcohol is a drug. Then drug because alcohol is a drug. Then drug because alcohol is a drug. Then again, caffeine is a drug. It's the one again, caffeine is a drug. It's the one again, caffeine is a drug. It's the one drug that if you don't consume it as an drug that if you don't consume it as an drug that if you don't consume it as an adult, people often uh adult, people often uh adult, people often uh are put off are put off by that, are put off are put off by that, are put off are put off by that, right? They're like, "Hey, like what's right? They're like, "Hey, like what's right? They're like, "Hey, like what's wrong with you?" kind of thing or like I wrong with you?" kind of thing or like I wrong with you?" kind of thing or like I thought real men drink or something like thought real men drink or something like thought real men drink or something like that. Um, and my So, I quit drinking that. Um, and my So, I quit drinking that. Um, and my So, I quit drinking a long time ago and I didn't have a long time ago and I didn't have a long time ago and I didn't have alcohol use disorder, but I didn't like alcohol use disorder, but I didn't like alcohol use disorder, but I didn't like it because I wouldn't sleep well on I it because I wouldn't sleep well on I it because I wouldn't sleep well on I like to train in the morning. So, when like to train in the morning. So, when like to train in the morning. So, when people would say like you don't drink, people would say like you don't drink, people would say like you don't drink, what's wrong with you? And I said, "No, what's wrong with you? And I said, "No, what's wrong with you? And I said, "No, I train in the morning while you're I train in the morning while you're I train in the morning while you're sleeping and then let's check in at I sleeping and then let's check in at I sleeping and then let's check in at I used to be a little in my 30s." I was used to be a little in my 30s." I was used to be a little in my 30s." I was kind of cocky. So, at meetings, you kind of cocky. So, at meetings, you kind of cocky. So, at meetings, you know, I'd say they'd be like, "Oh, know, I'd say they'd be like, "Oh, know, I'd say they'd be like, "Oh, you're going home at 9:00 p.m. on the you're going home at 9:00 p.m. on the you're going home at 9:00 p.m. on the first night." I'm like, "Yeah, but let's first night." I'm like, "Yeah, but let's first night." I'm like, "Yeah, but let's check in on Wednesday of this 5day check in on Wednesday of this 5day check in on Wednesday of this 5day meeting. Let's let's look at how you're meeting. Let's let's look at how you're meeting. Let's let's look at how you're hanging in there versus how I'm hanging in there versus how I'm hanging in there versus how I'm hanging in there." And um so I was always in there." And um so I was always in there." And um so I was always interested in the long arc of things, interested in the long arc of things, interested in the long arc of things, how I could maintain eight or nine out how I could maintain eight or nine out how I could maintain eight or nine out of 10 performance, maybe even 10 out of 10 performance, maybe even 10 out of 10 performance, maybe even 10 out of 10 performance 10 performance 10 performance day after day after day after day. Not day after day after day after day. Not day after day after day after day. Not necessarily a healthy mentality, but you necessarily a healthy mentality, but you necessarily a healthy mentality, but you know, this is what happens if you have, know, this is what happens if you have, know, this is what happens if you have, you know, my mentality and I you know, my mentality and I you know, my mentality and I think it's typical of many people. So think it's typical of many people. So think it's typical of many people. So for me, drinking was a hindrance to life for me, drinking was a hindrance to life for me, drinking was a hindrance to life performance. I think for many people, alcohol is the I think for many people, alcohol is the I think for many people, alcohol is the way that they mesh with the people way that they mesh with the people way that they mesh with the people around them. And I respect the fact that around them. And I respect the fact that around them. And I respect the fact that exists, that exists, that exists, that it's hard to be the odd person that it's hard to be the odd person that it's hard to be the odd person out. It can be socially isolating and out. It can be socially isolating and out. It can be socially isolating and social connection is important. social connection is important. social connection is important. Here's what I found with quitting Here's what I found with quitting Here's what I found with quitting alcohol. A couple of funny things. alcohol. A couple of funny things. alcohol. A couple of funny things. Number one, I did get shamed. I was in Number one, I did get shamed. I was in Number one, I did get shamed. I was in the Dominican Republic. Uh, and at the Dominican Republic. Uh, and at the Dominican Republic. Uh, and at the dinner table, and I like pin coladas, dinner table, and I like pin coladas, dinner table, and I like pin coladas, you know, virgin pinina colada. So, I you know, virgin pinina colada. So, I you know, virgin pinina colada. So, I ordered a virgin pinina colada. and the ordered a virgin pinina colada. and the ordered a virgin pinina colada. and the server just like cracked up and server just like cracked up and server just like cracked up and laughed at me and made fun of me for laughed at me and made fun of me for laughed at me and made fun of me for doing a virgin drink. So, I actually doing a virgin drink. So, I actually doing a virgin drink. So, I actually have gotten shamed for uh ordering a have gotten shamed for uh ordering a have gotten shamed for uh ordering a virgin pinina colada. Um, but one of the virgin pinina colada. Um, but one of the virgin pinina colada. Um, but one of the reasons that I w was afraid to quit is reasons that I w was afraid to quit is reasons that I w was afraid to quit is because I thought that events would lose because I thought that events would lose because I thought that events would lose their fun. Uh, I felt like I would sort their fun. Uh, I felt like I would sort their fun. Uh, I felt like I would sort of lose my uh ability to, of lose my uh ability to, of lose my uh ability to, you know, be social and have fun you know, be social and have fun you know, be social and have fun and have the same degree of uh, you and have the same degree of uh, you and have the same degree of uh, you know, it's a weird thing. You you don't know, it's a weird thing. You you don't know, it's a weird thing. You you don't know until you quit drinking that things know until you quit drinking that things know until you quit drinking that things are just as fun. You're are just as fun. You're are just as fun. You're obviously you're lucid and you take a obviously you're lucid and you take a obviously you're lucid and you take a lot more in and you can you know you lot more in and you can you know you lot more in and you can you know you can enjoy everything moment to moment can enjoy everything moment to moment can enjoy everything moment to moment and there's no lost patches of time and there's no lost patches of time and there's no lost patches of time and uh the interesting thing and the uh the interesting thing and the uh the interesting thing and the positive thing about quitting drinking positive thing about quitting drinking positive thing about quitting drinking for me and I haven't drank one not one for me and I haven't drank one not one for me and I haven't drank one not one drink in almost seven years now come drink in almost seven years now come drink in almost seven years now come August is that it taught me how to sit August is that it taught me how to sit August is that it taught me how to sit in my feelings in my feelings in my feelings and cope with the stress and come up and cope with the stress and come up and cope with the stress and come up with solutions. Whereas prior to that, with solutions. Whereas prior to that, with solutions. Whereas prior to that, oh, I know the solution. Put the alcohol oh, I know the solution. Put the alcohol oh, I know the solution. Put the alcohol band-aid on it. But I think that impairs band-aid on it. But I think that impairs band-aid on it. But I think that impairs character building. It impairs uh character building. It impairs uh character building. It impairs uh problem solving capabilities. It impairs problem solving capabilities. It impairs problem solving capabilities. It impairs coping capabilities. And um I think coping capabilities. And um I think coping capabilities. And um I think those are super important for just those are super important for just those are super important for just basically, you know, being an adult. basically, you know, being an adult. basically, you know, being an adult. And so those were kind of the hidden And so those were kind of the hidden And so those were kind of the hidden benefits that I experienced from benefits that I experienced from benefits that I experienced from quitting alcohol on top of having better quitting alcohol on top of having better quitting alcohol on top of having better training sessions, having better training sessions, having better training sessions, having better training recovery, consuming a,000 training recovery, consuming a,000 training recovery, consuming a,000 calories less per day or almost 1,000 calories less per day or almost 1,000 calories less per day or almost 1,000 calories less per day, improvements in calories less per day, improvements in calories less per day, improvements in body composition and just mental health. body composition and just mental health. body composition and just mental health. All departments of life just kicked up All departments of life just kicked up All departments of life just kicked up and improved after I quit drinking. But and improved after I quit drinking. But and improved after I quit drinking. But see, I was one of those one in 10 who see, I was one of those one in 10 who see, I was one of those one in 10 who got into the drinking routine. And I'm got into the drinking routine. And I'm got into the drinking routine. And I'm one of those guys. If I like something, one of those guys. If I like something, one of those guys. If I like something, I'll have it every day. I'll do it every I'll have it every day. I'll do it every I'll have it every day. I'll do it every day. Like I I'm probably going to have day. Like I I'm probably going to have day. Like I I'm probably going to have either coffee and or eggs every day for either coffee and or eggs every day for either coffee and or eggs every day for the rest of my life. the rest of my life. the rest of my life. Same thing happened with alcohol. But Same thing happened with alcohol. But Same thing happened with alcohol. But the thing with alcohol is you have to the thing with alcohol is you have to the thing with alcohol is you have to try to maintain the buzz, which try to maintain the buzz, which try to maintain the buzz, which increases over time because of tolerance increases over time because of tolerance increases over time because of tolerance as you know. So that was the issue uh as you know. So that was the issue uh as you know. So that was the issue uh you know with me and alcohol and so you know with me and alcohol and so you know with me and alcohol and so well thanks for sharing that. Again well thanks for sharing that. Again well thanks for sharing that. Again we're not here to ram anything down we're not here to ram anything down we're not here to ram anything down anyone's throat but um I think there are anyone's throat but um I think there are anyone's throat but um I think there are many and I think that many people can do and I think that many people can do and I think that many people can do alcohol in moderation. alcohol in moderation. alcohol in moderation. I just was one of them who was much I just was one of them who was much I just was one of them who was much better off quitting. better off quitting. better off quitting. Great. Well, I appreciate you sharing Great. Well, I appreciate you sharing Great. Well, I appreciate you sharing that uh very much so. Let's talk about that uh very much so. Let's talk about that uh very much so. Let's talk about seed oils. The dreaded seed oil debate. seed oils. The dreaded seed oil debate. seed oils. The dreaded seed oil debate. Should we fear them or not fear them? Should we fear them or not fear them? Should we fear them or not fear them? Let's assume somebody is going to Let's assume somebody is going to Let's assume somebody is going to maintain calories. Like they're not maintain calories. Like they're not maintain calories. Like they're not adding seed oils as a source of adding seed oils as a source of adding seed oils as a source of additional calories above what they additional calories above what they additional calories above what they would normally be taking in. But let's would normally be taking in. But let's would normally be taking in. But let's say they have the choice. They can say they have the choice. They can say they have the choice. They can consume a seed oil like canola oil or consume a seed oil like canola oil or consume a seed oil like canola oil or soybean oil or they can consume olive soybean oil or they can consume olive soybean oil or they can consume olive oil in place of it. oil in place of it. oil in place of it. And let's just compare like which one is And let's just compare like which one is And let's just compare like which one is better if either. And is there anything better if either. And is there anything better if either. And is there anything inherently bad about seed oils? And I inherently bad about seed oils? And I inherently bad about seed oils? And I want to make sure that we talk about the want to make sure that we talk about the want to make sure that we talk about the processing because people will say, "Ah, processing because people will say, "Ah, processing because people will say, "Ah, the seed oils aren't bad if they come the seed oils aren't bad if they come the seed oils aren't bad if they come from a quality source, but most of the from a quality source, but most of the from a quality source, but most of the seed oils are through this high seed oils are through this high seed oils are through this high pressure, high temperature refinement pressure, high temperature refinement pressure, high temperature refinement process." And that's the problem. So process." And that's the problem. So process." And that's the problem. So what's the deal with seed oils? what's the deal with seed oils? what's the deal with seed oils? Okay, the big picture is that people Okay, the big picture is that people Okay, the big picture is that people overvilify seed oils. One side overvilify seed oils. One side overvilify seed oils. One side overvilifies seed oils just like the overvilifies seed oils just like the overvilifies seed oils just like the other side overvilifies other side overvilifies other side overvilifies let's say your standard you know land let's say your standard you know land let's say your standard you know land animal fats like beef tallow butter animal fats like beef tallow butter animal fats like beef tallow butter lard. But when you compare those two like seed But when you compare those two like seed But when you compare those two like seed oils versus the butter, beef towel, oils versus the butter, beef towel, oils versus the butter, beef towel, lard, you compare the evidence base of lard, you compare the evidence base of lard, you compare the evidence base of those two things, you can find more dirt those two things, you can find more dirt those two things, you can find more dirt as far as adverse health outcomes from as far as adverse health outcomes from as far as adverse health outcomes from the land animal fats compared to the land animal fats compared to the land animal fats compared to the seed oils. And and that is the reality seed oils. And and that is the reality seed oils. And and that is the reality of the matter. Um, of the matter. Um, of the matter. Um, it's really weird that seed oils are it's really weird that seed oils are it's really weird that seed oils are being vilified right now because that's being vilified right now because that's being vilified right now because that's not the scientific consensus. Uh, people not the scientific consensus. Uh, people not the scientific consensus. Uh, people who have their nose in the literature who have their nose in the literature who have their nose in the literature are just kind of scratching their are just kind of scratching their are just kind of scratching their heads at the whole seed oil scare thing. heads at the whole seed oil scare thing. heads at the whole seed oil scare thing. And there are some people on the fringe And there are some people on the fringe And there are some people on the fringe who laser in on their philosophies and who laser in on their philosophies and who laser in on their philosophies and ideologies about seed oils. But then all ideologies about seed oils. But then all ideologies about seed oils. But then all you need to do is ask a short set of you need to do is ask a short set of you need to do is ask a short set of questions. Okay. And you specified the questions. Okay. And you specified the questions. Okay. And you specified the seed oils in the question, which is seed oils in the question, which is seed oils in the question, which is great. I mean that you're ahead great. I mean that you're ahead great. I mean that you're ahead of like everybody else. So what seed oil of like everybody else. So what seed oil of like everybody else. So what seed oil are we talking about? are we talking about? are we talking about? What what kind of dosage are we talking What what kind of dosage are we talking What what kind of dosage are we talking about? And um what health outcome are about? And um what health outcome are about? And um what health outcome are you concerned with? And then what trial you concerned with? And then what trial you concerned with? And then what trial do you find most compelling that do you find most compelling that do you find most compelling that supports your fear of the seed oil? And supports your fear of the seed oil? And supports your fear of the seed oil? And so everybody like nine out of 10 people so everybody like nine out of 10 people so everybody like nine out of 10 people immediately will say, "Ah, okay. You immediately will say, "Ah, okay. You immediately will say, "Ah, okay. You want to know what seed oil? canola oil. want to know what seed oil? canola oil. want to know what seed oil? canola oil. Okay, great. Let's look at the canola Okay, great. Let's look at the canola Okay, great. Let's look at the canola oil literature. And one of the hardest oil literature. And one of the hardest oil literature. And one of the hardest things to do is find dirt on canola oil things to do is find dirt on canola oil things to do is find dirt on canola oil amidst all of the positive effects amidst all of the positive effects amidst all of the positive effects in almost every trial of canola oil. in almost every trial of canola oil. in almost every trial of canola oil. There is even a metaanalysis comparing There is even a metaanalysis comparing There is even a metaanalysis comparing directly the effect of canola oil versus directly the effect of canola oil versus directly the effect of canola oil versus olive oil on blood lipid profile. olive oil on blood lipid profile. olive oil on blood lipid profile. And s maybe, you know, unsurprisingly to s maybe, you know, unsurprisingly to s maybe, you know, unsurprisingly to some, but surprisingly to most, canola some, but surprisingly to most, canola some, but surprisingly to most, canola oil outperforms olive oil for improving oil outperforms olive oil for improving oil outperforms olive oil for improving blood lipids in the sense of um lowering blood lipids in the sense of um lowering blood lipids in the sense of um lowering LDL cholesterol. LDL cholesterol. LDL cholesterol. That's surprising to me because I That's surprising to me because I That's surprising to me because I assumed that assumed that assumed that olive oil can do no wrong. olive oil can do no wrong. olive oil can do no wrong. You know what? I was I was taken aback You know what? I was I was taken aback You know what? I was I was taken aback by that, too. I would have been just by that, too. I would have been just by that, too. I would have been just fine with seeing there's no damn fine with seeing there's no damn fine with seeing there's no damn difference. one of these antilimactic difference. one of these antilimactic difference. one of these antilimactic results. But when you take a look at results. But when you take a look at results. But when you take a look at canola oil's composition, it has a kind canola oil's composition, it has a kind canola oil's composition, it has a kind of an extraordinarily high proportion of an extraordinarily high proportion of an extraordinarily high proportion of omega-3 fatty acids compared to olive omega-3 fatty acids compared to olive omega-3 fatty acids compared to olive oil and compared to the rest of the seed oil and compared to the rest of the seed oil and compared to the rest of the seed oils for that. oils for that. oils for that. Omega-3. I thought it was high in Omega-3. I thought it was high in Omega-3. I thought it was high in omega6. It's it does contain omega-6 and omega6. It's it does contain omega-6 and omega6. It's it does contain omega-6 and that is the pre predominant um fatty that is the pre predominant um fatty that is the pre predominant um fatty acid in canola but it has a high omega-3 acid in canola but it has a high omega-3 acid in canola but it has a high omega-3 content as well. It has a high content as well. It has a high content as well. It has a high proportion of omega-3. I don't know the proportion of omega-3. I don't know the proportion of omega-3. I don't know the exact proportion of omega-3, but what exact proportion of omega-3, but what exact proportion of omega-3, but what makes canola kind of special as far as makes canola kind of special as far as makes canola kind of special as far as the vegetable oils go is its high the vegetable oils go is its high the vegetable oils go is its high omega-3 content. omega-3 content. omega-3 content. Wow. Okay. Um that's going to surprise a Wow. Okay. Um that's going to surprise a Wow. Okay. Um that's going to surprise a number of people, including me. number of people, including me. number of people, including me. My sense is that any ill effects to come My sense is that any ill effects to come My sense is that any ill effects to come from seed oils are because of who seed from seed oils are because of who seed from seed oils are because of who seed oils hang out with, oils hang out with, oils hang out with, right? This is sort of the old uh if right? This is sort of the old uh if right? This is sort of the old uh if you're old enough uh like me to you're old enough uh like me to you're old enough uh like me to remember, I'm 49, turning 50 in remember, I'm 49, turning 50 in remember, I'm 49, turning 50 in September, so I'm not quite 53, but um September, so I'm not quite 53, but um September, so I'm not quite 53, but um we're of the same generation and we're of the same generation and we're of the same generation and there was there was there was we grew up without the internet, we grew up without the internet, we grew up without the internet, right? Well, there was a discussion right? Well, there was a discussion right? Well, there was a discussion around cannabis for instance. We've done around cannabis for instance. We've done around cannabis for instance. We've done several episodes about it. We several episodes about it. We several episodes about it. We didn't paint it as good or bad. Although didn't paint it as good or bad. Although didn't paint it as good or bad. Although I do believe that young people, I do believe that young people, I do believe that young people, especially young males, smoking high THC especially young males, smoking high THC especially young males, smoking high THC cannabis can predispose to psychosis. I cannabis can predispose to psychosis. I cannabis can predispose to psychosis. I mean, there there's bunch of debate mean, there there's bunch of debate mean, there there's bunch of debate around this. But back in the day, it was around this. But back in the day, it was around this. But back in the day, it was if you use cannabis soon, you'll be if you use cannabis soon, you'll be if you use cannabis soon, you'll be using crack cocaine. That was kind of using crack cocaine. That was kind of using crack cocaine. That was kind of like the argument, right? And over time, like the argument, right? And over time, like the argument, right? And over time, people realized that cannabis has its people realized that cannabis has its people realized that cannabis has its own potential benefits and its own potential benefits and its own potential benefits and its own potential risks, right? Depending on a potential risks, right? Depending on a potential risks, right? Depending on a number of things. It seems that people number of things. It seems that people number of things. It seems that people who consume a lot of seed oils consume who consume a lot of seed oils consume who consume a lot of seed oils consume them in conjunction with a lot of them in conjunction with a lot of them in conjunction with a lot of starches and perhaps with added sugars starches and perhaps with added sugars starches and perhaps with added sugars as well. And when you lump those as well. And when you lump those as well. And when you lump those together, you end up with a together, you end up with a together, you end up with a pro-inflammatory often hypercaloric often hypercaloric often hypercaloric uh set of conditions and people aren't uh set of conditions and people aren't uh set of conditions and people aren't getting enough quality protein. And then getting enough quality protein. And then getting enough quality protein. And then we know what that picture looks like. It we know what that picture looks like. It we know what that picture looks like. It looks like the United States of America. looks like the United States of America. looks like the United States of America. Yeah. Right. Or most of the United States of Right. Or most of the United States of Right. Or most of the United States of America. Mhm. And so I do think that America. Mhm. And so I do think that America. Mhm. And so I do think that there's something about who olive oil there's something about who olive oil there's something about who olive oil and grass-fed butter hang out with and grass-fed butter hang out with and grass-fed butter hang out with that has the opposite effect. Like that has the opposite effect. Like that has the opposite effect. Like people who go, "Oh, this is a really people who go, "Oh, this is a really people who go, "Oh, this is a really high quality olive oil generally in my high quality olive oil generally in my high quality olive oil generally in my mind are the sort of people who are mind are the sort of people who are mind are the sort of people who are thinking about the quality of the salad thinking about the quality of the salad thinking about the quality of the salad ingredients. They're thinking about the ingredients. They're thinking about the ingredients. They're thinking about the sourdough bread uh as opposed to maybe a sourdough bread uh as opposed to maybe a sourdough bread uh as opposed to maybe a more refined sugar containing bread. And more refined sugar containing bread. And more refined sugar containing bread. And the people who talk about grass-fed the people who talk about grass-fed the people who talk about grass-fed butter are thinking about the quality of butter are thinking about the quality of butter are thinking about the quality of the meat sources and they're not eating the meat sources and they're not eating the meat sources and they're not eating other protein sources that are laden other protein sources that are laden other protein sources that are laden with other, you know, preservatives. So with other, you know, preservatives. So with other, you know, preservatives. So to me, I think a lot of this quote to me, I think a lot of this quote to me, I think a lot of this quote unquote seed oil debate will be resolved unquote seed oil debate will be resolved unquote seed oil debate will be resolved when we start pulling apart the when we start pulling apart the when we start pulling apart the individual components. individual components. individual components. They're riding in the wrong vehicle. They're riding in the wrong vehicle. They're riding in the wrong vehicle. Right. And I and I think that um Right. And I and I think that um Right. And I and I think that um from a cost perspective, you know, this from a cost perspective, you know, this from a cost perspective, you know, this hadn't occurred to me until I started hadn't occurred to me until I started hadn't occurred to me until I started voicing a little bit of this online, in voicing a little bit of this online, in voicing a little bit of this online, in which case you learn a lot which case you learn a lot which case you learn a lot uh quickly. And what I learned was, you uh quickly. And what I learned was, you uh quickly. And what I learned was, you know, there were a number of people who know, there were a number of people who know, there were a number of people who said, "Yeah, I'm hearing all this great said, "Yeah, I'm hearing all this great said, "Yeah, I'm hearing all this great stuff about grass-fed butter and olive stuff about grass-fed butter and olive stuff about grass-fed butter and olive oil, but there are people for whom the oil, but there are people for whom the oil, but there are people for whom the cost margins are just too high to cost margins are just too high to cost margins are just too high to consume all organic and or olive oil and consume all organic and or olive oil and consume all organic and or olive oil and you know, and you have to listen to and you know, and you have to listen to and you know, and you have to listen to that and say, okay, well, you know, for that and say, okay, well, you know, for that and say, okay, well, you know, for people needing to feed an entire family, people needing to feed an entire family, people needing to feed an entire family, um, you know, perhaps some of these um, you know, perhaps some of these um, you know, perhaps some of these other fat sources uh are more affordable other fat sources uh are more affordable other fat sources uh are more affordable and therefore what are the real health and therefore what are the real health and therefore what are the real health risks with those?" Mhm. risks with those?" Mhm. risks with those?" Mhm. So anyway, a bit of editorializing So anyway, a bit of editorializing So anyway, a bit of editorializing there, but um I have a feeling some of there, but um I have a feeling some of there, but um I have a feeling some of this is going to shake out in the in the this is going to shake out in the in the this is going to shake out in the in the in the fine parsing of these different in the fine parsing of these different in the fine parsing of these different diets. I diets. I diets. I think people oversimplify it. What I think people oversimplify it. What I think people oversimplify it. What people do with seed oils is what people do with seed oils is what people do with seed oils is what people do with dairy. They say dairy as if it's do with dairy. They say dairy as if it's do with dairy. They say dairy as if it's some monolithic thing. You know, with some monolithic thing. You know, with some monolithic thing. You know, with dairy, you've got the hard cheeses, dairy, you've got the hard cheeses, dairy, you've got the hard cheeses, you've got butter, you've got yogurt, you've got butter, you've got yogurt, you've got butter, you've got yogurt, you've got milk of varying fat levels. you've got milk of varying fat levels. you've got milk of varying fat levels. you know, um you're kind of hardressed you know, um you're kind of hardressed you know, um you're kind of hardressed to find negative stuff on yogurt. You're to find negative stuff on yogurt. You're to find negative stuff on yogurt. You're you'd be kind of hardressed actually to you'd be kind of hardressed actually to you'd be kind of hardressed actually to find negative stuff on hard cheeses. Um find negative stuff on hard cheeses. Um find negative stuff on hard cheeses. Um butter of all of the, you know, the butter of all of the, you know, the butter of all of the, you know, the range of dairy foods, butter is the one range of dairy foods, butter is the one range of dairy foods, butter is the one that you can find the dirt on. Um that you can find the dirt on. Um that you can find the dirt on. Um similar story with seed oils, like try similar story with seed oils, like try similar story with seed oils, like try to find some negative stuff on flax to find some negative stuff on flax to find some negative stuff on flax seed, chia seed, sesame seed. Uh you seed, chia seed, sesame seed. Uh you seed, chia seed, sesame seed. Uh you can't. I mean, yeah, if you dig hard can't. I mean, yeah, if you dig hard can't. I mean, yeah, if you dig hard enough, you can try to find some enough, you can try to find some enough, you can try to find some negative stuff on canola. It's very negative stuff on canola. It's very negative stuff on canola. It's very tough, too. Um, even things like soybean tough, too. Um, even things like soybean tough, too. Um, even things like soybean oil and corn oil, you can look at the oil and corn oil, you can look at the oil and corn oil, you can look at the literature, and it doesn't paint this literature, and it doesn't paint this literature, and it doesn't paint this sinister picture either. And so, I think sinister picture either. And so, I think sinister picture either. And so, I think people are missing the forest for the people are missing the forest for the people are missing the forest for the trees in general when they're focused on trees in general when they're focused on trees in general when they're focused on honestly the cooking oils. You shouldn't honestly the cooking oils. You shouldn't honestly the cooking oils. You shouldn't be drowning or deep frying your stuff on be drowning or deep frying your stuff on be drowning or deep frying your stuff on a regular basis anyway. So um yeah and a regular basis anyway. So um yeah and a regular basis anyway. So um yeah and beyond that when you look at the and beyond that when you look at the and beyond that when you look at the effects of seed oil that are examined in effects of seed oil that are examined in effects of seed oil that are examined in the literature for various outcomes you the literature for various outcomes you the literature for various outcomes you know everything from the intermediate know everything from the intermediate know everything from the intermediate outcomes like biioarker effects all the outcomes like biioarker effects all the outcomes like biioarker effects all the way to the in quotes hard end points way to the in quotes hard end points way to the in quotes hard end points like mortality like mortality like mortality heart attack you know um cardiac events heart attack you know um cardiac events heart attack you know um cardiac events and heart disease. So the hard end and heart disease. So the hard end and heart disease. So the hard end points as well as the intermediate or points as well as the intermediate or points as well as the intermediate or soft end points, they're all superior soft end points, they're all superior soft end points, they're all superior with the seed oils compared to butter, with the seed oils compared to butter, with the seed oils compared to butter, um, lard, beef tallow um, lard, beef tallow um, lard, beef tallow on the whole. So there is a severe on the whole. So there is a severe on the whole. So there is a severe misunderstanding and falsely founded misunderstanding and falsely founded misunderstanding and falsely founded scaremongering with respect to seed oils scaremongering with respect to seed oils scaremongering with respect to seed oils to the point where I just think it's to the point where I just think it's to the point where I just think it's incredibly silly. incredibly silly. incredibly silly. Um, people just have to get a hold of Um, people just have to get a hold of Um, people just have to get a hold of themselves and focus on the overall themselves and focus on the overall themselves and focus on the overall quality of the diet and not really get quality of the diet and not really get quality of the diet and not really get into these absolute, you know, death into these absolute, you know, death into these absolute, you know, death matches over what oils they use to cook matches over what oils they use to cook matches over what oils they use to cook their foods. Um, I am a huge extravirgin their foods. Um, I am a huge extravirgin their foods. Um, I am a huge extravirgin olive oil fan. That is my go-to. That's olive oil fan. That is my go-to. That's olive oil fan. That is my go-to. That's what I love. I could honestly I could what I love. I could honestly I could what I love. I could honestly I could like do shots of the stuff. I love it like do shots of the stuff. I love it like do shots of the stuff. I love it that much. that much. that much. Delicious. Yeah. And um and I love Delicious. Yeah. And um and I love Delicious. Yeah. And um and I love sesame oil, you know, but sesame is a sesame oil, you know, but sesame is a sesame oil, you know, but sesame is a seed oil, but sesame oil has been seed oil, but sesame oil has been seed oil, but sesame oil has been consumed by very healthy populations consumed by very healthy populations consumed by very healthy populations throughout Asia for the last 5,000 throughout Asia for the last 5,000 throughout Asia for the last 5,000 years. Um and so years. Um and so years. Um and so I don't necessarily like canola oil, you I don't necessarily like canola oil, you I don't necessarily like canola oil, you know, like as far as the sort of the know, like as far as the sort of the know, like as far as the sort of the stickiness and the oddness about it, but stickiness and the oddness about it, but stickiness and the oddness about it, but I I'll still acknowledge that the I I'll still acknowledge that the I I'll still acknowledge that the literature shows literature shows literature shows overwhelmingly positive stuff about it in the majority positive stuff about it in the majority positive stuff about it in the majority of trials. Um, but I prefer olive oil of trials. Um, but I prefer olive oil of trials. Um, but I prefer olive oil and I would almost feel more and I would almost feel more and I would almost feel more comfortable recommending that if you comfortable recommending that if you comfortable recommending that if you like olive oil then that should be your like olive oil then that should be your like olive oil then that should be your go-to rather than oils that are I guess go-to rather than oils that are I guess go-to rather than oils that are I guess maybe Frankensteined or engineered to maybe Frankensteined or engineered to maybe Frankensteined or engineered to a degree. And you mentioned the a degree. And you mentioned the a degree. And you mentioned the whole idea of the like how these oils whole idea of the like how these oils whole idea of the like how these oils are produced. Like one of the concerns are produced. Like one of the concerns are produced. Like one of the concerns is hexane use to extract the oils from is hexane use to extract the oils from is hexane use to extract the oils from the seed cakes and stuff like that. So the seed cakes and stuff like that. So the seed cakes and stuff like that. So the use of solvents to get these the use of solvents to get these the use of solvents to get these oils out of their native source. Uh I oils out of their native source. Uh I oils out of their native source. Uh I there's some interesting literature there's some interesting literature there's some interesting literature showing higher hexane levels in um olive showing higher hexane levels in um olive showing higher hexane levels in um olive oil than in I forget it was some oil than in I forget it was some oil than in I forget it was some other seed oil whether it was canola or other seed oil whether it was canola or other seed oil whether it was canola or sunflower. And so but nevertheless that the hexane And so but nevertheless that the hexane And so but nevertheless that the hexane amounts were well below established safe amounts were well below established safe amounts were well below established safe thresholds. And so I think I really do thresholds. And so I think I really do thresholds. And so I think I really do think that people are getting sort of think that people are getting sort of think that people are getting sort of lost in the weeds and kind of missing lost in the weeds and kind of missing lost in the weeds and kind of missing the forest for the trees, focusing on the forest for the trees, focusing on the forest for the trees, focusing on the little grains of sand and missing the little grains of sand and missing the little grains of sand and missing the big boulders. the big boulders. the big boulders. Thank you for that. I think it's going Thank you for that. I think it's going Thank you for that. I think it's going to clarify a number of things for a to clarify a number of things for a to clarify a number of things for a number of people. I also love olive oil. number of people. I also love olive oil. number of people. I also love olive oil. Over the years, I've tried to consume Over the years, I've tried to consume Over the years, I've tried to consume less butter. I love the taste of butter. less butter. I love the taste of butter. less butter. I love the taste of butter. Can can I interrupt and let you know I'm Can can I interrupt and let you know I'm Can can I interrupt and let you know I'm not anti- butter at all. Mhm. not anti- butter at all. Mhm. not anti- butter at all. Mhm. I just um when you look at the evidence, I just um when you look at the evidence, I just um when you look at the evidence, if you butter everything up in your diet if you butter everything up in your diet if you butter everything up in your diet and you really pound like the if you're and you really pound like the if you're and you really pound like the if you're just eating sticks of butter, then just eating sticks of butter, then just eating sticks of butter, then you're hedging your uh bets in the you're hedging your uh bets in the you're hedging your uh bets in the direction of increased cardiovascular direction of increased cardiovascular direction of increased cardiovascular risk. And there's even a really risk. And there's even a really risk. And there's even a really interesting study comparing cream with interesting study comparing cream with interesting study comparing cream with butter on blood lipids. And so cream butter on blood lipids. And so cream butter on blood lipids. And so cream actually had a neutral effect on blood actually had a neutral effect on blood actually had a neutral effect on blood lipids whereas butter kind of skewed lipids whereas butter kind of skewed lipids whereas butter kind of skewed things in an adverse direction. Usually things in an adverse direction. Usually things in an adverse direction. Usually it's typically an increase in uh it's typically an increase in uh it's typically an increase in uh LDL. The reason why cream had this neutral The reason why cream had this neutral The reason why cream had this neutral effect is what they're figuring and effect is what they're figuring and effect is what they're figuring and this is based on other studies as well this is based on other studies as well this is based on other studies as well is it's got this component called milk is it's got this component called milk is it's got this component called milk fat globial membrane MFGM which gets fat globial membrane MFGM which gets fat globial membrane MFGM which gets churned out of butter. And so even churned out of butter. And so even churned out of butter. And so even within the dairy category, you have within the dairy category, you have within the dairy category, you have very differently behaving types of very differently behaving types of very differently behaving types of foods. And once again, I'm not anti- foods. And once again, I'm not anti- foods. And once again, I'm not anti- butter, but we have to acknowledge that butter, but we have to acknowledge that butter, but we have to acknowledge that some foods within a given food category some foods within a given food category some foods within a given food category are a little bit riskier and you should are a little bit riskier and you should are a little bit riskier and you should be a little bit more careful about the be a little bit more careful about the be a little bit more careful about the just the sheer amounts you consume of it just the sheer amounts you consume of it just the sheer amounts you consume of it over a lifetime. over a lifetime. over a lifetime. Yeah. Uh years ago when first starting Yeah. Uh years ago when first starting Yeah. Uh years ago when first starting the podcast when I wasn't aware of the podcast when I wasn't aware of the podcast when I wasn't aware of frankly how big the podcast was going to frankly how big the podcast was going to frankly how big the podcast was going to grow to I made a joke about like I eat grow to I made a joke about like I eat grow to I made a joke about like I eat slabs of butter to increase my slabs of butter to increase my slabs of butter to increase my cholesterol so I have higher cholesterol so I have higher cholesterol so I have higher testosterone like and man did I pay for testosterone like and man did I pay for testosterone like and man did I pay for that one. Um I I've always I've always that one. Um I I've always I've always that one. Um I I've always I've always that's pure gold. that's pure gold. that's pure gold. Yeah. I've always um I've always Yeah. I've always um I've always Yeah. I've always um I've always tried to get a little bit of saturated tried to get a little bit of saturated tried to get a little bit of saturated fat in my daily diet, either through red fat in my daily diet, either through red fat in my daily diet, either through red meat or through eggs or through, you meat or through eggs or through, you meat or through eggs or through, you know, a tablespoon or two maybe of know, a tablespoon or two maybe of know, a tablespoon or two maybe of butter depending on um how hard I'm butter depending on um how hard I'm butter depending on um how hard I'm training and how what my caloric needs training and how what my caloric needs training and how what my caloric needs are. I don't like to drop my saturated are. I don't like to drop my saturated are. I don't like to drop my saturated fat to zero because I find my skin gets fat to zero because I find my skin gets fat to zero because I find my skin gets dry. I don't feel as well. My blood dry. I don't feel as well. My blood dry. I don't feel as well. My blood profiles actually suffer a little bit. profiles actually suffer a little bit. profiles actually suffer a little bit. So, that's just me. I do what but I So, that's just me. I do what but I So, that's just me. I do what but I would I just want to would I just want to would I just want to re-emphasize I don't think people should re-emphasize I don't think people should re-emphasize I don't think people should consciously try and increase their consciously try and increase their consciously try and increase their butter intake. Um but between butter and butter intake. Um but between butter and butter intake. Um but between butter and olive oil and the fats naturally olive oil and the fats naturally olive oil and the fats naturally occurring in nuts and eggs and red meat occurring in nuts and eggs and red meat occurring in nuts and eggs and red meat um consuming some omega-3s through fish oil consuming some omega-3s through fish oil consuming some omega-3s through fish oil or through some fatty fish intake, you or through some fatty fish intake, you or through some fatty fish intake, you can get a pretty nice uh contour of the can get a pretty nice uh contour of the can get a pretty nice uh contour of the different lipids that include a bunch of different lipids that include a bunch of different lipids that include a bunch of micronutrients too, right? I feel like micronutrients too, right? I feel like micronutrients too, right? I feel like the idea of just emphasizing tallow and the idea of just emphasizing tallow and the idea of just emphasizing tallow and butter and red meat to the exclusion of butter and red meat to the exclusion of butter and red meat to the exclusion of every plant-based fat or nuts to me every plant-based fat or nuts to me every plant-based fat or nuts to me seems nuts and I'm friends with Paul seems nuts and I'm friends with Paul seems nuts and I'm friends with Paul Saladino and I'll say that. I also think Saladino and I'll say that. I also think Saladino and I'll say that. I also think that if you eat a ve a diet that's very that if you eat a ve a diet that's very that if you eat a ve a diet that's very low in saturated fat, like very low in saturated fat, like very low in saturated fat, like very low in saturated fat, um most of the people in saturated fat, um most of the people in saturated fat, um most of the people that I know who've done that and that I know who've done that and that I know who've done that and certainly myself, uh it leads to drier certainly myself, uh it leads to drier certainly myself, uh it leads to drier skin, brittle hair, um achy joints. I do skin, brittle hair, um achy joints. I do skin, brittle hair, um achy joints. I do think there's really something to think there's really something to think there's really something to including some saturated fat in one's including some saturated fat in one's including some saturated fat in one's diet in I would say low moderation, diet in I would say low moderation, diet in I would say low moderation, right? Like right, especially as one right? Like right, especially as one right? Like right, especially as one gets older. And I know uh all the gets older. And I know uh all the gets older. And I know uh all the carnivore folks are probably like left carnivore folks are probably like left carnivore folks are probably like left the conversation by now. the conversation by now. the conversation by now. You know, the Mediterranean keto model You know, the Mediterranean keto model You know, the Mediterranean keto model is legit. I mean, it it's got nothing is legit. I mean, it it's got nothing is legit. I mean, it it's got nothing but positive uh effects that have but positive uh effects that have but positive uh effects that have been seen in the literature. So, like if been seen in the literature. So, like if been seen in the literature. So, like if you wanted to go keto, but you're you wanted to go keto, but you're you wanted to go keto, but you're instead of eating a bunch of lard or instead of eating a bunch of lard or instead of eating a bunch of lard or butter or beef fat, you swap it out with butter or beef fat, you swap it out with butter or beef fat, you swap it out with nuts, avocado, nuts, avocado, nuts, avocado, extra virgin olive oil, um you know, extra virgin olive oil, um you know, extra virgin olive oil, um you know, some extra virgin coconut oil. Then you some extra virgin coconut oil. Then you some extra virgin coconut oil. Then you have a much better cardiovascular risk have a much better cardiovascular risk have a much better cardiovascular risk profile and you can still be on keto and profile and you can still be on keto and profile and you can still be on keto and you can still consume, you know, the you can still consume, you know, the you can still consume, you know, the range of uh protein sources and you're range of uh protein sources and you're range of uh protein sources and you're sort of getting kind of like a win-win sort of getting kind of like a win-win sort of getting kind of like a win-win there. Um, you know, oddly the there. Um, you know, oddly the there. Um, you know, oddly the government, the US government used to government, the US government used to government, the US government used to recommend and they used to dish out this recommend and they used to dish out this recommend and they used to dish out this recommendation of your fat intake, a recommendation of your fat intake, a recommendation of your fat intake, a third of it, so the government has third of it, so the government has third of it, so the government has always been into low fat. So 30% fat, always been into low fat. So 30% fat, always been into low fat. So 30% fat, 10% should be saturated, 10% should be 10% should be saturated, 10% should be 10% should be saturated, 10% should be monounsaturated, 10% should be uh monounsaturated, 10% should be uh monounsaturated, 10% should be uh polyunsaturated. And so they kind of had polyunsaturated. And so they kind of had polyunsaturated. And so they kind of had the right idea there with kind had the right idea there with kind had the right idea there with kind of getting a variety of the fat of getting a variety of the fat of getting a variety of the fat types in there. And I'm familiar with types in there. And I'm familiar with types in there. And I'm familiar with the literature on um saturated fat the literature on um saturated fat the literature on um saturated fat and cholesterol and testosterone levels and cholesterol and testosterone levels and cholesterol and testosterone levels and you know as somebody who is and you know as somebody who is and you know as somebody who is not on exogenous testosterone, dude, I not on exogenous testosterone, dude, I not on exogenous testosterone, dude, I I'm going to be grabbing for whatever um I'm going to be grabbing for whatever um I'm going to be grabbing for whatever um dietary advantage I can get as far as dietary advantage I can get as far as dietary advantage I can get as far as keeping my testosterone levels up. And keeping my testosterone levels up. And keeping my testosterone levels up. And so I personally would I would not so I personally would I would not so I personally would I would not engage a zero saturated fat diet engage a zero saturated fat diet engage a zero saturated fat diet either. I think that's great for people either. I think that's great for people either. I think that's great for people to hear. to hear. to hear. Are you aware of any female specific Are you aware of any female specific Are you aware of any female specific nutrition advice aside from uh you know nutrition advice aside from uh you know nutrition advice aside from uh you know adjusting for you know body weight in on adjusting for you know body weight in on adjusting for you know body weight in on average women tend to be lower body average women tend to be lower body average women tend to be lower body weight than men? Not always but um weight than men? Not always but um weight than men? Not always but um and so on lower lean mass etc. Not and so on lower lean mass etc. Not and so on lower lean mass etc. Not always. Is there anything specific about always. Is there anything specific about always. Is there anything specific about some of the topics that we've discussed some of the topics that we've discussed some of the topics that we've discussed thus far that from your experience and I thus far that from your experience and I thus far that from your experience and I know your wife is extremely know your wife is extremely know your wife is extremely skilled in uh in the department of skilled in uh in the department of skilled in uh in the department of training and nutrition etc for training and nutrition etc for training and nutrition etc for clients uh that is truly female specific like uh that is truly female specific like uh that is truly female specific like that they really benefit from doing that they really benefit from doing that they really benefit from doing certain things or not doing certain things or not doing certain things or not doing certain things that men can get away with or things that men can get away with or things that men can get away with or don't have to pay attention to. don't have to pay attention to. don't have to pay attention to. There's very little in that direction. There's very little in that direction. There's very little in that direction. almost nothing, almost no meaningful almost nothing, almost no meaningful almost nothing, almost no meaningful um differences that you can sort of um differences that you can sort of um differences that you can sort of universalize about women need to eat universalize about women need to eat universalize about women need to eat this way, men need to eat that way. The this way, men need to eat that way. The this way, men need to eat that way. The only thing that I would concede only thing that I would concede only thing that I would concede to is that if you're if you have to is that if you're if you have to is that if you're if you have somebody with the goal of um somebody with the goal of um somebody with the goal of um you know what, forget about the goal. If you know what, forget about the goal. If you know what, forget about the goal. If if somebody is of childbearing age, if somebody is of childbearing age, if somebody is of childbearing age, she's going to have a monthly menstrual she's going to have a monthly menstrual she's going to have a monthly menstrual cycle. And during that monthly cycle, cycle. And during that monthly cycle, cycle. And during that monthly cycle, for about a week out of the month, her for about a week out of the month, her for about a week out of the month, her cravings are going to go through the cravings are going to go through the cravings are going to go through the roof. She might have lethargy at the roof. She might have lethargy at the roof. She might have lethargy at the same time, just feel generally like same time, just feel generally like same time, just feel generally like crap. And you know, even emotionally, crap. And you know, even emotionally, crap. And you know, even emotionally, things will be kind of um disregulated things will be kind of um disregulated things will be kind of um disregulated during that time. I don't think I don't during that time. I don't think I don't during that time. I don't think I don't think women should totally fight their think women should totally fight their think women should totally fight their cravings. and um especially if their cravings. and um especially if their cravings. and um especially if somebody is on uh a weight loss diet. So somebody is on uh a weight loss diet. So somebody is on uh a weight loss diet. So there's a tactic that we use we can there's a tactic that we use we can there's a tactic that we use we can use with clients called diet breaks. So use with clients called diet breaks. So use with clients called diet breaks. So if you're endeavoring weight loss then if you're endeavoring weight loss then if you're endeavoring weight loss then you can go you know you can go hard for you can go you know you can go hard for you can go you know you can go hard for three weeks and then on the week of the three weeks and then on the week of the three weeks and then on the week of the menstrual cycle kind of take it easy and menstrual cycle kind of take it easy and menstrual cycle kind of take it easy and then give into to your cravings so to then give into to your cravings so to then give into to your cravings so to speak for that week. And I'm not talking speak for that week. And I'm not talking speak for that week. And I'm not talking use that week to undo the progress you use that week to undo the progress you use that week to undo the progress you made in the previous 3 weeks, but I made in the previous 3 weeks, but I made in the previous 3 weeks, but I think that if you're going to diet in a think that if you're going to diet in a think that if you're going to diet in a cyclical fashion, cyclical fashion, cyclical fashion, um, and this works quite well with women um, and this works quite well with women um, and this works quite well with women observationally, then your observationally, then your observationally, then your week off or your higher calorie week or week off or your higher calorie week or week off or your higher calorie week or your maintenance week, just coincide it your maintenance week, just coincide it your maintenance week, just coincide it with the menstrual cycle. And that way, with the menstrual cycle. And that way, with the menstrual cycle. And that way, you're not fighting mother nature. you're not fighting mother nature. you're not fighting mother nature. You're sort of kind of riding with You're sort of kind of riding with You're sort of kind of riding with mother nature. uh and you can have mother nature. uh and you can have mother nature. uh and you can have potentially easier time improving body potentially easier time improving body potentially easier time improving body composition that way. Um composition that way. Um composition that way. Um as far as the other claims that float as far as the other claims that float as far as the other claims that float around about, you know, the around about, you know, the around about, you know, the permenopausal period or the menopausal transition period or the menopausal transition period or the menopausal transition and women have to eat this way, they and women have to eat this way, they and women have to eat this way, they have to avoid this and that and eating, have to avoid this and that and eating, have to avoid this and that and eating, you know, there's all kinds of you know, there's all kinds of you know, there's all kinds of claims being made. claims being made. claims being made. uh they should be framed as speculations uh they should be framed as speculations uh they should be framed as speculations honestly and um with the menopausal transition and um with the menopausal transition and um with the menopausal transition like menopause is a really hot thing like menopause is a really hot thing like menopause is a really hot thing right now amongst the influencers and right now amongst the influencers and right now amongst the influencers and things like that and there is some things like that and there is some things like that and there is some research showing that um there is fat research showing that um there is fat research showing that um there is fat mass that's gained during the menopausal mass that's gained during the menopausal mass that's gained during the menopausal transition and lean mass that's lost at transition and lean mass that's lost at transition and lean mass that's lost at a general population level but there's a general population level but there's a general population level but there's a lot of scaremongering around that as lot of scaremongering around that as lot of scaremongering around that as well and there's a study that was done well and there's a study that was done well and there's a study that was done it's called the Swan Study. It's the it's called the Swan Study. It's the it's called the Swan Study. It's the it's the longest and uh largest study on it's the longest and uh largest study on it's the longest and uh largest study on this topic and they looked at the 4 on this topic and they looked at the 4 on this topic and they looked at the 4 to8 year menopausal transition and that to8 year menopausal transition and that to8 year menopausal transition and that usually occurs in women from like usually occurs in women from like usually occurs in women from like mid-40s to mid-50s and they looked at mid-40s to mid-50s and they looked at mid-40s to mid-50s and they looked at early menopause, mid menopause, early menopause, mid menopause, early menopause, mid menopause, postmenopause and they looked at the postmenopause and they looked at the postmenopause and they looked at the effects on body composition or the effects on body composition or the effects on body composition or the relationship at least with menopausal relationship at least with menopausal relationship at least with menopausal transition and body composition transition and body composition transition and body composition during a concentrated three and a year during a concentrated three and a year during a concentrated three and a year period where most of the changes took period where most of the changes took period where most of the changes took place. The average body fat gained was 1.6 The average body fat gained was 1.6 The average body fat gained was 1.6 kilograms. So that's three and a half kilograms. So that's three and a half kilograms. So that's three and a half pounds. The average amount of lean mass pounds. The average amount of lean mass pounds. The average amount of lean mass lost was 0.2 kg. So about half a pound lost was 0.2 kg. So about half a pound lost was 0.2 kg. So about half a pound of lean mass lost. So yes, these things of lean mass lost. So yes, these things of lean mass lost. So yes, these things occur, but the magnitude of which they occur, but the magnitude of which they occur, but the magnitude of which they occur. And this is in the general population. And this is in the general population. And this is in the general population. This isn't in like fitness people who This isn't in like fitness people who This isn't in like fitness people who are really meticulous about high enough are really meticulous about high enough are really meticulous about high enough protein, resistance training, etc. protein, resistance training, etc. protein, resistance training, etc. Uh I don't think this the scaremongering Uh I don't think this the scaremongering Uh I don't think this the scaremongering is warranted. I know that there's very is warranted. I know that there's very is warranted. I know that there's very real symptoms associated with the real symptoms associated with the real symptoms associated with the menopausal transition that make adhering menopausal transition that make adhering menopausal transition that make adhering to a you know a fitness program or a to a you know a fitness program or a to a you know a fitness program or a diet program very tough. you know, the diet program very tough. you know, the diet program very tough. you know, the hot flashes, um the uh lethargy, joint hot flashes, um the uh lethargy, joint hot flashes, um the uh lethargy, joint pain, changes in sexual function, um the pain, changes in sexual function, um the pain, changes in sexual function, um the combination of those things, how they combination of those things, how they combination of those things, how they affect sleep, poor sleep affects affect sleep, poor sleep affects affect sleep, poor sleep affects everything negatively. And so everything negatively. And so everything negatively. And so you when you when you work with somebody you when you when you work with somebody you when you when you work with somebody as a practitioner who's going through as a practitioner who's going through as a practitioner who's going through the menopausal transition, I would grant the menopausal transition, I would grant the menopausal transition, I would grant that maybe you set their expectations at that maybe you set their expectations at that maybe you set their expectations at maybe 50% maybe 50% maybe 50% the amount that you would with somebody the amount that you would with somebody the amount that you would with somebody who was not in the menopausal who was not in the menopausal who was not in the menopausal transition. So whereas you would transition. So whereas you would transition. So whereas you would maybe set somebody to expect like a maybe set somebody to expect like a maybe set somebody to expect like a pound a week loss if they're trying to pound a week loss if they're trying to pound a week loss if they're trying to lose body fat, then you should maybe set lose body fat, then you should maybe set lose body fat, then you should maybe set somebody in the permenopausal period to somebody in the permenopausal period to somebody in the permenopausal period to be okay with like half of that be okay with like half of that be okay with like half of that because of the other changes that are because of the other changes that are because of the other changes that are occurring that make the rest and occurring that make the rest and occurring that make the rest and recovery more difficult. recovery more difficult. recovery more difficult. Yep. Absolutely. Yep. Absolutely. Yep. Absolutely. Thank you for that answer. Um Thank you for that answer. Um Thank you for that answer. Um I know it's a topic that's as you I know it's a topic that's as you I know it's a topic that's as you mentioned is more frequent these days. I mentioned is more frequent these days. I mentioned is more frequent these days. I think it's important that it is. It It's think it's important that it is. It It's think it's important that it is. It It's been a topic that hasn't received a been a topic that hasn't received a been a topic that hasn't received a lot of attention until fairly recently. lot of attention until fairly recently. lot of attention until fairly recently. I think because a the women's health I think because a the women's health I think because a the women's health initiative studies weren't uh weren't initiative studies weren't uh weren't initiative studies weren't uh weren't completed. A lot of them were completed completed. A lot of them were completed completed. A lot of them were completed in recent years and so the data quote in recent years and so the data quote in recent years and so the data quote unquote were in. I think also um the unquote were in. I think also um the unquote were in. I think also um the effects on brain like the effects on brain like the effects on brain like the relationship between estrogen, relationship between estrogen, relationship between estrogen, testosterone, and brain function in testosterone, and brain function in testosterone, and brain function in males and females is something that males and females is something that males and females is something that we're just now starting to really we're just now starting to really we're just now starting to really understand with modern imaging tools and understand with modern imaging tools and understand with modern imaging tools and so on. So, this is an area of course and so on. So, this is an area of course and so on. So, this is an area of course that that's going to evolve quickly in that that's going to evolve quickly in that that's going to evolve quickly in the in the upcoming years. the in the upcoming years. the in the upcoming years. Collagen, I've had a dermologist, I've had a dermologist, I've had a dermologist, another death match fight. another death match fight. another death match fight. I've had a dermologist on this podcast. I've had a dermologist on this podcast. I've had a dermologist on this podcast. We talked about collagen. My read of the We talked about collagen. My read of the We talked about collagen. My read of the data on collagen is that um the amino data on collagen is that um the amino data on collagen is that um the amino acid profile in collagen which typically acid profile in collagen which typically acid profile in collagen which typically comes from fish. I believe most collagen comes from fish. I believe most collagen comes from fish. I believe most collagen sources are fish based boine sources are fish based boine sources are fish based boine or boine or um or boine or um or boine or um that the amino acid profile is not that the amino acid profile is not that the amino acid profile is not terrific from the perspective of muscle terrific from the perspective of muscle terrific from the perspective of muscle protein synthesis. low in leucine and protein synthesis. low in leucine and protein synthesis. low in leucine and other branch chain amino acids. Um other branch chain amino acids. Um other branch chain amino acids. Um higher in other um amino acids, but that higher in other um amino acids, but that higher in other um amino acids, but that the amino acids that it is high in the amino acids that it is high in the amino acids that it is high in comprise uh a significant fraction of comprise uh a significant fraction of comprise uh a significant fraction of what skin and other soft tissues are what skin and other soft tissues are what skin and other soft tissues are made of. So that ingesting 15 to 30 made of. So that ingesting 15 to 30 made of. So that ingesting 15 to 30 grams of collagen per day might be grams of collagen per day might be grams of collagen per day might be beneficial independent and uh separate beneficial independent and uh separate beneficial independent and uh separate from dietary protein for sake of muscle from dietary protein for sake of muscle from dietary protein for sake of muscle protein synthesis. It also so happens, protein synthesis. It also so happens, protein synthesis. It also so happens, if you don't mind me saying, you have if you don't mind me saying, you have if you don't mind me saying, you have very nice skin. So, do you take very nice skin. So, do you take very nice skin. So, do you take collagen? Um, and he's 53 years old. You collagen? Um, and he's 53 years old. You collagen? Um, and he's 53 years old. You got nice skin. Um, do you take collagen? got nice skin. Um, do you take collagen? got nice skin. Um, do you take collagen? And what are your uh thoughts about And what are your uh thoughts about And what are your uh thoughts about people who want to take collagen people who want to take collagen people who want to take collagen specifically to improve skin appearance specifically to improve skin appearance specifically to improve skin appearance and for no other reason? and for no other reason? and for no other reason? Okay. So, I want to start off by saying Okay. So, I want to start off by saying Okay. So, I want to start off by saying that fitness professionals in the in that fitness professionals in the in that fitness professionals in the in quotes evidence-based community, quotes evidence-based community, quotes evidence-based community, they have almost a pathologically they have almost a pathologically they have almost a pathologically minimalist approach to supplementation. So, it's approach to supplementation. So, it's approach to supplementation. So, it's almost like if you can avoid a almost like if you can avoid a almost like if you can avoid a supplement and dismiss it and poo supplement and dismiss it and poo supplement and dismiss it and poo it, hey, great, we won. it, hey, great, we won. it, hey, great, we won. I'm not like that with I'm not like that with I'm not like that with a few supplements, and collagen is one a few supplements, and collagen is one a few supplements, and collagen is one of them. of them. of them. And for one thing, of all the proteins And for one thing, of all the proteins And for one thing, of all the proteins in the body, collagen is the single most in the body, collagen is the single most in the body, collagen is the single most abundant. Um, and Um, and Um, and collagen comprises collagen comprises collagen comprises about gosh, you know, 20 to 40% of about gosh, you know, 20 to 40% of about gosh, you know, 20 to 40% of the proteins in the body. A it comprises the proteins in the body. A it comprises the proteins in the body. A it comprises uh a significant amount of bone tissue uh a significant amount of bone tissue uh a significant amount of bone tissue and not just the joints and ligaments and not just the joints and ligaments and not just the joints and ligaments and tendons. And so from a very kind of and tendons. And so from a very kind of and tendons. And so from a very kind of no-brainer trogloidic level, it's like no-brainer trogloidic level, it's like no-brainer trogloidic level, it's like what is everybody's issue with providing what is everybody's issue with providing what is everybody's issue with providing the raw materials to the body that it the raw materials to the body that it the raw materials to the body that it can use to build these tissues. And the can use to build these tissues. And the can use to build these tissues. And the push back on that is the idea that the push back on that is the idea that the push back on that is the idea that the body takes any protein, breaks it down body takes any protein, breaks it down body takes any protein, breaks it down into its constituent amino acids and the into its constituent amino acids and the into its constituent amino acids and the amino acids get shuttled to where they amino acids get shuttled to where they amino acids get shuttled to where they need to go depending on the homeostatic need to go depending on the homeostatic need to go depending on the homeostatic need of the body or you know whatever need of the body or you know whatever need of the body or you know whatever need the body has at the moment. need the body has at the moment. need the body has at the moment. Okay. Well, if we go with that logic Okay. Well, if we go with that logic Okay. Well, if we go with that logic then we would say okay so then there's then we would say okay so then there's then we would say okay so then there's really no such thing as better proteins really no such thing as better proteins really no such thing as better proteins than others as long as we have sort of a than others as long as we have sort of a than others as long as we have sort of a basic amount of the essential amino basic amount of the essential amino basic amount of the essential amino acids. No, that that's just not acids. No, that that's just not acids. No, that that's just not true. Um and then beyond that, the true. Um and then beyond that, the true. Um and then beyond that, the interesting thing about collagen interesting thing about collagen interesting thing about collagen and uh this is debated as well is it's and uh this is debated as well is it's and uh this is debated as well is it's resistance to full hydraysis where resistance to full hydraysis where resistance to full hydraysis where you've got these collagen fragments that you've got these collagen fragments that you've got these collagen fragments that can float through circulation and into can float through circulation and into can float through circulation and into the target tissues. uh these die and the target tissues. uh these die and the target tissues. uh these die and tripeptides, right? They've been the tripeptides, right? They've been the tripeptides, right? They've been the they've been observed through uh they've been observed through uh they've been observed through uh isotopic tracer technology and they make isotopic tracer technology and they make isotopic tracer technology and they make it into the condroytes or the you it into the condroytes or the you it into the condroytes or the you know the joint cells and they increase know the joint cells and they increase know the joint cells and they increase activity in the condro sites that that's activity in the condro sites that that's activity in the condro sites that that's been documented and published. But been documented and published. But been documented and published. But beyond that, it's like beyond that, it's like beyond that, it's like why would pe nobody bocks about why would pe nobody bocks about why would pe nobody bocks about consuming enough calcium, dietary consuming enough calcium, dietary consuming enough calcium, dietary calcium to calcium to calcium to maintain the integrity of the skeletal maintain the integrity of the skeletal maintain the integrity of the skeletal system. But hey, you talk about system. But hey, you talk about system. But hey, you talk about consuming enough collagen to maintain consuming enough collagen to maintain consuming enough collagen to maintain the integrity of connective tissues the integrity of connective tissues the integrity of connective tissues throughout the body and including skin. throughout the body and including skin. throughout the body and including skin. Skin is 80% collagen by dry weight. Then Skin is 80% collagen by dry weight. Then Skin is 80% collagen by dry weight. Then people lose their crap, you know. Um, I people lose their crap, you know. Um, I people lose their crap, you know. Um, I kind of think it's a no-brainer to I kind of think it's a no-brainer to I kind of think it's a no-brainer to at least be optimistic about collagen at least be optimistic about collagen at least be optimistic about collagen supplementation if you're somebody who supplementation if you're somebody who supplementation if you're somebody who never eats the cartilage of the meat never eats the cartilage of the meat never eats the cartilage of the meat that the bone, the connective tissue that the bone, the connective tissue that the bone, the connective tissue parts, if you don't eat, you know, your parts, if you don't eat, you know, your parts, if you don't eat, you know, your animal foods nose totail and you're just animal foods nose totail and you're just animal foods nose totail and you're just eating muscle meats, eating muscle meats, eating muscle meats, uh, I think the guy who does that but uh, I think the guy who does that but uh, I think the guy who does that but takes collagen as a supplement is going takes collagen as a supplement is going takes collagen as a supplement is going to have an edge on you through to have an edge on you through to have an edge on you through throughout the life course. throughout the life course. throughout the life course. Um, and you know, on a related note, I Um, and you know, on a related note, I Um, and you know, on a related note, I think that's one of the disadvantages think that's one of the disadvantages think that's one of the disadvantages that vegans might have until they that vegans might have until they that vegans might have until they find a genius way to manufacture a find a genius way to manufacture a find a genius way to manufacture a non-animal collagen molecule. Uh, there non-animal collagen molecule. Uh, there non-animal collagen molecule. Uh, there are multiple systematic reviews showing are multiple systematic reviews showing are multiple systematic reviews showing the benefits of collagen on various the benefits of collagen on various the benefits of collagen on various skin outcomes, which are debated, of skin outcomes, which are debated, of skin outcomes, which are debated, of course. Um, course. Um, course. Um, whey protein always seems to kick whey protein always seems to kick whey protein always seems to kick collagen's ass for muscle related collagen's ass for muscle related collagen's ass for muscle related outcomes, but you know, that's not what outcomes, but you know, that's not what outcomes, but you know, that's not what we're taking collagen for. So, um, back we're taking collagen for. So, um, back we're taking collagen for. So, um, back to your original question. Yeah, I do to your original question. Yeah, I do to your original question. Yeah, I do take collagen. take collagen. take collagen. How much do you take? How much do you take? How much do you take? About 15 grams a day. To me, it's kind About 15 grams a day. To me, it's kind About 15 grams a day. To me, it's kind of a no-brainer. Just like, you know, of a no-brainer. Just like, you know, of a no-brainer. Just like, you know, getting enough. you're providing getting enough. you're providing getting enough. you're providing the raw materials that the body is going the raw materials that the body is going the raw materials that the body is going to use and need anyway and the debate is to use and need anyway and the debate is to use and need anyway and the debate is whether or not the bioavailability is whether or not the bioavailability is whether or not the bioavailability is meaningful or not. Ah, you know what? meaningful or not. Ah, you know what? meaningful or not. Ah, you know what? I'm willing to just do the first world I'm willing to just do the first world I'm willing to just do the first world thing and take that chance and take the thing and take that chance and take the thing and take that chance and take the collagen supplement. The downsides are collagen supplement. The downsides are collagen supplement. The downsides are basically non-existent. basically non-existent. basically non-existent. Great. What other supplements do you take? And What other supplements do you take? And What other supplements do you take? And what maybe we can establish a hierarchy what maybe we can establish a hierarchy what maybe we can establish a hierarchy of supplements or clusters instead of supplements or clusters instead of supplements or clusters instead of like the top one. Let's talk about like the top one. Let's talk about like the top one. Let's talk about the um the um the um by disposable budget. I think this is a by disposable budget. I think this is a by disposable budget. I think this is a real world perspective. real world perspective. real world perspective. Yeah. So let's agree um that the main thing is So let's agree um that the main thing is So let's agree um that the main thing is get enough sleep, exercise, eat well. to get enough sleep, exercise, eat well. to get enough sleep, exercise, eat well. to eat well. You want to emphasize eat well. You want to emphasize eat well. You want to emphasize what you talked about and to try and get what you talked about and to try and get what you talked about and to try and get the best quality sources that you can the best quality sources that you can the best quality sources that you can afford. Let's assume that somebody has afford. Let's assume that somebody has afford. Let's assume that somebody has the amount of disposable income to be the amount of disposable income to be the amount of disposable income to be able to buy, able to buy, able to buy, you know, one or two supplements to take you know, one or two supplements to take you know, one or two supplements to take on an ongoing basis. on an ongoing basis. on an ongoing basis. um and let's set aside food supplements um and let's set aside food supplements um and let's set aside food supplements like whey protein um from vitamins and like whey protein um from vitamins and like whey protein um from vitamins and performance supplements and just kind of performance supplements and just kind of performance supplements and just kind of put them all out there and say, "Okay, put them all out there and say, "Okay, put them all out there and say, "Okay, let's say I've got uh it's going to let's say I've got uh it's going to let's say I've got uh it's going to differ by country, but let's say I've differ by country, but let's say I've differ by country, but let's say I've got 150 bucks of disposable income. I got 150 bucks of disposable income. I got 150 bucks of disposable income. I could get like one or two supplements I could get like one or two supplements I could get like one or two supplements I can take on going." um what would can take on going." um what would can take on going." um what would you place into that category if the goal you place into that category if the goal you place into that category if the goal is um keep lean tissue um the same or is um keep lean tissue um the same or is um keep lean tissue um the same or increase lean tissue and keep body increase lean tissue and keep body increase lean tissue and keep body fat where it's at or lose some body fat where it's at or lose some body fat where it's at or lose some body fat overall vigor overall health fat overall vigor overall health fat overall vigor overall health longevity the big picture. Yeah. longevity the big picture. Yeah. longevity the big picture. Yeah. Got it. Got it. Got it. Got it. Got it. Got it. Okay. So my answer to this is going to Okay. So my answer to this is going to Okay. So my answer to this is going to be very broscientific be very broscientific be very broscientific because it is so hard to study those because it is so hard to study those because it is so hard to study those outcomes um that we almost are just outcomes um that we almost are just outcomes um that we almost are just you know placing our bets when we you know placing our bets when we you know placing our bets when we do the supplement thing uh beyond having do the supplement thing uh beyond having do the supplement thing uh beyond having a diet that is diverse across and within a diet that is diverse across and within a diet that is diverse across and within the food groups and provides all the food groups and provides all the food groups and provides all the essential macro and micronutrients essential macro and micronutrients essential macro and micronutrients which it often doesn't especially if which it often doesn't especially if which it often doesn't especially if we're dieting, especially if we're dieting, especially if we're dieting, especially if we're training or a combination of both, training or a combination of both, training or a combination of both, especially if we're caught out in not especially if we're caught out in not especially if we're caught out in not eating an optimal diet, traveling all eating an optimal diet, traveling all eating an optimal diet, traveling all over the place, which we often are. Um, over the place, which we often are. Um, over the place, which we often are. Um, so I personally see so I personally see so I personally see a multivitamin, a multivitamin, a multivitamin, and mineral as a multivitamin, and mineral as a multivitamin, and mineral as a no-brainer. It's a no freaking brainer. no-brainer. It's a no freaking brainer. no-brainer. It's a no freaking brainer. Like who do you know eats this pristine Like who do you know eats this pristine Like who do you know eats this pristine diet that just nails all the diet that just nails all the diet that just nails all the micronutrients in optimal amounts? micronutrients in optimal amounts? micronutrients in optimal amounts? That's a very rare person and that That's a very rare person and that That's a very rare person and that person would have to be covering the person would have to be covering the person would have to be covering the food groups and eating a whole lot of food groups and eating a whole lot of food groups and eating a whole lot of calories of the different groups and calories of the different groups and calories of the different groups and across and within the groups. across and within the groups. across and within the groups. So I this is the bro science part of me. So I this is the bro science part of me. So I this is the bro science part of me. I take two multivitamins and I take two multivitamins and I take two multivitamins and a double dose of the same one or two a double dose of the same one or two a double dose of the same one or two different ones. different ones. different ones. Two different ones. One of them does not Two different ones. One of them does not Two different ones. One of them does not have iron. have iron. have iron. Okay. One of them does. One of them does. One of them does. You take them with meals? You take them with meals? You take them with meals? I take it with meals. Yes. I take it with meals. Yes. I take it with meals. Yes. In the early part of the day presumably. In the early part of the day presumably. In the early part of the day presumably. I take it with dinner. I take it with dinner. I take it with dinner. Um that's usually my largest meal. Um that's usually my largest meal. Um that's usually my largest meal. Okay. So, a good quality multivitamin. Okay. So, a good quality multivitamin. Okay. So, a good quality multivitamin. Okay. I do that. Um, usually with I do that. Um, usually with I do that. Um, usually with multivitamins, it would have to be an multivitamins, it would have to be an multivitamins, it would have to be an absolute horse pill to get enough absolute horse pill to get enough absolute horse pill to get enough vitamin D, vitamin D3 in that. So, I do vitamin D, vitamin D3 in that. So, I do vitamin D, vitamin D3 in that. So, I do take extra vitamin D3. take extra vitamin D3. take extra vitamin D3. How many IU per day? How many IU per day? How many IU per day? Oh, that's where I get real bro Oh, that's where I get real bro Oh, that's where I get real bro scientific on you, man. I take quite a scientific on you, man. I take quite a scientific on you, man. I take quite a bit. Um, the literature cuts off bit. Um, the literature cuts off bit. Um, the literature cuts off with benefits like below a thousand IUs. with benefits like below a thousand IUs. with benefits like below a thousand IUs. I take 4,000 IUs. I take 4,000 IUs. I take 4,000 IUs. That's I don't think that's exceedingly That's I don't think that's exceedingly That's I don't think that's exceedingly high. Well, you don't. You're a bro, too. Well, you don't. You're a bro, too. Well, you don't. You're a bro, too. Yeah. I mean, I listen, I have female Yeah. I mean, I listen, I have female Yeah. I mean, I listen, I have female family members who were having some family members who were having some family members who were having some health struggles that for whom the only health struggles that for whom the only health struggles that for whom the only change the only change was 5,000 IU of change the only change was 5,000 IU of change the only change was 5,000 IU of vitamin D3 per day. And it made a vitamin D3 per day. And it made a vitamin D3 per day. And it made a significant positive effect significant positive effect significant positive effect on a number of different subjective on a number of different subjective on a number of different subjective metrics and some objective metrics. And metrics and some objective metrics. And metrics and some objective metrics. And these were people that were getting these were people that were getting these were people that were getting their sunlight and eating very their sunlight and eating very their sunlight and eating very high quality food. um you know really high quality food. um you know really high quality food. um you know really putting time and effort into it. Um so putting time and effort into it. Um so putting time and effort into it. Um so I'm a believer in D3. I'm a believer in D3. I'm a believer in D3. D3 is getting pubmeded right now in a D3 is getting pubmeded right now in a D3 is getting pubmeded right now in a similar way that fish oil is getting similar way that fish oil is getting similar way that fish oil is getting pubmeded. And so it's And so it's And so it's we verbed uh pubmed. we verbed uh pubmed. we verbed uh pubmed. Yeah, we did. So it's now it's a controversial we did. So it's now it's a controversial we did. So it's now it's a controversial thing to take you know vitamin D3. You thing to take you know vitamin D3. You thing to take you know vitamin D3. You know you have position statements know you have position statements know you have position statements rolling out. Oh, well, we thought you rolling out. Oh, well, we thought you rolling out. Oh, well, we thought you need you don't really h need you don't really h need you don't really h Okay, so good multivitamin with iron, Okay, so good multivitamin with iron, Okay, so good multivitamin with iron, especially for women who menrate, right? especially for women who menrate, right? especially for women who menrate, right? Especially you'll need that vitamin D Especially you'll need that vitamin D Especially you'll need that vitamin D D3, D D3, D D3, I take vitamin D3, I take fish oil I take vitamin D3, I take fish oil I take vitamin D3, I take fish oil um I take three grams of uh of fish oil, um I take three grams of uh of fish oil, um I take three grams of uh of fish oil, not three grams combined EPA, DHA, but not three grams combined EPA, DHA, but not three grams combined EPA, DHA, but three grams in three grams in three grams in three one gram capsules. And three one gram capsules. And three one gram capsules. And that's a good amount I would say. Does that's a good amount I would say. Does that's a good amount I would say. Does that get you over the one gram per day that get you over the one gram per day that get you over the one gram per day of EPA? of EPA? of EPA? It's right around there. It's right around there. It's right around there. Yeah, that's what I shoot for, too. One Yeah, that's what I shoot for, too. One Yeah, that's what I shoot for, too. One gram per day of EPA, which means taking gram per day of EPA, which means taking gram per day of EPA, which means taking about three grams total. about three grams total. about three grams total. Yeah, it's about one gram a day of Yeah, it's about one gram a day of Yeah, it's about one gram a day of combined EPA, DHA, and uh the atrial fib combined EPA, DHA, and uh the atrial fib combined EPA, DHA, and uh the atrial fib literature is showing that much above literature is showing that much above literature is showing that much above that. Okay. Then you're incurring this that. Okay. Then you're incurring this that. Okay. Then you're incurring this risk. But you know what, man? I risk. But you know what, man? I risk. But you know what, man? I don't believe everything I read, even in the believe everything I read, even in the believe everything I read, even in the peer-reviewed literature. peer-reviewed literature. peer-reviewed literature. You've been a scientist too long to You've been a scientist too long to You've been a scientist too long to believe everything you read, right? believe everything you read, right? believe everything you read, right? That's just That's just That's just certain things you just take it with a certain things you just take it with a certain things you just take it with a grain of salt. You you recognize the grain of salt. You you recognize the grain of salt. You you recognize the literature evidence base and then you literature evidence base and then you literature evidence base and then you make the judgment call um just based on make the judgment call um just based on make the judgment call um just based on your own sensibilities and how you your own sensibilities and how you your own sensibilities and how you respond individually, you know, like the respond individually, you know, like the respond individually, you know, like the regular hierarchy of evidence is one regular hierarchy of evidence is one regular hierarchy of evidence is one way, but I think at the very tip is how way, but I think at the very tip is how way, but I think at the very tip is how do you respond individually to do you respond individually to do you respond individually to protocol? So, um yeah, and so protocol? So, um yeah, and so protocol? So, um yeah, and so I'll take that. Um, another thing that I'll take that. Um, another thing that I'll take that. Um, another thing that would blow up the size of a multivitamin would blow up the size of a multivitamin would blow up the size of a multivitamin is getting enough magnesium to show is getting enough magnesium to show is getting enough magnesium to show benefits. So, I take magnesium. benefits. So, I take magnesium. benefits. So, I take magnesium. Which form of magnesium do you Which form of magnesium do you Which form of magnesium do you emphasize? Magnesium citrate. I I'm cool with Magnesium citrate. I I'm cool with Magnesium citrate. I I'm cool with pretty much anything except magnesium pretty much anything except magnesium pretty much anything except magnesium oxide. Okay. Oxide is the low bioavailability form. Oxide is the low bioavailability form. Oxide is the low bioavailability form. But yeah, magnesium citrate. Uh, and I But yeah, magnesium citrate. Uh, and I But yeah, magnesium citrate. Uh, and I do take creatine um about five grams a do take creatine um about five grams a do take creatine um about five grams a day. And uh day. And uh day. And uh I do take another bro science maneuver I do take another bro science maneuver I do take another bro science maneuver which uh boy I'm really which uh boy I'm really which uh boy I'm really incriminating myself here. I take incriminating myself here. I take incriminating myself here. I take vitamin C, extra vitamin C, a gram a vitamin C, extra vitamin C, a gram a vitamin C, extra vitamin C, a gram a day. What effect are you seeking with the What effect are you seeking with the What effect are you seeking with the vitamin C? vitamin C? vitamin C? Uh effects on immunity plus kind of a Uh effects on immunity plus kind of a Uh effects on immunity plus kind of a potential synergy with the collagen. potential synergy with the collagen. potential synergy with the collagen. Oh, right. And there are some data on Oh, right. And there are some data on Oh, right. And there are some data on this. I realize that you're framing all this. I realize that you're framing all this. I realize that you're framing all of this very cautiously under the of this very cautiously under the of this very cautiously under the umbrella of bro science, but umbrella of bro science, but umbrella of bro science, but and this is just me. I wouldn't tell and this is just me. I wouldn't tell and this is just me. I wouldn't tell everybody to do this. This is you ask me everybody to do this. This is you ask me everybody to do this. This is you ask me what I'm doing. what I'm doing. what I'm doing. But I think there are good data on But I think there are good data on But I think there are good data on vitamin D on uh on D3 on combining vitamin D on uh on D3 on combining vitamin D on uh on D3 on combining 15 grams of collagen with vitamin C at 15 grams of collagen with vitamin C at 15 grams of collagen with vitamin C at least in the studies looking at skin least in the studies looking at skin least in the studies looking at skin um elasticity. So I you're not that far um elasticity. So I you're not that far um elasticity. So I you're not that far out on a limb. I I'm realizing and the out on a limb. I I'm realizing and the out on a limb. I I'm realizing and the audience is certainly realizing just how audience is certainly realizing just how audience is certainly realizing just how cautious and conservative you are how cautious and conservative you are how cautious and conservative you are with your words, which I believe with your words, which I believe with your words, which I believe everyone appreciates. Um, everyone appreciates. Um, everyone appreciates. Um, so the 5 g of creatine, uh, some vitamin so the 5 g of creatine, uh, some vitamin so the 5 g of creatine, uh, some vitamin C, um, anything more esoteric than that? C, um, anything more esoteric than that? C, um, anything more esoteric than that? No, nothing beyond the multi- vitamin D, No, nothing beyond the multi- vitamin D, No, nothing beyond the multi- vitamin D, fish oil, vitamin C, creatine, fish oil, vitamin C, creatine, fish oil, vitamin C, creatine, um, magnesium. um, magnesium. um, magnesium. How many days per week are you How many days per week are you How many days per week are you resistance training? resistance training? resistance training? About about four to five. about four to five. about four to five. And do you do cardio regularly? Okay. And do you do cardio regularly? Okay. And do you do cardio regularly? Okay. So, here here's the thing that a lot of So, here here's the thing that a lot of So, here here's the thing that a lot of people would ding me on is um I try to people would ding me on is um I try to people would ding me on is um I try to make my resistance training cardio. make my resistance training cardio. make my resistance training cardio. So, I my cardio, if you can call it So, I my cardio, if you can call it So, I my cardio, if you can call it cardio, would consist of just walks cardio, would consist of just walks cardio, would consist of just walks around the neighborhood on occasion. Um around the neighborhood on occasion. Um around the neighborhood on occasion. Um or just really light hikes on occasion or just really light hikes on occasion or just really light hikes on occasion and maybe pacing around between sets. I and maybe pacing around between sets. I and maybe pacing around between sets. I enjoy resistance training. I make it I enjoy resistance training. I make it I enjoy resistance training. I make it fun. I mean, everybody wants to wait two fun. I mean, everybody wants to wait two fun. I mean, everybody wants to wait two to three minutes between sets to move to three minutes between sets to move to three minutes between sets to move the maximum amount of loads, but you the maximum amount of loads, but you the maximum amount of loads, but you know what? You can do progressive know what? You can do progressive know what? You can do progressive resistance training, you can do resistance training, you can do resistance training, you can do progressive overload. progressive overload. progressive overload. Even within a short rest paradigm, I Even within a short rest paradigm, I Even within a short rest paradigm, I mean, as long as it's trending up, mean, as long as it's trending up, mean, as long as it's trending up, you know, your net tonnage moved is you know, your net tonnage moved is you know, your net tonnage moved is trending up over time, it won't move up trending up over time, it won't move up trending up over time, it won't move up as quickly as if you were to freaking as quickly as if you were to freaking as quickly as if you were to freaking rest two to three minutes between sets. rest two to three minutes between sets. rest two to three minutes between sets. I love short rests. I love high rep. I love short rests. I love high rep. I love short rests. I love high rep. You and I are not training together. You and I are not training together. You and I are not training together. I like to lift heavy and slow, I like to lift heavy and slow, I like to lift heavy and slow, like three to five minutes between sets. like three to five minutes between sets. like three to five minutes between sets. Now I'm in like two to five repetition Now I'm in like two to five repetition Now I'm in like two to five repetition range. Anything more than six feels like range. Anything more than six feels like range. Anything more than six feels like cardio, but I like to run and I do other cardio, but I like to run and I do other cardio, but I like to run and I do other forms of cardio for cardio. But we forms of cardio for cardio. But we forms of cardio for cardio. But we should uh make sure that you at some should uh make sure that you at some should uh make sure that you at some point you and Cameron Haynes train point you and Cameron Haynes train point you and Cameron Haynes train together because he does these circuit together because he does these circuit together because he does these circuit his run lift shoot thing that he does his run lift shoot thing that he does his run lift shoot thing that he does every day. You know, he shoots arrows to every day. You know, he shoots arrows to every day. You know, he shoots arrows to practice his archery. He runs often 10 practice his archery. He runs often 10 practice his archery. He runs often 10 to 20 miles a day, but he lifts every to 20 miles a day, but he lifts every to 20 miles a day, but he lifts every day and he does this the circuit style day and he does this the circuit style day and he does this the circuit style uh lifting training that I've done with uh lifting training that I've done with uh lifting training that I've done with him and it's for a guy like me, him and it's for a guy like me, him and it's for a guy like me, it's murder. I mean, it is so hard. I've it's murder. I mean, it is so hard. I've it's murder. I mean, it is so hard. I've never been so sore. I've never been so never been so sore. I've never been so never been so sore. I've never been so exhausted. Um, but it sounds like it's exhausted. Um, but it sounds like it's exhausted. Um, but it sounds like it's very well tuned to what you thrive very well tuned to what you thrive very well tuned to what you thrive on. I've been messing around with cluster I've been messing around with cluster I've been messing around with cluster sets and I want you to try this. Okay. sets and I want you to try this. Okay. sets and I want you to try this. Okay. Can you explain what for people what a Can you explain what for people what a Can you explain what for people what a cluster set is? A cluster set is you cluster set is? A cluster set is you cluster set is? A cluster set is you basically you're breaking up a set with basically you're breaking up a set with basically you're breaking up a set with rest periods that range from with rest periods that range from with rest periods that range from anywhere from gosh five to like 20 anywhere from gosh five to like 20 anywhere from gosh five to like 20 seconds with within like a single leg seconds with within like a single leg seconds with within like a single leg set. So or with set. So or with set. So or with like leg extension, leg press and then like leg extension, leg press and then like leg extension, leg press and then squat as squat as squat as that would be more like a superset that would be more like a superset that would be more like a superset or a giant set. So a cluster set is like or a giant set. So a cluster set is like or a giant set. So a cluster set is like a single I I'll explain it. I want a single I I'll explain it. I want a single I I'll explain it. I want you to try this. I think you'll find it you to try this. I think you'll find it you to try this. I think you'll find it fun. Okay. So, with a given lift, let's fun. Okay. So, with a given lift, let's fun. Okay. So, with a given lift, let's imagine what's your what's your favorite I'm what's your what's your favorite I'm what's your what's your favorite I'm talking to you as if you're a talking to you as if you're a talking to you as if you're a bodybuilder. What's your favorite body bodybuilder. What's your favorite body bodybuilder. What's your favorite body part? I like to run and I lift to stay uh I like to run and I lift to stay uh I like to run and I lift to stay uh strong enough and stable enough to run. strong enough and stable enough to run. strong enough and stable enough to run. What do I like to train the most? What do I like to train the most? What do I like to train the most? Yep. As far as Yep. As far as Yep. As far as these days, I've been doing a lot I love these days, I've been doing a lot I love these days, I've been doing a lot I love leg day. I'm a huge fan of leg day. So, leg day. I'm a huge fan of leg day. So, leg day. I'm a huge fan of leg day. So, I'll do um I go very heavy on like I'll do um I go very heavy on like I'll do um I go very heavy on like hack squats or belt squats. hack squats or belt squats. hack squats or belt squats. Are you a leg extension person? Are you a leg extension person? Are you a leg extension person? Yep. I do those two. Yep. I do those two. Yep. I do those two. Okay. So, so let's imagine you pick a Okay. So, so let's imagine you pick a Okay. So, so let's imagine you pick a weight for um leg extensions that you weight for um leg extensions that you weight for um leg extensions that you can do your first work set um after can do your first work set um after can do your first work set um after however you might warm up your however you might warm up your however you might warm up your first work set. first work set. first work set. Pick um a load that will enable you to Pick um a load that will enable you to Pick um a load that will enable you to fail out at about fail out at about fail out at about let's say 16 reps. let's say 16 reps. let's say 16 reps. Okay, more than 10. Okay, more than 10. Okay, more than 10. How about how we'll do 12 reps. 12 reps. How about how we'll do 12 reps. 12 reps. How about how we'll do 12 reps. 12 reps. Fair enough. Y Fair enough. Y Fair enough. Y take it to failure. Mhm. take it to failure. Mhm. take it to failure. Mhm. My colleagues would say, "Okay, well, My colleagues would say, "Okay, well, My colleagues would say, "Okay, well, you know, leave like one rep in reserve you know, leave like one rep in reserve you know, leave like one rep in reserve and what, you know, um I like to train and what, you know, um I like to train and what, you know, um I like to train to failure all this freaking time. I to failure all this freaking time. I to failure all this freaking time. I just it's more fun. I I've been training just it's more fun. I I've been training just it's more fun. I I've been training for a long time. I don't hurt myself for a long time. I don't hurt myself for a long time. I don't hurt myself with training to failure and I wouldn't with training to failure and I wouldn't with training to failure and I wouldn't train to failure with a freaking bench train to failure with a freaking bench train to failure with a freaking bench press or a squat. But you can choose the press or a squat. But you can choose the press or a squat. But you can choose the exercises you can take to failure. Leg exercises you can take to failure. Leg exercises you can take to failure. Leg extension is one of them. You can extension is one of them. You can extension is one of them. You can take to failure. You can take to take to failure. You can take to take to failure. You can take to partials. So, um leg extension. So, partials. So, um leg extension. So, partials. So, um leg extension. So, choose a weight you can do for 12 reps. choose a weight you can do for 12 reps. choose a weight you can do for 12 reps. Take it to failure and do five slow Take it to failure and do five slow Take it to failure and do five slow breaths. That's one. And take that five That's one. And take that five That's one. And take that five times and then go right back into the times and then go right back into the times and then go right back into the set. Don't change the weight. Try to do set. Don't change the weight. Try to do set. Don't change the weight. Try to do half the amount of reps you did. half the amount of reps you did. half the amount of reps you did. And you you'll usually hit it, And you you'll usually hit it, And you you'll usually hit it, but sometimes you won't. You know, if but sometimes you won't. You know, if but sometimes you won't. You know, if you breathe fast enough, you kind of you breathe fast enough, you kind of you breathe fast enough, you kind of won't hit it. But if you're five slow won't hit it. But if you're five slow won't hit it. But if you're five slow breaths or slow enough, you'll hit the breaths or slow enough, you'll hit the breaths or slow enough, you'll hit the six reps in this case. Okay. After that, six reps in this case. Okay. After that, six reps in this case. Okay. After that, 10 slow breaths. 10 slow breaths. 10 slow breaths. Try to try to beat your previous Try to try to beat your previous Try to try to beat your previous set. Try to do if you can do six, great. set. Try to do if you can do six, great. set. Try to do if you can do six, great. If you can do seven, great. That's If you can do seven, great. That's If you can do seven, great. That's that's a cluster set with failure built that's a cluster set with failure built that's a cluster set with failure built into it a couple times. into it a couple times. into it a couple times. And how many cluster sets would you do And how many cluster sets would you do And how many cluster sets would you do per body part? per body part? per body part? Two. Yeah. Because it's multiple sets. Because it's multiple sets. Because it's multiple sets. Yeah. This seems like a great thing to Yeah. This seems like a great thing to Yeah. This seems like a great thing to do if one is uh low on time. Mhm. do if one is uh low on time. Mhm. do if one is uh low on time. Mhm. Um, and perhaps if one has a nagging Um, and perhaps if one has a nagging Um, and perhaps if one has a nagging injury that you need to work around uh injury that you need to work around uh injury that you need to work around uh by avoiding heavy weights, I hope to by avoiding heavy weights, I hope to by avoiding heavy weights, I hope to never be in the position to have to do never be in the position to have to do never be in the position to have to do this uh workout. this uh workout. this uh workout. And you can add a drop set to the second And you can add a drop set to the second And you can add a drop set to the second exercise. Bam. Cut cut the weight down exercise. Bam. Cut cut the weight down exercise. Bam. Cut cut the weight down by 25ish% by 25ish% by 25ish% and go right into it and drop set. So, and go right into it and drop set. So, and go right into it and drop set. So, kind of the point of that and how I'm kind of the point of that and how I'm kind of the point of that and how I'm sort of defending my uh non-love for sort of defending my uh non-love for sort of defending my uh non-love for formal cardio is a lot of my um formal cardio is a lot of my um formal cardio is a lot of my um resistance training. I try to make it I resistance training. I try to make it I resistance training. I try to make it I try sort of try to gify it in that sense try sort of try to gify it in that sense try sort of try to gify it in that sense and it ends up and it ends up and it ends up stimulating cardiorespiratory pathways stimulating cardiorespiratory pathways stimulating cardiorespiratory pathways to a greater degree than your typical to a greater degree than your typical to a greater degree than your typical resistance training. Um I would never resistance training. Um I would never resistance training. Um I would never deny the benefit of formal cardio. deny the benefit of formal cardio. deny the benefit of formal cardio. Um, but uh just how I navigate my Um, but uh just how I navigate my Um, but uh just how I navigate my training and sticking with what I enjoy. training and sticking with what I enjoy. training and sticking with what I enjoy. I do enough volume through the week to I do enough volume through the week to I do enough volume through the week to where um I would say that look, whoever where um I would say that look, whoever where um I would say that look, whoever loves endurance adaptations, you know, loves endurance adaptations, you know, loves endurance adaptations, you know, increases in V2 max pushing that in, increases in V2 max pushing that in, increases in V2 max pushing that in, great, good for you. Um I just think great, good for you. Um I just think great, good for you. Um I just think that there's a limit to how much that there's a limit to how much that there's a limit to how much that will benefit um cardiovascular health andor benefit um cardiovascular health andor benefit um cardiovascular health andor longevity compared to just staying longevity compared to just staying longevity compared to just staying physically active, keeping good body physically active, keeping good body physically active, keeping good body composition and just being consistent composition and just being consistent composition and just being consistent with that and of course the other with that and of course the other with that and of course the other lifestyle factors too. So yeah, lifestyle factors too. So yeah, lifestyle factors too. So yeah, different conversation I guess. different conversation I guess. different conversation I guess. Yeah. But I think it weaves very nicely Yeah. But I think it weaves very nicely Yeah. But I think it weaves very nicely into what we've been talking about up into what we've been talking about up into what we've been talking about up until now, which is which is a realworld until now, which is which is a realworld until now, which is which is a realworld um scenario like this is what works for um scenario like this is what works for um scenario like this is what works for you. Um I you know touch on what works you. Um I you know touch on what works you. Um I you know touch on what works for me, but this is what works for you for me, but this is what works for you for me, but this is what works for you and you're able to kind of merge cardio and you're able to kind of merge cardio and you're able to kind of merge cardio and resistance training in a way that and resistance training in a way that and resistance training in a way that sounds very time efficient. sounds very time efficient. sounds very time efficient. Well, I don't always do the cluster Well, I don't always do the cluster Well, I don't always do the cluster set thing. I love doing super sets. So set thing. I love doing super sets. So set thing. I love doing super sets. So if I'm, you know, if I'm at a if I'm, you know, if I'm at a if I'm, you know, if I'm at a station where I can superset chest and station where I can superset chest and station where I can superset chest and back work, I'll superset with back work, I'll superset with back work, I'll superset with minimal rest. minimal rest. minimal rest. Also very time efficient Also very time efficient Also very time efficient and or you know uh you know bicep versus and or you know uh you know bicep versus and or you know uh you know bicep versus tricep work or any anything that you can tricep work or any anything that you can tricep work or any anything that you can do sort of uh supersetting antagonistic do sort of uh supersetting antagonistic do sort of uh supersetting antagonistic muscles. I take advantage of that. I don't I take advantage of that. I don't I take advantage of that. I don't necessarily always do the cluster set necessarily always do the cluster set necessarily always do the cluster set thing. You mentioned that your wife is a You mentioned that your wife is a You mentioned that your wife is a trainer. Yeah. Um, does she train her trainer. Yeah. Um, does she train her trainer. Yeah. Um, does she train her female clients uh this way? Um, and female clients uh this way? Um, and female clients uh this way? Um, and do you train your female clients this do you train your female clients this do you train your female clients this way? The reason I ask is that in my way? The reason I ask is that in my way? The reason I ask is that in my experience, I realize this is a experience, I realize this is a experience, I realize this is a generalization, but I've had female generalization, but I've had female generalization, but I've had female training partners before. Some of the training partners before. Some of the training partners before. Some of the best training partners I've had, by the best training partners I've had, by the best training partners I've had, by the way, female training partners. They they way, female training partners. They they way, female training partners. They they worked hard and they were also they worked hard and they were also they worked hard and they were also great athletes. great athletes. great athletes. Um, they tended to view resistance training, they tended to view resistance training, they tended to view resistance training, at least at first, as something to limit at least at first, as something to limit at least at first, as something to limit the rest periods between sets. like they the rest periods between sets. like they the rest periods between sets. like they felt like if their heart rate they felt like if their heart rate they felt like if their heart rate wasn't up continuously, it wasn't up continuously, it wasn't up continuously, it wasn't exercise. Um those people often were exercise. Um those people often were exercise. Um those people often were pleasantly surprised by doing lower pleasantly surprised by doing lower pleasantly surprised by doing lower repetition, longer rest work. But lower repetition, longer rest work. But lower repetition, longer rest work. But um in general, do you recommend what you um in general, do you recommend what you um in general, do you recommend what you just described more for your male or just described more for your male or just described more for your male or female um training clients? You know, to female um training clients? You know, to female um training clients? You know, to being perfectly honest, it's just what I being perfectly honest, it's just what I being perfectly honest, it's just what I enjoy doing and it is probably not the enjoy doing and it is probably not the enjoy doing and it is probably not the most efficient way to make muscle gains, most efficient way to make muscle gains, most efficient way to make muscle gains, but uh I just find it fun but uh I just find it fun but uh I just find it fun and I enjoy it. Um, when I was and I enjoy it. Um, when I was and I enjoy it. Um, when I was training folks for the specific goal of training folks for the specific goal of training folks for the specific goal of hypertrophy, I would put them through hypertrophy, I would put them through hypertrophy, I would put them through kind of a standard, you know, let's kind of a standard, you know, let's kind of a standard, you know, let's rest between sets, move the let's rest between sets, move the let's rest between sets, move the maximum amount of load, um, let's cover maximum amount of load, um, let's cover maximum amount of load, um, let's cover a spectrum of loading zones. I a spectrum of loading zones. I a spectrum of loading zones. I don't, you know, I'm sort of with Brad don't, you know, I'm sort of with Brad don't, you know, I'm sort of with Brad Shenfeld. I think Brad has done the Shenfeld. I think Brad has done the Shenfeld. I think Brad has done the best work in the hypertrophy realm and best work in the hypertrophy realm and best work in the hypertrophy realm and um training for hypertrophy is one of um training for hypertrophy is one of um training for hypertrophy is one of the best ways to train for the best ways to train for the best ways to train for I guess optimizing metabolic health. So I guess optimizing metabolic health. So I guess optimizing metabolic health. So there should be some hypertrophy there should be some hypertrophy there should be some hypertrophy training included in any program in training included in any program in training included in any program in my opinion. Um so yeah, it it's in my opinion. Um so yeah, it it's in my opinion. Um so yeah, it it's just what I enjoy, man. just what I enjoy, man. just what I enjoy, man. Um, and I and I realize it does go Um, and I and I realize it does go Um, and I and I realize it does go against a lot of the uh the typical against a lot of the uh the typical against a lot of the uh the typical like consensus. like consensus. like consensus. Well, thank you for sharing that. I Well, thank you for sharing that. I Well, thank you for sharing that. I think it highlights, if nothing else, um think it highlights, if nothing else, um think it highlights, if nothing else, um that doing what one enjoys in the realm that doing what one enjoys in the realm that doing what one enjoys in the realm of fitness and nutrition is equally of fitness and nutrition is equally of fitness and nutrition is equally important to what's best because if you important to what's best because if you important to what's best because if you don't enjoy it, you're unlikely to stick don't enjoy it, you're unlikely to stick don't enjoy it, you're unlikely to stick to things. So, find what you enjoy. to things. So, find what you enjoy. to things. So, find what you enjoy. Listen, I want to extend a huge thank Listen, I want to extend a huge thank Listen, I want to extend a huge thank you for coming here today. This was a you for coming here today. This was a you for coming here today. This was a long time coming. I always knew from our long time coming. I always knew from our long time coming. I always knew from our first in-person meeting that we would do first in-person meeting that we would do first in-person meeting that we would do this at some point. Um, and I'm so glad this at some point. Um, and I'm so glad this at some point. Um, and I'm so glad we're doing this now. I must say you we're doing this now. I must say you we're doing this now. I must say you have an absolutely have an absolutely have an absolutely staggeringly impressive command of the staggeringly impressive command of the staggeringly impressive command of the literature. I, you know, anyone that's literature. I, you know, anyone that's literature. I, you know, anyone that's listened to this realizes that you don't listened to this realizes that you don't listened to this realizes that you don't just say stuff. You always preede your just say stuff. You always preede your just say stuff. You always preede your statements with the origin of the statements with the origin of the statements with the origin of the information you're about to convey. information you're about to convey. information you're about to convey. whether or not it's your own personal whether or not it's your own personal whether or not it's your own personal experience and preference, whether it's experience and preference, whether it's experience and preference, whether it's um from a meta analysis, whether or not um from a meta analysis, whether or not um from a meta analysis, whether or not it's from a particular study. And as an it's from a particular study. And as an it's from a particular study. And as an academic, I especially appreciate you academic, I especially appreciate you academic, I especially appreciate you always credit the authors of the always credit the authors of the always credit the authors of the study. I mean, I know people heard study. I mean, I know people heard study. I mean, I know people heard this, but I want to underscore the this, but I want to underscore the this, but I want to underscore the scholarly nature with which you present scholarly nature with which you present scholarly nature with which you present evidence and attribution to the original evidence and attribution to the original evidence and attribution to the original authors of the work. And it's so clear authors of the work. And it's so clear authors of the work. And it's so clear that you've got your mind wrapped around that you've got your mind wrapped around that you've got your mind wrapped around these massive topics that are of immense these massive topics that are of immense these massive topics that are of immense confusion to the general public and confusion to the general public and confusion to the general public and importance. And to take us back to importance. And to take us back to importance. And to take us back to something I said at the beginning, you something I said at the beginning, you something I said at the beginning, you know, when I think of Allen Aragon, I know, when I think of Allen Aragon, I know, when I think of Allen Aragon, I think of immense amounts of knowledge think of immense amounts of knowledge think of immense amounts of knowledge shared and this immense and this immense and this immense property of clarifying things for property of clarifying things for property of clarifying things for people. Today you've taught us that people. Today you've taught us that people. Today you've taught us that protein is extremely important. what protein is extremely important. what protein is extremely important. what qualities of protein uh exist in qualities of protein uh exist in qualities of protein uh exist in different domains of the different food different domains of the different food different domains of the different food groups. Timing of a protein intake, groups. Timing of a protein intake, groups. Timing of a protein intake, timing relative to exercise, timing of timing relative to exercise, timing of timing relative to exercise, timing of exercise, type of exercise, talked about exercise, type of exercise, talked about exercise, type of exercise, talked about collagen, we talked about calorie collagen, we talked about calorie collagen, we talked about calorie surplus deficit. Yes, you can gain surplus deficit. Yes, you can gain surplus deficit. Yes, you can gain muscle and lose fat simultaneously. And muscle and lose fat simultaneously. And muscle and lose fat simultaneously. And you make this information not just clear you make this information not just clear you make this information not just clear but extremely practical. So, thank you, but extremely practical. So, thank you, but extremely practical. So, thank you, thank you, thank you for the immense thank you, thank you for the immense thank you, thank you for the immense amount of information you've provided us amount of information you've provided us amount of information you've provided us today and that you continue to provide today and that you continue to provide today and that you continue to provide online and elsewhere. We of course will online and elsewhere. We of course will online and elsewhere. We of course will provide links to uh where people can provide links to uh where people can provide links to uh where people can learn more about you and from you. And I learn more about you and from you. And I learn more about you and from you. And I just want to say keep going. I value you just want to say keep going. I value you just want to say keep going. I value you as a colleague and a friend and I'm so as a colleague and a friend and I'm so as a colleague and a friend and I'm so grateful that you came out here today grateful that you came out here today grateful that you came out here today and that I uh said the wrong thing on and that I uh said the wrong thing on and that I uh said the wrong thing on social media so that we had the social media so that we had the social media so that we had the opportunity to meet. opportunity to meet. opportunity to meet. Goes right back to you, Andrew. It is an Goes right back to you, Andrew. It is an Goes right back to you, Andrew. It is an honor and a pleasure to be here and I honor and a pleasure to be here and I honor and a pleasure to be here and I really uh think this will bring a really uh think this will bring a really uh think this will bring a lot of value and just thank you for lot of value and just thank you for lot of value and just thank you for everything. Well, you're most welcome. It's been a Well, you're most welcome. It's been a Well, you're most welcome. It's been a true pleasure. We'll have you back true pleasure. We'll have you back true pleasure. We'll have you back again. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Alan Aragon. To learn discussion with Alan Aragon. To learn discussion with Alan Aragon. To learn more about Allen's work and to find more about Allen's work and to find more about Allen's work and to find links to his articles and various other links to his articles and various other links to his articles and various other resources, please see the show note resources, please see the show note resources, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. and you can now leave fivestar review. and you can now leave fivestar review. and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Hubberman Lab podcast, please put those Hubberman Lab podcast, please put those Hubberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Alan Aragon. And today's discussion with Alan Aragon. And today's discussion with Alan Aragon. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]