Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk about an extremely we're going to talk about an extremely we're going to talk about an extremely important topic that's central to our important topic that's central to our important topic that's central to our daily life, and that's motivation. We're daily life, and that's motivation. We're daily life, and that's motivation. We're going to talk about pleasure and reward. going to talk about pleasure and reward. going to talk about pleasure and reward. What underlies our sense of pleasure or What underlies our sense of pleasure or What underlies our sense of pleasure or reward? We're going to talk about reward? We're going to talk about reward? We're going to talk about addictions as well. We're going to talk addictions as well. We're going to talk addictions as well. We're going to talk about the neurochemistry of drive and about the neurochemistry of drive and about the neurochemistry of drive and mindset. But for now, let's just talk mindset. But for now, let's just talk mindset. But for now, let's just talk about the neuroscience of motivation and about the neuroscience of motivation and about the neuroscience of motivation and reward, of pleasure and pain, because reward, of pleasure and pain, because reward, of pleasure and pain, because those are central to what we think of as those are central to what we think of as those are central to what we think of as emotions, whether or not we feel good, emotions, whether or not we feel good, emotions, whether or not we feel good, whether or not we feel we're on track in whether or not we feel we're on track in whether or not we feel we're on track in life, whether or not we feel we're life, whether or not we feel we're life, whether or not we feel we're falling behind. falling behind. falling behind. So, motivation is fundamental to our So, motivation is fundamental to our So, motivation is fundamental to our daily life. It's what allows us to get daily life. It's what allows us to get daily life. It's what allows us to get out of bed in the morning. It's what out of bed in the morning. It's what out of bed in the morning. It's what allows us to pursue long-term goals or allows us to pursue long-term goals or allows us to pursue long-term goals or short-term goals. Motivation and the short-term goals. Motivation and the short-term goals. Motivation and the chemistry of motivation is tightly wound chemistry of motivation is tightly wound chemistry of motivation is tightly wound in with the neurochemistry in with the neurochemistry in with the neurochemistry of movement. In fact, the same single of movement. In fact, the same single of movement. In fact, the same single molecule, dopamine, is responsible for molecule, dopamine, is responsible for molecule, dopamine, is responsible for our sense of motivation and for our sense of motivation and for our sense of motivation and for movement. It's a fascinating molecule, movement. It's a fascinating molecule, movement. It's a fascinating molecule, and it lies at the center of so many and it lies at the center of so many and it lies at the center of so many great things in life, and it lies at the great things in life, and it lies at the great things in life, and it lies at the center of so many terrible aspects of center of so many terrible aspects of center of so many terrible aspects of life, namely addiction and certain forms life, namely addiction and certain forms life, namely addiction and certain forms of mental disease. of mental disease. of mental disease. So, if ever there was a double-edged So, if ever there was a double-edged So, if ever there was a double-edged blade in the world of neuroscience, it's blade in the world of neuroscience, it's blade in the world of neuroscience, it's dopamine. There's a fundamental dopamine. There's a fundamental dopamine. There's a fundamental relationship between dopamine released relationship between dopamine released relationship between dopamine released in your brain and your desire to exert in your brain and your desire to exert in your brain and your desire to exert effort, and you can actually control the effort, and you can actually control the effort, and you can actually control the schedule of dopamine release, but it schedule of dopamine release, but it schedule of dopamine release, but it requires the appropriate knowledge. This requires the appropriate knowledge. This requires the appropriate knowledge. This is one of those cases where is one of those cases where is one of those cases where understanding the way the dopamine understanding the way the dopamine understanding the way the dopamine system works will allow you to leverage system works will allow you to leverage system works will allow you to leverage it to your benefit. Let's get a few it to your benefit. Let's get a few it to your benefit. Let's get a few basic facts on the table. basic facts on the table. basic facts on the table. Dopamine was discovered in the late Dopamine was discovered in the late Dopamine was discovered in the late 1950s, and it was discovered as the precursor, and it was discovered as the precursor, and it was discovered as the precursor, meaning the thing from which epinephrine meaning the thing from which epinephrine meaning the thing from which epinephrine or adrenaline is made. Epinephrine is or adrenaline is made. Epinephrine is or adrenaline is made. Epinephrine is the same thing as adrenaline, except in the same thing as adrenaline, except in the same thing as adrenaline, except in the brain we call it epinephrine. the brain we call it epinephrine. the brain we call it epinephrine. Epinephrine allows us to get into action. It allows us to get into action. It allows us to get into action. It stimulates changes in the blood vessels, stimulates changes in the blood vessels, stimulates changes in the blood vessels, in the heart, in the organs and tissues in the heart, in the organs and tissues in the heart, in the organs and tissues of the body that bias us for movement. of the body that bias us for movement. of the body that bias us for movement. Dopamine was initially thought to be Dopamine was initially thought to be Dopamine was initially thought to be just the building block for epinephrine. just the building block for epinephrine. just the building block for epinephrine. However, dopamine does a lot of things However, dopamine does a lot of things However, dopamine does a lot of things on its own. It's not always converted to on its own. It's not always converted to on its own. It's not always converted to epinephrine. Dopamine is released from several sites Dopamine is released from several sites Dopamine is released from several sites in the brain and body, but perhaps the in the brain and body, but perhaps the in the brain and body, but perhaps the most important one for today's most important one for today's most important one for today's discussion about motivation and reward discussion about motivation and reward discussion about motivation and reward is something that sometimes just called is something that sometimes just called is something that sometimes just called the reward pathway. For the aficionados, the reward pathway. For the aficionados, the reward pathway. For the aficionados, it's sometimes called the mesolimbic it's sometimes called the mesolimbic it's sometimes called the mesolimbic reward pathway. reward pathway. reward pathway. But it's fundamentally important to your But it's fundamentally important to your But it's fundamentally important to your desire to engage in action, and it's desire to engage in action, and it's desire to engage in action, and it's fundamentally important for people fundamentally important for people fundamentally important for people getting addicted to substances or getting addicted to substances or getting addicted to substances or behaviors. So, how does this work? Well, behaviors. So, how does this work? Well, behaviors. So, how does this work? Well, you've got a structure in the deep part you've got a structure in the deep part you've got a structure in the deep part of your brain called the VTA. The VTA or of your brain called the VTA. The VTA or of your brain called the VTA. The VTA or ventral tegmental area contains neurons ventral tegmental area contains neurons ventral tegmental area contains neurons that send what we call axons, little that send what we call axons, little that send what we call axons, little wires, that spit out dopamine at a wires, that spit out dopamine at a wires, that spit out dopamine at a different structure called the nucleus different structure called the nucleus different structure called the nucleus accumbens. And those two structures, VTA accumbens. And those two structures, VTA accumbens. And those two structures, VTA and nucleus accumbens, form and nucleus accumbens, form and nucleus accumbens, form really the core machinery of the reward really the core machinery of the reward really the core machinery of the reward pathway and the pathway that controls pathway and the pathway that controls pathway and the pathway that controls your motivation for anything. your motivation for anything. your motivation for anything. You can think of them like an You can think of them like an You can think of them like an accelerator. They bias you for action. accelerator. They bias you for action. accelerator. They bias you for action. However, within the reward pathway, However, within the reward pathway, However, within the reward pathway, there's also a break. The break or there's also a break. The break or there's also a break. The break or restriction on that dopamine, which restriction on that dopamine, which restriction on that dopamine, which controls when it's released and how much controls when it's released and how much controls when it's released and how much it's released, is the prefrontal cortex. it's released, is the prefrontal cortex. it's released, is the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is the neural real The prefrontal cortex is the neural real The prefrontal cortex is the neural real estate right behind your forehead. You estate right behind your forehead. You estate right behind your forehead. You hear about it for decision-making, hear about it for decision-making, hear about it for decision-making, executive function, for planning, etc. executive function, for planning, etc. executive function, for planning, etc. And indeed, it's responsible for a lot And indeed, it's responsible for a lot And indeed, it's responsible for a lot of those. It's this really unique real of those. It's this really unique real of those. It's this really unique real estate that we were all endowed with as estate that we were all endowed with as estate that we were all endowed with as humans. Other animals don't have much of humans. Other animals don't have much of humans. Other animals don't have much of it. We have a lot of it. And that it. We have a lot of it. And that it. We have a lot of it. And that prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the dopamine system. And that brings us dopamine system. And that brings us dopamine system. And that brings us to the important feature of motivation, to the important feature of motivation, to the important feature of motivation, which is that motivation is a two-part which is that motivation is a two-part which is that motivation is a two-part process, which is about balancing process, which is about balancing process, which is about balancing pleasure and pain. So, when you're just pleasure and pain. So, when you're just pleasure and pain. So, when you're just sitting around not doing much of sitting around not doing much of sitting around not doing much of anything, this reward pathway is anything, this reward pathway is anything, this reward pathway is releasing dopamine at a rate of about releasing dopamine at a rate of about releasing dopamine at a rate of about three or four times per second. It's three or four times per second. It's three or four times per second. It's kind of firing at a low level. If kind of firing at a low level. If kind of firing at a low level. If suddenly you get excited about suddenly you get excited about suddenly you get excited about something, you anticipate something, you anticipate something, you anticipate something, not receive a reward, but you get not receive a reward, but you get not receive a reward, but you get excited in an anticipatory way, excited in an anticipatory way, excited in an anticipatory way, then the rate of firing, the rate of then the rate of firing, the rate of then the rate of firing, the rate of activity in this reward pathway, activity in this reward pathway, activity in this reward pathway, suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 times. And it has the effect of creating times. And it has the effect of creating times. And it has the effect of creating a sense of action or desire to move in a sense of action or desire to move in a sense of action or desire to move in the direction of the thing that you're the direction of the thing that you're the direction of the thing that you're craving. In fact, it's fair to say that craving. In fact, it's fair to say that craving. In fact, it's fair to say that dopamine is responsible for wanting and dopamine is responsible for wanting and dopamine is responsible for wanting and for craving. And that's distinctly for craving. And that's distinctly for craving. And that's distinctly different from the way that you hear it different from the way that you hear it different from the way that you hear it talked about normally, which is that talked about normally, which is that talked about normally, which is that it's involved in pleasure. So, yes, it's involved in pleasure. So, yes, it's involved in pleasure. So, yes, dopamine is released in response to sex. dopamine is released in response to sex. dopamine is released in response to sex. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to a lot of things, released in response to a lot of things, released in response to a lot of things, but it's mostly released in anticipation but it's mostly released in anticipation but it's mostly released in anticipation and craving for a particular thing. It and craving for a particular thing. It and craving for a particular thing. It has the effect of narrowing our focus has the effect of narrowing our focus has the effect of narrowing our focus for the thing that we crave. for the thing that we crave. for the thing that we crave. And that thing could be as simple as a And that thing could be as simple as a And that thing could be as simple as a cup of coffee. It could be as um cup of coffee. It could be as um cup of coffee. It could be as um important as a big board meeting. It important as a big board meeting. It important as a big board meeting. It could be a big final exam. It could be could be a big final exam. It could be could be a big final exam. It could be uh the person that we're excited to meet uh the person that we're excited to meet uh the person that we're excited to meet or see. Dopamine doesn't care about what or see. Dopamine doesn't care about what or see. Dopamine doesn't care about what you're craving. It just releases at a you're craving. It just releases at a you're craving. It just releases at a particular rate. If we just take a step particular rate. If we just take a step particular rate. If we just take a step back and we look at the scientific data back and we look at the scientific data back and we look at the scientific data on how much the dopamine firing increases how much the dopamine firing increases how much the dopamine firing increases in response to different things, you get in response to different things, you get in response to different things, you get a pretty interesting window into how a pretty interesting window into how a pretty interesting window into how your brain works and why you might be your brain works and why you might be your brain works and why you might be motivated or not motivated. Let's say motivated or not motivated. Let's say motivated or not motivated. Let's say you're hungry you're hungry you're hungry or you're looking forward to a cup of or you're looking forward to a cup of or you're looking forward to a cup of coffee or you're going to see your partner. or you're going to see your partner. or you're going to see your partner. Well, your dopamine neurons are firing Well, your dopamine neurons are firing Well, your dopamine neurons are firing at a low rate until you start thinking at a low rate until you start thinking at a low rate until you start thinking about the thing that you want or the about the thing that you want or the about the thing that you want or the thing that you're looking forward to. thing that you're looking forward to. thing that you're looking forward to. When you eat that food When you eat that food When you eat that food the amount of dopamine that's released the amount of dopamine that's released the amount of dopamine that's released in this reward pathway goes up about 50% in this reward pathway goes up about 50% in this reward pathway goes up about 50% above baseline. above baseline. above baseline. Sex, which is fundamental to our species Sex, which is fundamental to our species Sex, which is fundamental to our species continuation and reproduction sex does continuation and reproduction sex does continuation and reproduction sex does release dopamine and it increases release dopamine and it increases release dopamine and it increases dopamine levels about 100% so basically dopamine levels about 100% so basically dopamine levels about 100% so basically doubles them. doubles them. doubles them. Nicotine increases the amount of Nicotine increases the amount of Nicotine increases the amount of dopamine about 150% above baseline. dopamine about 150% above baseline. dopamine about 150% above baseline. Cocaine and amphetamine increase the Cocaine and amphetamine increase the Cocaine and amphetamine increase the amount of dopamine that's released a amount of dopamine that's released a amount of dopamine that's released a thousandfold within about 10 seconds of thousandfold within about 10 seconds of thousandfold within about 10 seconds of consuming the drug. consuming the drug. consuming the drug. However, just thinking about food, about However, just thinking about food, about However, just thinking about food, about sex about nicotine if you like nicotine or about nicotine if you like nicotine or about nicotine if you like nicotine or cocaine or amphetamine can increase the cocaine or amphetamine can increase the cocaine or amphetamine can increase the amount of dopamine that's released to amount of dopamine that's released to amount of dopamine that's released to the same degree as actually consuming the same degree as actually consuming the same degree as actually consuming the drug. Now, it depends in some cases the drug. Now, it depends in some cases the drug. Now, it depends in some cases for instance the cocaine user or the for instance the cocaine user or the for instance the cocaine user or the addict that wants cocaine can't just addict that wants cocaine can't just addict that wants cocaine can't just think about cocaine and increase the think about cocaine and increase the think about cocaine and increase the amount of that's released about a amount of that's released about a amount of that's released about a thousandfold. It's actually much lower thousandfold. It's actually much lower thousandfold. It's actually much lower but it's just enough to put them on the but it's just enough to put them on the but it's just enough to put them on the motivation track for to crave that motivation track for to crave that motivation track for to crave that particular thing. Now, there are reasons particular thing. Now, there are reasons particular thing. Now, there are reasons why you would have brain circuitry like why you would have brain circuitry like why you would have brain circuitry like this. I mean brain circuitry like this this. I mean brain circuitry like this this. I mean brain circuitry like this didn't evolve to get you addicted. Brain didn't evolve to get you addicted. Brain didn't evolve to get you addicted. Brain circuitry like this circuitry like this circuitry like this evolved in order to motivate behaviors toward in order to motivate behaviors toward in order to motivate behaviors toward particular goals. Water when you're particular goals. Water when you're particular goals. Water when you're thirsty, sex in order to reproduce. thirsty, sex in order to reproduce. thirsty, sex in order to reproduce. These things and these brain areas and These things and these brain areas and These things and these brain areas and neurons were part of the evolutionary neurons were part of the evolutionary neurons were part of the evolutionary history that led to the continuation of history that led to the continuation of history that led to the continuation of our species. our species. our species. Things like cocaine and amphetamine are Things like cocaine and amphetamine are Things like cocaine and amphetamine are disastrous for most people because they disastrous for most people because they disastrous for most people because they release so much dopamine and they create release so much dopamine and they create release so much dopamine and they create these closed loops where people then these closed loops where people then these closed loops where people then only crave the particular thing, cocaine only crave the particular thing, cocaine only crave the particular thing, cocaine and amphetamine, that leads to those and amphetamine, that leads to those and amphetamine, that leads to those massive amounts of dopamine release. massive amounts of dopamine release. massive amounts of dopamine release. Most things don't release that Most things don't release that Most things don't release that level of dopamine. Now nowadays there's level of dopamine. Now nowadays there's level of dopamine. Now nowadays there's a ton of interest in social media and in a ton of interest in social media and in a ton of interest in social media and in video games and it there have been some video games and it there have been some video games and it there have been some measurements of the amount of dopamine measurements of the amount of dopamine measurements of the amount of dopamine released. Video games, especially video released. Video games, especially video released. Video games, especially video games that have a very high update speed games that have a very high update speed games that have a very high update speed where there's novel territory all the where there's novel territory all the where there's novel territory all the time. Novelty is a big stimulus of time. Novelty is a big stimulus of time. Novelty is a big stimulus of dopamine. Those can release dopamine dopamine. Those can release dopamine dopamine. Those can release dopamine somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. So very high levels of dopamine release. So very high levels of dopamine release. So very high levels of dopamine release. Social media is an interesting one Social media is an interesting one Social media is an interesting one because the amount of dopamine that's because the amount of dopamine that's because the amount of dopamine that's released in response to logging on to released in response to logging on to released in response to logging on to social media initially could be quite social media initially could be quite social media initially could be quite high, but it seems like likely that high, but it seems like likely that high, but it seems like likely that there's a taper in the amount of there's a taper in the amount of there's a taper in the amount of dopamine. But and yet people still get dopamine. But and yet people still get dopamine. But and yet people still get addicted. So why? Why is it that we can addicted. So why? Why is it that we can addicted. So why? Why is it that we can get addicted to things that fail to get addicted to things that fail to get addicted to things that fail to get to elicit the same massive amount of to elicit the same massive amount of to elicit the same massive amount of pleasure that they initially did? pleasure that they initially did? pleasure that they initially did? Being addicted to something isn't just Being addicted to something isn't just Being addicted to something isn't just about the fact that it feels so good about the fact that it feels so good about the fact that it feels so good that you want to do it over and over that you want to do it over and over that you want to do it over and over again and that's because of this again and that's because of this again and that's because of this pleasure pain balance that underlies pleasure pain balance that underlies pleasure pain balance that underlies motivation. So let's look a little bit motivation. So let's look a little bit motivation. So let's look a little bit closer at the pleasure pain balance closer at the pleasure pain balance closer at the pleasure pain balance because therein lies the tools for you because therein lies the tools for you because therein lies the tools for you to be able to control motivation toward to be able to control motivation toward to be able to control motivation toward healthy things and avoid motivated healthy things and avoid motivated healthy things and avoid motivated behaviors towards things that are behaviors towards things that are behaviors towards things that are destructive for you. There are a lot of destructive for you. There are a lot of destructive for you. There are a lot of reasons why people try novel behaviors, reasons why people try novel behaviors, reasons why people try novel behaviors, whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are adventure whether or not those are adventure whether or not those are adventure thrill-seeking things where, you know, thrill-seeking things where, you know, thrill-seeking things where, you know, they take a new class. As you'll notice, they take a new class. As you'll notice, they take a new class. As you'll notice, I'm not placing any judgment or value on I'm not placing any judgment or value on I'm not placing any judgment or value on these different behaviors. Although I these different behaviors. Although I these different behaviors. Although I think it's fair to point out that for think it's fair to point out that for think it's fair to point out that for most people most people most people addictive drugs like cocaine and addictive drugs like cocaine and addictive drugs like cocaine and amphetamine are very destructive. amphetamine are very destructive. amphetamine are very destructive. Actually, we know that about 15 to 20% Actually, we know that about 15 to 20% Actually, we know that about 15 to 20% of people have a genetic bias towards of people have a genetic bias towards of people have a genetic bias towards addiction. That addiction. That addiction. That you know, you sometimes hear that the you know, you sometimes hear that the you know, you sometimes hear that the first time that you use a drug, you can first time that you use a drug, you can first time that you use a drug, you can become addicted to it. That's actually become addicted to it. That's actually become addicted to it. That's actually not been shown to be true for most not been shown to be true for most not been shown to be true for most things and most people, but for some things and most people, but for some things and most people, but for some people that actually is true. But, in people that actually is true. But, in people that actually is true. But, in any case, the way that addiction works any case, the way that addiction works any case, the way that addiction works and the way that motivation works and the way that motivation works and the way that motivation works generally in the non-addictive setting generally in the non-addictive setting generally in the non-addictive setting is that when you anticipate something, a is that when you anticipate something, a is that when you anticipate something, a little bit of dopamine is released. And little bit of dopamine is released. And little bit of dopamine is released. And then when you reach that thing, you then when you reach that thing, you then when you reach that thing, you engage in that thing, engage in that thing, engage in that thing, the amount of dopamine goes up even the amount of dopamine goes up even the amount of dopamine goes up even further. But as you repeatedly pursue a further. But as you repeatedly pursue a further. But as you repeatedly pursue a behavior and you repeatedly engage with behavior and you repeatedly engage with behavior and you repeatedly engage with a particular thing, let's say you love a particular thing, let's say you love a particular thing, let's say you love running or you love chocolate. As you running or you love chocolate. As you running or you love chocolate. As you eat a piece of chocolate, believe it or eat a piece of chocolate, believe it or eat a piece of chocolate, believe it or not, it tastes good. And then there's a not, it tastes good. And then there's a not, it tastes good. And then there's a shift away from activation of dopamine shift away from activation of dopamine shift away from activation of dopamine and there are other chemicals that are and there are other chemicals that are and there are other chemicals that are released that trigger a low-level sense released that trigger a low-level sense released that trigger a low-level sense of pain. Now, you might not feel this of pain. Now, you might not feel this of pain. Now, you might not feel this physical pain, but the craving that you physical pain, but the craving that you physical pain, but the craving that you feel is both one part dopamine and one feel is both one part dopamine and one feel is both one part dopamine and one part the mirror image of dopamine, which part the mirror image of dopamine, which part the mirror image of dopamine, which is the pain or the craving for yet is the pain or the craving for yet is the pain or the craving for yet another piece of chocolate. And this is another piece of chocolate. And this is another piece of chocolate. And this is a very important and subtle feature of a very important and subtle feature of a very important and subtle feature of the dopamine system that's not often the dopamine system that's not often the dopamine system that's not often discussed. People always talk about just discussed. People always talk about just discussed. People always talk about just as pleasure. You love social media, so as pleasure. You love social media, so as pleasure. You love social media, so it gives you dopamine and so you engage it gives you dopamine and so you engage it gives you dopamine and so you engage in that. You like chocolate, it releases in that. You like chocolate, it releases in that. You like chocolate, it releases dopamine, so you do that. But for every dopamine, so you do that. But for every dopamine, so you do that. But for every bit of dopamine that's released, there's bit of dopamine that's released, there's bit of dopamine that's released, there's another circuit in the brain that another circuit in the brain that another circuit in the brain that creates you can think of it as kind of creates you can think of it as kind of creates you can think of it as kind of like a downward deflection in pleasure. like a downward deflection in pleasure. like a downward deflection in pleasure. So you engage in something you really So you engage in something you really So you engage in something you really want and there's an increase in want and there's an increase in want and there's an increase in pleasure. And then there's a pleasure. And then there's a pleasure. And then there's a without you doing anything, there's a mirror you doing anything, there's a mirror you doing anything, there's a mirror image of that, which is a downward image of that, which is a downward image of that, which is a downward deflection in pleasure, which we're deflection in pleasure, which we're deflection in pleasure, which we're calling pain. So for every bit of calling pain. So for every bit of calling pain. So for every bit of pleasure, there is a mirror image pleasure, there is a mirror image pleasure, there is a mirror image experience of pain. And they overlap in experience of pain. And they overlap in experience of pain. And they overlap in time very closely, so it's sometimes time very closely, so it's sometimes time very closely, so it's sometimes hard to sense this. But try it. The next hard to sense this. But try it. The next hard to sense this. But try it. The next time you eat something really delicious, time you eat something really delicious, time you eat something really delicious, you'll take a bite, it tastes delicious, you'll take a bite, it tastes delicious, you'll take a bite, it tastes delicious, and part of the experience is to want and part of the experience is to want and part of the experience is to want more of that thing. This is true for any more of that thing. This is true for any more of that thing. This is true for any pleasurable experience. pleasurable experience. pleasurable experience. Now, the diabolical part about dopamine Now, the diabolical part about dopamine Now, the diabolical part about dopamine is that because it didn't evolve in is that because it didn't evolve in is that because it didn't evolve in order to get you to indulge in more and order to get you to indulge in more and order to get you to indulge in more and more and more of something, what happens more and more of something, what happens more and more of something, what happens is that is that is that initially, you experience an in- an initially, you experience an in- an initially, you experience an in- an increase in pleasure, and you also increase in pleasure, and you also increase in pleasure, and you also experience this increase in pain shortly experience this increase in pain shortly experience this increase in pain shortly after or woven in with the pleasure after or woven in with the pleasure after or woven in with the pleasure that makes you want more of that thing. that makes you want more of that thing. that makes you want more of that thing. But, with each subsequent time that you But, with each subsequent time that you But, with each subsequent time that you encounter that thing, the experience of encounter that thing, the experience of encounter that thing, the experience of dopamine release and pleasure is dopamine release and pleasure is dopamine release and pleasure is diminished a little bit. diminished a little bit. diminished a little bit. And the diabolical thing is that the And the diabolical thing is that the And the diabolical thing is that the pain response is increased a little bit. pain response is increased a little bit. pain response is increased a little bit. And this is best observed in the context And this is best observed in the context And this is best observed in the context of drug-seeking behavior. The first time of drug-seeking behavior. The first time of drug-seeking behavior. The first time someone decides to take cocaine or someone decides to take cocaine or someone decides to take cocaine or amphetamine, they will experience a huge amphetamine, they will experience a huge amphetamine, they will experience a huge dopamine release, and they will feel dopamine release, and they will feel dopamine release, and they will feel likely very good. likely very good. likely very good. However, the next time they take it, it However, the next time they take it, it However, the next time they take it, it won't feel quite as good. And it won't feel quite as good. And it won't feel quite as good. And it won't feel even as good the third time or the feel even as good the third time or the feel even as good the third time or the next time. next time. next time. But, the amount of pain, the amount of the amount of pain, the amount of the amount of pain, the amount of craving that they experience for the craving that they experience for the craving that they experience for the drug will increase over time. So, much drug will increase over time. So, much drug will increase over time. So, much of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to reduce the pain of craving. So, the next reduce the pain of craving. So, the next reduce the pain of craving. So, the next time you experience something you really time you experience something you really time you experience something you really like, I don't want to take you out of like, I don't want to take you out of like, I don't want to take you out of that experience, but it's really that experience, but it's really that experience, but it's really important that you notice this. That if important that you notice this. That if important that you notice this. That if there's something you really enjoy, part there's something you really enjoy, part there's something you really enjoy, part of that enjoyment is about the of that enjoyment is about the of that enjoyment is about the anticipation and wanting of more of that anticipation and wanting of more of that anticipation and wanting of more of that thing. And that's the pain system in action. And that's the pain system in action. And that's the pain system in action. And so, we can distinguish between And so, we can distinguish between And so, we can distinguish between dopamine, which is really about dopamine, which is really about dopamine, which is really about pleasure, and dopamine, which is really pleasure, and dopamine, which is really pleasure, and dopamine, which is really about motivation to pursue more in order about motivation to pursue more in order about motivation to pursue more in order to relieve or exclude future pain. Let to relieve or exclude future pain. Let to relieve or exclude future pain. Let me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much about pleasure as much as it is about pleasure as much as it is about pleasure as much as it is about motivation and desire to pursue more in motivation and desire to pursue more in motivation and desire to pursue more in order to reduce the amount of pain. order to reduce the amount of pain. order to reduce the amount of pain. And we are now talking about pain as a And we are now talking about pain as a And we are now talking about pain as a psychological pain and a craving, psychological pain and a craving, psychological pain and a craving, although people that miss a lover very although people that miss a lover very although people that miss a lover very badly or that really crave a food very badly or that really crave a food very badly or that really crave a food very badly or that are addicted to a drug and badly or that are addicted to a drug and badly or that are addicted to a drug and can't access it will experience that as can't access it will experience that as can't access it will experience that as a physical craving and a mental craving. a physical craving and a mental craving. a physical craving and a mental craving. The body and brain are linked in this The body and brain are linked in this The body and brain are linked in this way. It's almost they'll describe it as way. It's almost they'll describe it as way. It's almost they'll describe it as painful. They yearn for it. And I think painful. They yearn for it. And I think painful. They yearn for it. And I think the word yearning is one that's very the word yearning is one that's very the word yearning is one that's very valuable in this context because valuable in this context because valuable in this context because yearning seems to include a whole body yearning seems to include a whole body yearning seems to include a whole body experience more than just wanting, which experience more than just wanting, which experience more than just wanting, which could just be up in the mind. So, your could just be up in the mind. So, your could just be up in the mind. So, your desire for something is proportional to desire for something is proportional to desire for something is proportional to how pleasurable it is to indulge in that pleasurable it is to indulge in that pleasurable it is to indulge in that thing, but also how much pain you thing, but also how much pain you thing, but also how much pain you experience when you don't have it. And experience when you don't have it. And experience when you don't have it. And you can now start to let your mind you can now start to let your mind you can now start to let your mind wander into all sorts of examples of wander into all sorts of examples of wander into all sorts of examples of addictions or things that you happen to addictions or things that you happen to addictions or things that you happen to like. Um I'll use the example that I like. Um I'll use the example that I like. Um I'll use the example that I sometimes use on here, which is my love sometimes use on here, which is my love sometimes use on here, which is my love of croissants. The taste of that of croissants. The taste of that of croissants. The taste of that croissant makes me want to eat more croissant makes me want to eat more croissant makes me want to eat more croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar goes up, satiety is reached, etc. What goes up, satiety is reached, etc. What goes up, satiety is reached, etc. What happens then? What is satisfaction and happens then? What is satisfaction and happens then? What is satisfaction and satiety about? Well, that's a separate satiety about? Well, that's a separate satiety about? Well, that's a separate neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator serotonin. It's about neuromodulator serotonin. It's about neuromodulator serotonin. It's about oxytocin. It's about a hormone system oxytocin. It's about a hormone system oxytocin. It's about a hormone system that involves something called that involves something called that involves something called prolactin. So, we're going to talk about prolactin. So, we're going to talk about prolactin. So, we're going to talk about all of those in the book The all of those in the book The all of those in the book The Molecule of More, wonderful book. Uh Molecule of More, wonderful book. Uh Molecule of More, wonderful book. Uh those were described as the here and now those were described as the here and now those were described as the here and now molecules, the ones that allow you to molecules, the ones that allow you to molecules, the ones that allow you to experience your sensations and pleasure experience your sensations and pleasure experience your sensations and pleasure in the present and for which the brain in the present and for which the brain in the present and for which the brain stops projecting into the future. So, stops projecting into the future. So, stops projecting into the future. So, now let's talk about craving and now let's talk about craving and now let's talk about craving and these so-called here and now molecules these so-called here and now molecules these so-called here and now molecules and how those engage in a kind of and how those engage in a kind of and how those engage in a kind of push-pull balance that will allow you to push-pull balance that will allow you to push-pull balance that will allow you to not just feel more motivated, but also not just feel more motivated, but also not just feel more motivated, but also to enjoy the things in life that you are to enjoy the things in life that you are to enjoy the things in life that you are pursuing to a much greater degree. We pursuing to a much greater degree. We pursuing to a much greater degree. We have neurons in an area of our brain have neurons in an area of our brain have neurons in an area of our brain called the raphe, r a p h e. The raphe called the raphe, r a p h e. The raphe called the raphe, r a p h e. The raphe releases serotonin at different places releases serotonin at different places releases serotonin at different places in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule of bliss and contentment for what you of bliss and contentment for what you of bliss and contentment for what you already have. already have. already have. I've talked before about exteroception. I've talked before about exteroception. I've talked before about exteroception. Exteroception is a focus on the outside Exteroception is a focus on the outside Exteroception is a focus on the outside world, everything beyond the confines of world, everything beyond the confines of world, everything beyond the confines of your skin. your skin. your skin. I've also talked about interoception, a I've also talked about interoception, a I've also talked about interoception, a focus on things that are happening focus on things that are happening focus on things that are happening internally within the confines of your internally within the confines of your internally within the confines of your skin. Dopamine and serotonin and serotonin and serotonin can be thought of as related to can be thought of as related to can be thought of as related to exteroception. Dopamine makes us focused exteroception. Dopamine makes us focused exteroception. Dopamine makes us focused on things outside us that are beyond on things outside us that are beyond on things outside us that are beyond what we call our personal space, where what we call our personal space, where what we call our personal space, where we actually have to move and take action we actually have to move and take action we actually have to move and take action in order to achieve things. And in order to achieve things. And in order to achieve things. And serotonin in general has to do with the serotonin in general has to do with the serotonin in general has to do with the things that are in our immediate here things that are in our immediate here things that are in our immediate here and now, hence the description of these and now, hence the description of these and now, hence the description of these as the here and now molecules. as the here and now molecules. as the here and now molecules. So, it's interesting to point out that So, it's interesting to point out that So, it's interesting to point out that the body and the brain can direct its the body and the brain can direct its the body and the brain can direct its attention towards things outside us or attention towards things outside us or attention towards things outside us or inside us or split our attention between inside us or split our attention between inside us or split our attention between those. Just understand that dopamine biases us Just understand that dopamine biases us Just understand that dopamine biases us toward thinking about what we don't toward thinking about what we don't toward thinking about what we don't have, whereas serotonin and some of the have, whereas serotonin and some of the have, whereas serotonin and some of the related molecules, like the related molecules, like the related molecules, like the endocannabinoids, if you picked up on the word if you picked up on the word if you picked up on the word cannabinoid, yes, it's like cannabis cannabinoid, yes, it's like cannabis cannabinoid, yes, it's like cannabis because cannabis because cannabis because cannabis attaches to endocannabinoid receptors, attaches to endocannabinoid receptors, attaches to endocannabinoid receptors, and the endocannabinoids are receptors and the endocannabinoids are receptors and the endocannabinoids are receptors that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that you naturally make that are that you naturally make that are that you naturally make that are involved in things like forgetting. But involved in things like forgetting. But involved in things like forgetting. But you make these molecules that bind to you make these molecules that bind to you make these molecules that bind to these receptors that make you feel kind these receptors that make you feel kind these receptors that make you feel kind of blissed out and content in the of blissed out and content in the of blissed out and content in the present. So, you got these two systems. present. So, you got these two systems. present. So, you got these two systems. They're kind of like a push-pull. And if They're kind of like a push-pull. And if They're kind of like a push-pull. And if you were to say do the um you know, in you were to say do the um you know, in you were to say do the um you know, in the book uh Wherever You Go, There You the book uh Wherever You Go, There You the book uh Wherever You Go, There You Are, Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this um Are, Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this um Are, Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this um meditation practice that's different meditation practice that's different meditation practice that's different than most meditation practices where you than most meditation practices where you than most meditation practices where you eat one almond and you focus all of your eat one almond and you focus all of your eat one almond and you focus all of your attention on the almond, the taste of attention on the almond, the taste of attention on the almond, the taste of the almond, the texture of the almond. the almond, the texture of the almond. the almond, the texture of the almond. That's really a mindfulness practice That's really a mindfulness practice That's really a mindfulness practice that's geared towards trying to take a that's geared towards trying to take a that's geared towards trying to take a behavior, which is normally about behavior, which is normally about behavior, which is normally about pursuit, normally feeding is we're going pursuit, normally feeding is we're going pursuit, normally feeding is we're going engaging in feeding because of dopamine, engaging in feeding because of dopamine, engaging in feeding because of dopamine, we pursue more of a food because of that we pursue more of a food because of that we pursue more of a food because of that pleasure-pain relationship I talked pleasure-pain relationship I talked pleasure-pain relationship I talked about before. The focus on the one about before. The focus on the one about before. The focus on the one almond or the or becoming very present almond or the or becoming very present almond or the or becoming very present in any behavior that normally would be a in any behavior that normally would be a in any behavior that normally would be a kind of exteroceptive pursuit behavior kind of exteroceptive pursuit behavior kind of exteroceptive pursuit behavior and bring it into the here and now, and bring it into the here and now, and bring it into the here and now, that's a mental that's a mental that's a mental trick or a mental task that the trick or a mental task that the trick or a mental task that the mindfulness community has really mindfulness community has really mindfulness community has really embraced in order to try and create embraced in order to try and create embraced in order to try and create increased pleasure for what you already increased pleasure for what you already increased pleasure for what you already have. It's really trying to accomplish a have. It's really trying to accomplish a have. It's really trying to accomplish a shift from dopamine being released to shift from dopamine being released to shift from dopamine being released to serotonin and the cannabinoid system serotonin and the cannabinoid system serotonin and the cannabinoid system being involved in that behavior. being involved in that behavior. being involved in that behavior. Dopamine has the quality of making Dopamine has the quality of making Dopamine has the quality of making people kind of rapidly in pursuit of people kind of rapidly in pursuit of people kind of rapidly in pursuit of things. Drugs like marijuana, things. Drugs like marijuana, things. Drugs like marijuana, the opioids, the opioids, the opioids, anything that um really hits the anything that um really hits the anything that um really hits the serotonin system hard tend to make serotonin system hard tend to make serotonin system hard tend to make people rather lethargic and content to people rather lethargic and content to people rather lethargic and content to stay exactly where they are. They don't stay exactly where they are. They don't stay exactly where they are. They don't want to pursue much at all. So, you've want to pursue much at all. So, you've want to pursue much at all. So, you've got these molecules like dopamine that got these molecules like dopamine that got these molecules like dopamine that make you focused on the things you want make you focused on the things you want make you focused on the things you want and the things you crave. And then and the things you crave. And then and the things you crave. And then you've got the molecules that make you you've got the molecules that make you you've got the molecules that make you content with what you have. So, the most content with what you have. So, the most content with what you have. So, the most important thing perhaps in creating a important thing perhaps in creating a important thing perhaps in creating a healthy emotional landscape is to have a healthy emotional landscape is to have a healthy emotional landscape is to have a balance between these two neuromodulator balance between these two neuromodulator balance between these two neuromodulator systems. So, at about this point in the systems. So, at about this point in the systems. So, at about this point in the podcast, I'm guessing that some of you podcast, I'm guessing that some of you podcast, I'm guessing that some of you are thinking, "Okay, great. I want more are thinking, "Okay, great. I want more are thinking, "Okay, great. I want more dopamine. I want to be more motivated. I dopamine. I want to be more motivated. I dopamine. I want to be more motivated. I don't want to procrastinate as much. And don't want to procrastinate as much. And don't want to procrastinate as much. And I want to be able to experience life. I want to be able to experience life. I want to be able to experience life. I want these here-and-now molecules to be want these here-and-now molecules to be want these here-and-now molecules to be released as well." Well, there is a way released as well." Well, there is a way released as well." Well, there is a way to do that, but you have to understand to do that, but you have to understand to do that, but you have to understand the source of procrastination is not one the source of procrastination is not one the source of procrastination is not one thing. There are basically two kinds of thing. There are basically two kinds of thing. There are basically two kinds of procrastinators, or so says the procrastinators, or so says the procrastinators, or so says the research. The first kind are people that research. The first kind are people that research. The first kind are people that actually really enjoy the actually really enjoy the actually really enjoy the stress of the impending deadline. It's stress of the impending deadline. It's stress of the impending deadline. It's the only way they can get into action. the only way they can get into action. the only way they can get into action. There are other procrastinators for There are other procrastinators for There are other procrastinators for which they simply are not releasing which they simply are not releasing which they simply are not releasing enough dopamine. For those people, there enough dopamine. For those people, there enough dopamine. For those people, there are a variety of things that can are a variety of things that can are a variety of things that can increase dopamine. I do suggest you talk increase dopamine. I do suggest you talk increase dopamine. I do suggest you talk to a psychiatrist or doctor. I've talked to a psychiatrist or doctor. I've talked to a psychiatrist or doctor. I've talked about Mucuna pruriens, which is 99.9% about Mucuna pruriens, which is 99.9% about Mucuna pruriens, which is 99.9% L-DOPA, the precursor to dopamine. L-DOPA, the precursor to dopamine. L-DOPA, the precursor to dopamine. There are antidepressants like There are antidepressants like There are antidepressants like Wellbutrin. Bupropion is the other name for it, Bupropion is the other name for it, Bupropion is the other name for it, which increase dopamine and epinephrine. which increase dopamine and epinephrine. which increase dopamine and epinephrine. However, if you think back to our However, if you think back to our However, if you think back to our earlier discussion about dopamine, earlier discussion about dopamine, earlier discussion about dopamine, if it's very high, dopamine, if it's very high, dopamine, if it's very high, creates a sense of pleasure and the creates a sense of pleasure and the creates a sense of pleasure and the desire for more. So, you can also become desire for more. So, you can also become desire for more. So, you can also become a person for which a person for which a person for which enough is never enough. The only thing enough is never enough. The only thing enough is never enough. The only thing that dopamine really wants is more of that dopamine really wants is more of that dopamine really wants is more of the thing that releases dopamine. And the thing that releases dopamine. And the thing that releases dopamine. And so, one of the things that you can do in so, one of the things that you can do in so, one of the things that you can do in order to generally just be a happier order to generally just be a happier order to generally just be a happier person, especially if you're a person in person, especially if you're a person in person, especially if you're a person in pursuit of long-term goals of any kind, pursuit of long-term goals of any kind, pursuit of long-term goals of any kind, is the longer that you can is the longer that you can is the longer that you can extend that positive phase of the extend that positive phase of the extend that positive phase of the dopamine release, and the more that you dopamine release, and the more that you dopamine release, and the more that you can blunt the pain response to that, the can blunt the pain response to that, the can blunt the pain response to that, the better. And you can actually do this better. And you can actually do this better. And you can actually do this cognitively. I used to joke with my cognitively. I used to joke with my cognitively. I used to joke with my lab that when we'd publish a paper, I lab that when we'd publish a paper, I lab that when we'd publish a paper, I would get really excited, but I wouldn't would get really excited, but I wouldn't would get really excited, but I wouldn't allow myself to get too excited. What I allow myself to get too excited. What I allow myself to get too excited. What I wanted to do instead, and what I've wanted to do instead, and what I've wanted to do instead, and what I've still tried to do, is try and extend the still tried to do, is try and extend the still tried to do, is try and extend the arc of that positive experience as long arc of that positive experience as long arc of that positive experience as long as I possibly can. Simply by thinking as I possibly can. Simply by thinking as I possibly can. Simply by thinking back, like, "Oh, that was really cool. I back, like, "Oh, that was really cool. I back, like, "Oh, that was really cool. I really enjoyed doing that work. I really enjoyed doing that work. I really enjoyed doing that work. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoyed doing that with the people that I was doing that with the people that I was doing that with the people that I was working with at the time. What a working with at the time. What a working with at the time. What a pleasure that was." So, you can extend pleasure that was." So, you can extend pleasure that was." So, you can extend pleasure without having to engage in the pleasure without having to engage in the pleasure without having to engage in the behavior over and over. That's extending behavior over and over. That's extending behavior over and over. That's extending the arc of that dopamine release. As the arc of that dopamine release. As the arc of that dopamine release. As well, it offsets some of the pain of not well, it offsets some of the pain of not well, it offsets some of the pain of not having that experience having that experience having that experience occur over and over and over again. Now, occur over and over and over again. Now, occur over and over and over again. Now, for the high performers out there, for the high performers out there, for the high performers out there, you're probably familiar with this. Many you're probably familiar with this. Many you're probably familiar with this. Many people who have a big achievement, their people who have a big achievement, their people who have a big achievement, their first thoughts are, "Well, now what? first thoughts are, "Well, now what? first thoughts are, "Well, now what? What am I going to do next? How am I What am I going to do next? How am I What am I going to do next? How am I ever going to exceed that?" And indeed, ever going to exceed that?" And indeed, ever going to exceed that?" And indeed, many people who are very high on this many people who are very high on this many people who are very high on this kind of dopamine sensation and kind of dopamine sensation and kind of dopamine sensation and novelty-seeking scale novelty-seeking scale novelty-seeking scale uh are prone to addiction. They're uh are prone to addiction. They're uh are prone to addiction. They're prone to the rapid pursuit of external prone to the rapid pursuit of external prone to the rapid pursuit of external goals, of exteroception, to the neglect goals, of exteroception, to the neglect goals, of exteroception, to the neglect of these internal mechanisms that allow of these internal mechanisms that allow of these internal mechanisms that allow them to feel calm and happy. So, for them to feel calm and happy. So, for them to feel calm and happy. So, for people that are very driven, very people that are very driven, very people that are very driven, very motivated, adopting a practice of being able to adopting a practice of being able to adopting a practice of being able to engage in the here and now, the sort of engage in the here and now, the sort of engage in the here and now, the sort of almond type practices we talked about almond type practices we talked about almond type practices we talked about earlier, um of learning how to achieve a really um of learning how to achieve a really um of learning how to achieve a really good night's sleep on a regular basis good night's sleep on a regular basis good night's sleep on a regular basis through tools and mechanisms I talked through tools and mechanisms I talked through tools and mechanisms I talked about in previous podcasts, gives us about in previous podcasts, gives us about in previous podcasts, gives us sort of balance to the pleasure-seeking sort of balance to the pleasure-seeking sort of balance to the pleasure-seeking and offsetting of pain and the pleasure and offsetting of pain and the pleasure and offsetting of pain and the pleasure in the here and now. So, pleasure is in the here and now. So, pleasure is in the here and now. So, pleasure is really two things. It's a joy in really two things. It's a joy in really two things. It's a joy in pursuit, but it's also the joy in what you have. but it's also the joy in what you have. but it's also the joy in what you have. The cool thing is, you can actually The cool thing is, you can actually The cool thing is, you can actually regulate this whole system in a way that regulate this whole system in a way that regulate this whole system in a way that will steer you or lean you towards more will steer you or lean you towards more will steer you or lean you towards more positive anticipation of things in life positive anticipation of things in life positive anticipation of things in life and less disappointment. It's simply a and less disappointment. It's simply a and less disappointment. It's simply a matter of adjusting what we call the matter of adjusting what we call the matter of adjusting what we call the dopamine schedule. In order to dopamine schedule. In order to dopamine schedule. In order to understand how to control the dopamine understand how to control the dopamine understand how to control the dopamine system, how to leverage it for a better system, how to leverage it for a better system, how to leverage it for a better life, you need to understand the results of a you need to understand the results of a you need to understand the results of a very important experiment. very important experiment. very important experiment. This experiment was able to separate This experiment was able to separate This experiment was able to separate pleasure from motivation. It's a very pleasure from motivation. It's a very pleasure from motivation. It's a very simple, but like many simple simple, but like many simple simple, but like many simple experiments, a very elegant experiment. experiments, a very elegant experiment. experiments, a very elegant experiment. What they did, and this has now been What they did, and this has now been What they did, and this has now been done in animals and in humans, done in animals and in humans, done in animals and in humans, they offered rats food. they offered rats food. they offered rats food. It was a food that they particularly It was a food that they particularly It was a food that they particularly liked. And the animals would lever press for a And the animals would lever press for a And the animals would lever press for a pellet of food, kind of classic pellet of food, kind of classic pellet of food, kind of classic experiment. They'd eat the food, and experiment. They'd eat the food, and experiment. They'd eat the food, and they presumably liked the food because they presumably liked the food because they presumably liked the food because they were motivated to press the lever they were motivated to press the lever they were motivated to press the lever and eat it. Great. and eat it. Great. and eat it. Great. They took other rats. They took other rats. They took other rats. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. You can do this by injection of a You can do this by injection of a You can do this by injection of a neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. So, they actually had no dopamine in So, they actually had no dopamine in So, they actually had no dopamine in their brain. They have no ability to their brain. They have no ability to their brain. They have no ability to release dopamine. release dopamine. release dopamine. And they gave them a lever. And they gave them a lever. And they gave them a lever. The rats would sit there and they'd hit The rats would sit there and they'd hit The rats would sit there and they'd hit the lever and they'd eat the food. They the lever and they'd eat the food. They the lever and they'd eat the food. They still enjoyed the food. still enjoyed the food. still enjoyed the food. So you say, well, okay, so dopamine So you say, well, okay, so dopamine So you say, well, okay, so dopamine isn't involved in motivation and isn't involved in motivation and isn't involved in motivation and isn't involved in pleasure? No, it absolutely involved in pleasure? No, it absolutely involved in pleasure? No, it absolutely is. They could still enjoy the food, but is. They could still enjoy the food, but is. They could still enjoy the food, but if they moved the rat literally one body if they moved the rat literally one body if they moved the rat literally one body length away from the lever, length away from the lever, length away from the lever, what they found was the animals that had what they found was the animals that had what they found was the animals that had dopamine would move over to the lever, dopamine would move over to the lever, dopamine would move over to the lever, press it, and eat. And the ones the rats press it, and eat. And the ones the rats press it, and eat. And the ones the rats that did not have dopamine available to that did not have dopamine available to that did not have dopamine available to them, wouldn't even move one body length, one wouldn't even move one body length, one wouldn't even move one body length, one rat length, to the lever in order to rat length, to the lever in order to rat length, to the lever in order to press it and get the food. Dopamine, press it and get the food. Dopamine, press it and get the food. Dopamine, therefore, is not about the ability to therefore, is not about the ability to therefore, is not about the ability to experience pleasure. It is about experience pleasure. It is about experience pleasure. It is about motivation for pleasure. And so many of motivation for pleasure. And so many of motivation for pleasure. And so many of you are probably thinking, wow, I'm not you are probably thinking, wow, I'm not you are probably thinking, wow, I'm not a very motivated person. Like you talked a very motivated person. Like you talked a very motivated person. Like you talked about the one kind of procrastination about the one kind of procrastination about the one kind of procrastination earlier, what about when I just feel earlier, what about when I just feel earlier, what about when I just feel kind of meh about life. Now, it for some kind of meh about life. Now, it for some kind of meh about life. Now, it for some of you there may be a real clinical of you there may be a real clinical of you there may be a real clinical depression and you should talk to a depression and you should talk to a depression and you should talk to a professional. There are very good professional. There are very good professional. There are very good prescription drugs that can really help prescription drugs that can really help prescription drugs that can really help people. There's also great non-drug people. There's also great non-drug people. There's also great non-drug treatments of uh psychotherapy and other treatments of uh psychotherapy and other treatments of uh psychotherapy and other treatments that are being developed in treatments that are being developed in treatments that are being developed in addition to psychotherapy and the addition to psychotherapy and the addition to psychotherapy and the various kinds of psychoanalysis, etc., various kinds of psychoanalysis, etc., various kinds of psychoanalysis, etc., that one can use. I think the data that one can use. I think the data that one can use. I think the data really point to the fact that a really point to the fact that a really point to the fact that a combination of pharmacology and talk combination of pharmacology and talk combination of pharmacology and talk therapies are generally best, and there therapies are generally best, and there therapies are generally best, and there are a huge range of these things. I know are a huge range of these things. I know are a huge range of these things. I know many of you are in these professions, so many of you are in these professions, so many of you are in these professions, so we're not going to talk about that right we're not going to talk about that right we're not going to talk about that right now. There is a compound that's kind of now. There is a compound that's kind of now. There is a compound that's kind of interesting in the supplement space that interesting in the supplement space that interesting in the supplement space that isn't um Mucuna pruriens L-dopa, it's isn't um Mucuna pruriens L-dopa, it's isn't um Mucuna pruriens L-dopa, it's not L-tyrosine, not L-tyrosine, not L-tyrosine, that isn't that isn't that isn't promoting massive releases of dopamine promoting massive releases of dopamine promoting massive releases of dopamine or even dopamine alone, but a or even dopamine alone, but a or even dopamine alone, but a combination of dopamine and serotonin. combination of dopamine and serotonin. combination of dopamine and serotonin. And it's an intriguing molecule. It's um And it's an intriguing molecule. It's um And it's an intriguing molecule. It's um sold over the counter. Again, you have sold over the counter. Again, you have sold over the counter. Again, you have to check with your healthcare um uh to check with your healthcare um uh to check with your healthcare um uh provider before you would take anything provider before you would take anything provider before you would take anything or remove anything, that's very or remove anything, that's very or remove anything, that's very important. But it's phenylethylamine, important. But it's phenylethylamine, important. But it's phenylethylamine, or PEA. or PEA. or PEA. PEA or beta phenylethylamine or beta phenylethylamine or beta phenylethylamine releases dopamine at low levels, but also dopamine at low levels, but also dopamine at low levels, but also serotonin at low levels. So, it's kind serotonin at low levels. So, it's kind serotonin at low levels. So, it's kind of a cocktail of the motivation of a cocktail of the motivation of a cocktail of the motivation molecules as well as the {quote} here molecules as well as the {quote} here molecules as well as the {quote} here and now molecules. and now molecules. and now molecules. And people's response to this varies And people's response to this varies And people's response to this varies widely. But, many people report feeling But, many people report feeling But, many people report feeling heightened sense of mental acuity, heightened sense of mental acuity, heightened sense of mental acuity, well-being, etc. It is a bit of a well-being, etc. It is a bit of a well-being, etc. It is a bit of a stimulant like anything that triggers stimulant like anything that triggers stimulant like anything that triggers activation of the dopamine and activation of the dopamine and activation of the dopamine and norepinephrine pathway. But, it is an norepinephrine pathway. But, it is an norepinephrine pathway. But, it is an interesting supplement. So, now let's interesting supplement. So, now let's interesting supplement. So, now let's talk about what is a dopamine schedule talk about what is a dopamine schedule talk about what is a dopamine schedule and how you can leverage this in order and how you can leverage this in order and how you can leverage this in order to have heightened levels of motivation, to have heightened levels of motivation, to have heightened levels of motivation, but not get so much dopamine that you're but not get so much dopamine that you're but not get so much dopamine that you're experiencing a crash afterwards. And experiencing a crash afterwards. And experiencing a crash afterwards. And also, so that you can experience also, so that you can experience also, so that you can experience heightened pleasure from the various heightened pleasure from the various heightened pleasure from the various pursuits that you are engaged in pursuits that you are engaged in pursuits that you are engaged in life. And here's the key principle. life. And here's the key principle. life. And here's the key principle. Dopamine is very subjective. Meaning, Dopamine is very subjective. Meaning, Dopamine is very subjective. Meaning, you can either allow yourself to you can either allow yourself to you can either allow yourself to experience the pleasure of reaching a experience the pleasure of reaching a experience the pleasure of reaching a milestone, of achieving or some craving milestone, of achieving or some craving milestone, of achieving or some craving or not. It's actually pretty powerful or not. It's actually pretty powerful or not. It's actually pretty powerful what one can do with the subjective what one can do with the subjective what one can do with the subjective system. In fact, I'm going to describe system. In fact, I'm going to describe system. In fact, I'm going to describe you an experiment that highlights just you an experiment that highlights just you an experiment that highlights just how powerful the subjective readout or how powerful the subjective readout or how powerful the subjective readout or the subjective interpretation of a given the subjective interpretation of a given the subjective interpretation of a given experience really can be even at the experience really can be even at the experience really can be even at the level of pharmacology. And the title of level of pharmacology. And the title of level of pharmacology. And the title of the experiment is expectation for the experiment is expectation for the experiment is expectation for stimulant type modifies caffeine's stimulant type modifies caffeine's stimulant type modifies caffeine's effects on mood and cognition. This was effects on mood and cognition. This was effects on mood and cognition. This was done in college students. It's a done in college students. It's a done in college students. It's a fascinating study. What they did is they fascinating study. What they did is they fascinating study. What they did is they gave college students college students college students either placebo essentially nothing or 200 mg of essentially nothing or 200 mg of essentially nothing or 200 mg of caffeine. 200 mg of caffeine is about caffeine. 200 mg of caffeine is about caffeine. 200 mg of caffeine is about what's in a typical coffee, like a what's in a typical coffee, like a what's in a typical coffee, like a medium coffee that you would buy, a drip medium coffee that you would buy, a drip medium coffee that you would buy, a drip coffee. So, they took 65 undergraduate coffee. So, they took 65 undergraduate coffee. So, they took 65 undergraduate students in college. They randomized them to in college. They randomized them to in college. They randomized them to either placebo or caffeine. either placebo or caffeine. either placebo or caffeine. And they told them that they were either And they told them that they were either And they told them that they were either getting caffeine or Adderall. getting caffeine or Adderall. getting caffeine or Adderall. Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very different expectation. College students know expectation. College students know expectation. College students know Adderall to be a much stronger stimulant Adderall to be a much stronger stimulant Adderall to be a much stronger stimulant than caffeine. They know it to create a than caffeine. They know it to create a than caffeine. They know it to create a sort of high. This is the way the sort of high. This is the way the sort of high. This is the way the students described it. And they thought students described it. And they thought students described it. And they thought that it would increase their level of that it would increase their level of that it would increase their level of focus and their ability to perform work. focus and their ability to perform work. focus and their ability to perform work. So, what's really interesting is there So, what's really interesting is there So, what's really interesting is there was definitely an effect of placebo versus definitely an effect of placebo versus definitely an effect of placebo versus caffeine. That's not surprising, caffeine. That's not surprising, caffeine. That's not surprising, however, right? You take a placebo, however, right? You take a placebo, however, right? You take a placebo, you may or may not feel more alert. you may or may not feel more alert. you may or may not feel more alert. But, you take 200 mg of caffeine, very But, you take 200 mg of caffeine, very But, you take 200 mg of caffeine, very likely you're going to feel very alert. likely you're going to feel very alert. likely you're going to feel very alert. But, there was also an effect of whether But, there was also an effect of whether But, there was also an effect of whether or not the students thought they were or not the students thought they were or not the students thought they were getting caffeine or Adderall. The getting caffeine or Adderall. The getting caffeine or Adderall. The subjects receiving caffeine reported subjects receiving caffeine reported subjects receiving caffeine reported feeling more stimulated, anxious, and feeling more stimulated, anxious, and feeling more stimulated, anxious, and motivated than the subjects that motivated than the subjects that motivated than the subjects that received the placebo. Okay. But, the received the placebo. Okay. But, the received the placebo. Okay. But, the ones that expected Adderall reported ones that expected Adderall reported ones that expected Adderall reported stronger amphetamine effects. They stronger amphetamine effects. They stronger amphetamine effects. They performed better on a working memory performed better on a working memory performed better on a working memory test. And in general, they had all the test. And in general, they had all the test. And in general, they had all the increased cognitive effects that would increased cognitive effects that would increased cognitive effects that would have been seen with Adderall, but they have been seen with Adderall, but they have been seen with Adderall, but they were only ingesting caffeine. were only ingesting caffeine. were only ingesting caffeine. So, it led to heightened performance So, it led to heightened performance So, it led to heightened performance simply because the students thought they simply because the students thought they simply because the students thought they were getting Adderall. were getting Adderall. were getting Adderall. And I think this is very important And I think this is very important And I think this is very important because I think that it points to the because I think that it points to the because I think that it points to the fact that the top-down, the kind fact that the top-down, the kind fact that the top-down, the kind of higher-level cognitive processes are of higher-level cognitive processes are of higher-level cognitive processes are impacting even the most basic impacting even the most basic impacting even the most basic fundamental aspects of say dopamine fundamental aspects of say dopamine fundamental aspects of say dopamine release or our release or our release or our adrenaline release or epinephrine adrenaline release or epinephrine adrenaline release or epinephrine release in ways that can positively release in ways that can positively release in ways that can positively impact performance. In this case, it was impact performance. In this case, it was impact performance. In this case, it was a positive improvement in working memory a positive improvement in working memory a positive improvement in working memory and focus. So, today we've talked a lot and focus. So, today we've talked a lot and focus. So, today we've talked a lot about the dopamine system and those about the dopamine system and those about the dopamine system and those kinds of schedules that will allow kinds of schedules that will allow kinds of schedules that will allow craving or addiction. craving or addiction. craving or addiction. What's the schedule of dopamine that's What's the schedule of dopamine that's What's the schedule of dopamine that's going to allow you to maximize on your going to allow you to maximize on your going to allow you to maximize on your pursuit of pleasure and your elimination pursuit of pleasure and your elimination pursuit of pleasure and your elimination of pain? And we get the answer to that of pain? And we get the answer to that of pain? And we get the answer to that from our good friend gambling. our good friend gambling. our good friend gambling. The reason gambling works, the reason The reason gambling works, the reason The reason gambling works, the reason why people will throw their lives away, why people will throw their lives away, why people will throw their lives away, the reason why people go back again and the reason why people go back again and the reason why people go back again and again and again to places like Las Vegas again and again to places like Las Vegas again and again to places like Las Vegas and Atlantic City and Atlantic City and Atlantic City is because of the hope and anticipation. is because of the hope and anticipation. is because of the hope and anticipation. It's a Those are cities and places built It's a Those are cities and places built It's a Those are cities and places built on dopamine. They are leveraging your on dopamine. They are leveraging your on dopamine. They are leveraging your dopamine system. And as a friend of mine dopamine system. And as a friend of mine dopamine system. And as a friend of mine who's a certified addiction treatment who's a certified addiction treatment who's a certified addiction treatment specialist tells me that, you know, the specialist tells me that, you know, the specialist tells me that, you know, the gambling addiction is a particularly gambling addiction is a particularly gambling addiction is a particularly sinister because the next time really sinister because the next time really sinister because the next time really could be the thing that changes could be the thing that changes could be the thing that changes everything. Unlike other addictions, the everything. Unlike other addictions, the everything. Unlike other addictions, the next time really could change next time really could change next time really could change everything, and that's embedded in the everything, and that's embedded in the everything, and that's embedded in the mind of the gambling addict. And rarely mind of the gambling addict. And rarely mind of the gambling addict. And rarely does it work out uh in favor of the does it work out uh in favor of the does it work out uh in favor of the well-being of the gambling addict and well-being of the gambling addict and well-being of the gambling addict and their family. their family. their family. However, the intermittent reinforcement However, the intermittent reinforcement However, the intermittent reinforcement schedule was discovered long ago by schedule was discovered long ago by schedule was discovered long ago by scientific researchers. So, this is the scientific researchers. So, this is the scientific researchers. So, this is the slot machine that every once in a while slot machine that every once in a while slot machine that every once in a while gives you a win to keep you playing. gives you a win to keep you playing. gives you a win to keep you playing. This is the This is the This is the probability of winning on the craps the probability of winning on the craps the probability of winning on the craps table or the roulette table or blackjack table or the roulette table or blackjack table or the roulette table or blackjack just often enough that you're willing to just often enough that you're willing to just often enough that you're willing to buy tickets, head out there, play again, buy tickets, head out there, play again, buy tickets, head out there, play again, go downstairs again from your room, even go downstairs again from your room, even go downstairs again from your room, even though you swore you were done for the though you swore you were done for the though you swore you were done for the night. Intermittent reinforcement is the night. Intermittent reinforcement is the night. Intermittent reinforcement is the most powerful form of dopamine reward most powerful form of dopamine reward most powerful form of dopamine reward schedule to keep you doing something. schedule to keep you doing something. schedule to keep you doing something. So, we can export that. We can use it So, we can export that. We can use it So, we can export that. We can use it for good. for good. for good. If there's something that you're If there's something that you're If there's something that you're pursuing in life, whether or not it's an pursuing in life, whether or not it's an pursuing in life, whether or not it's an academic goal or a financial goal or academic goal or a financial goal or academic goal or a financial goal or relationship goal, relationship goal, relationship goal, one of the things that you can do to one of the things that you can do to one of the things that you can do to ensure that you will remain on the path ensure that you will remain on the path ensure that you will remain on the path to that goal for a very long time and to that goal for a very long time and to that goal for a very long time and that you will continue to exceed your that you will continue to exceed your that you will continue to exceed your previous performance, previous performance, previous performance, as well as continue to enjoy the as well as continue to enjoy the as well as continue to enjoy the dopamine release that occurs when you dopamine release that occurs when you dopamine release that occurs when you hit the milestones that you want to hit the milestones that you want to hit the milestones that you want to achieve, is to occasionally remove rewards is to occasionally remove rewards is to occasionally remove rewards subjectively. Let's say you set out a goal of making Let's say you set out a goal of making Let's say you set out a goal of making I'm to make this quantitative with I'm to make this quantitative with I'm to make this quantitative with respect to finances cuz it just is easy respect to finances cuz it just is easy respect to finances cuz it just is easy description, but this could also be in description, but this could also be in description, but this could also be in sport, this could be in school, this sport, this could be in school, this sport, this could be in school, this could be in music, could be in anything could be in music, could be in anything could be in music, could be in anything creative endeavors. But let's say you creative endeavors. But let's say you creative endeavors. But let's say you set out a certain financial goal, or set out a certain financial goal, or set out a certain financial goal, or let's say you want to get certain number let's say you want to get certain number let's say you want to get certain number of followers on whatever social media of followers on whatever social media of followers on whatever social media platform. As you reach each one of those goals, As you reach each one of those goals, As you reach each one of those goals, you should know now that the amount of you should know now that the amount of you should know now that the amount of dopamine is not going to peak, it's dopamine is not going to peak, it's dopamine is not going to peak, it's actually going to diminish and make you actually going to diminish and make you actually going to diminish and make you crave more. The key to avoiding that crave more. The key to avoiding that crave more. The key to avoiding that crash, but to still keep it in healthy crash, but to still keep it in healthy crash, but to still keep it in healthy levels that will allow you to continue levels that will allow you to continue levels that will allow you to continue your suit, is as you are your suit, is as you are your suit, is as you are staircasing toward your goal, you staircasing toward your goal, you staircasing toward your goal, you actually want to blunt the reward actually want to blunt the reward actually want to blunt the reward response for some of those intermediate response for some of those intermediate response for some of those intermediate goals. I'm not telling you shouldn't I'm not telling you shouldn't I'm not telling you shouldn't celebrate your wins, but I'm telling you celebrate your wins, but I'm telling you celebrate your wins, but I'm telling you not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a good friend of mine who recently good friend of mine who recently good friend of mine who recently fortunately for him fortunately for him fortunately for him had a great financial success, he asked had a great financial success, he asked had a great financial success, he asked me and somebody else, a good friend of me and somebody else, a good friend of me and somebody else, a good friend of mine who's very tuned into dopamine mine who's very tuned into dopamine mine who's very tuned into dopamine reward schedules, understands how they reward schedules, understands how they reward schedules, understands how they work at a really deep level, and he work at a really deep level, and he work at a really deep level, and he said, "I don't know what to do next." said, "I don't know what to do next." said, "I don't know what to do next." And we said, "Oh, well, that's simple. And we said, "Oh, well, that's simple. And we said, "Oh, well, that's simple. You should just give most of it away." You should just give most of it away." You should just give most of it away." And this wasn't a ploy to receive any of And this wasn't a ploy to receive any of And this wasn't a ploy to receive any of the money ourselves, this was really the money ourselves, this was really the money ourselves, this was really about reducing the impact of that about reducing the impact of that about reducing the impact of that reward. Now, hopefully giving your money reward. Now, hopefully giving your money reward. Now, hopefully giving your money away if you already have enough of it away if you already have enough of it away if you already have enough of it would be something that was rewarding in would be something that was rewarding in would be something that was rewarding in and of itself. But if you're a student and of itself. But if you're a student and of itself. But if you're a student who's pursuing goals in university, or who's pursuing goals in university, or who's pursuing goals in university, or you're an athlete who's pursuing goals, you're an athlete who's pursuing goals, you're an athlete who's pursuing goals, it actually makes sense from a rational it actually makes sense from a rational it actually makes sense from a rational perspective, once you understand these perspective, once you understand these perspective, once you understand these mechanisms, to hit a new high point of performance, hit a new high point of performance, hit a new high point of performance, or to get that A+ or for you if it's an or to get that A+ or for you if it's an or to get that A+ or for you if it's an A- etc., and to tell yourself, "Okay, A- etc., and to tell yourself, "Okay, A- etc., and to tell yourself, "Okay, that was good." But to actually actively that was good." But to actually actively that was good." But to actually actively blunt the reward, to not go and blunt the reward, to not go and blunt the reward, to not go and celebrate too intensely. Because in celebrate too intensely. Because in celebrate too intensely. Because in doing that, you keep your dopamine doing that, you keep your dopamine doing that, you keep your dopamine system in check, and you ensure that system in check, and you ensure that system in check, and you ensure that you're going to stay on the path of you're going to stay on the path of you're going to stay on the path of continued pursuit, not just for that continued pursuit, not just for that continued pursuit, not just for that thing, but for all things. Big increases thing, but for all things. Big increases thing, but for all things. Big increases in dopamine lead to big crashes in dopamine lead to big crashes in dopamine lead to big crashes in dopamine and big increases in dopamine and big increases in dopamine and big increases in dopamine up the ante. So, you can lift the up the ante. So, you can lift the up the ante. So, you can lift the uh what Las Vegas and Atlantic City and uh what Las Vegas and Atlantic City and uh what Las Vegas and Atlantic City and other gambling other gambling other gambling uh mechanisms and places have known for a mechanisms and places have known for a mechanisms and places have known for a long time. They lifted it from the long time. They lifted it from the long time. They lifted it from the scientists. You can now take it back and scientists. You can now take it back and scientists. You can now take it back and you can start to leverage that and you can start to leverage that and you can start to leverage that and you just make it intermittent. You reward just make it intermittent. You reward just make it intermittent. You reward yourself not on a predictable schedule. yourself not on a predictable schedule. yourself not on a predictable schedule. So, not every other time or every third So, not every other time or every third So, not every other time or every third time or every 10th time, but sometimes time or every 10th time, but sometimes time or every 10th time, but sometimes it's three in a row then not at all for it's three in a row then not at all for it's three in a row then not at all for 10 days. So, 10 days. So, 10 days. So, reward is important, self-reward is reward is important, self-reward is reward is important, self-reward is critically important, but make sure that critically important, but make sure that critically important, but make sure that you're not doing it on such a you're not doing it on such a you're not doing it on such a predictable schedule that you burn out predictable schedule that you burn out predictable schedule that you burn out these dopamine circuits or that you these dopamine circuits or that you these dopamine circuits or that you undercut your own ability to strive and undercut your own ability to strive and undercut your own ability to strive and achieve. Hopefully, you now know far achieve. Hopefully, you now know far achieve. Hopefully, you now know far more about the dopamine system, reward, more about the dopamine system, reward, more about the dopamine system, reward, and motivation than you did at the and motivation than you did at the and motivation than you did at the beginning of this podcast. beginning of this podcast. beginning of this podcast. Hopefully, you also understand the other Hopefully, you also understand the other Hopefully, you also understand the other side of dopamine and reward, which is side of dopamine and reward, which is side of dopamine and reward, which is pain and the balance of this pain and the balance of this pain and the balance of this pleasure-pain system, as well as the pleasure-pain system, as well as the pleasure-pain system, as well as the molecules that we call or that were molecules that we call or that were molecules that we call or that were described in the molecule of more book, described in the molecule of more book, described in the molecule of more book, I should say, as the here and now I should say, as the here and now I should say, as the here and now molecules, things like serotonin and the molecules, things like serotonin and the molecules, things like serotonin and the endocannabinoids. Finally, I want to endocannabinoids. Finally, I want to endocannabinoids. Finally, I want to thank you for your time and attention thank you for your time and attention thank you for your time and attention today. I hope you learned a lot and that today. I hope you learned a lot and that today. I hope you learned a lot and that you learned a lot of possible tools that you learned a lot of possible tools that you learned a lot of possible tools that you could incorporate into your life as you could incorporate into your life as you could incorporate into your life as it relates to motivation and emotions. it relates to motivation and emotions. it relates to motivation and emotions. Thank you for your interest in science.