Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss sugar, in are going to discuss sugar, in are going to discuss sugar, in particular how our nervous system particular how our nervous system particular how our nervous system regulates our sugar intake and our regulates our sugar intake and our regulates our sugar intake and our seeking of sugar. We are going to place seeking of sugar. We are going to place seeking of sugar. We are going to place sugar into its proper context. The way I sugar into its proper context. The way I sugar into its proper context. The way I want to start off by doing that is to want to start off by doing that is to want to start off by doing that is to tell you a little bit of what happens tell you a little bit of what happens tell you a little bit of what happens when we eat and a little bit of what the when we eat and a little bit of what the when we eat and a little bit of what the brain does to respond to those events. brain does to respond to those events. brain does to respond to those events. So, what happens when we eat? Let's just So, what happens when we eat? Let's just So, what happens when we eat? Let's just take a what I call top-contour view of take a what I call top-contour view of take a what I call top-contour view of the hormonal response to ingesting food. the hormonal response to ingesting food. the hormonal response to ingesting food. Anytime we eat, that is the consequence Anytime we eat, that is the consequence Anytime we eat, that is the consequence of a number of things that happened of a number of things that happened of a number of things that happened before we ate. There's a hormone in our before we ate. There's a hormone in our before we ate. There's a hormone in our brain and body called ghrelin, spelled g brain and body called ghrelin, spelled g brain and body called ghrelin, spelled g h r e l i n. Ghrelin is a hormone that h r e l i n. Ghrelin is a hormone that h r e l i n. Ghrelin is a hormone that increases, depending on how long it's been since we depending on how long it's been since we depending on how long it's been since we ate last. Okay? So, the longer it's been ate last. Okay? So, the longer it's been ate last. Okay? So, the longer it's been since we had a meal, ghrelin levels are since we had a meal, ghrelin levels are since we had a meal, ghrelin levels are going to be higher and higher and going to be higher and higher and going to be higher and higher and higher, and it essentially makes us higher, and it essentially makes us higher, and it essentially makes us hungry by interacting with particular hungry by interacting with particular hungry by interacting with particular neurons in an area of the brain called neurons in an area of the brain called neurons in an area of the brain called the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus and some other areas as well, like the and some other areas as well, like the and some other areas as well, like the lateral hypothalamus. And then when we lateral hypothalamus. And then when we lateral hypothalamus. And then when we eat, typically what happens is ghrelin eat, typically what happens is ghrelin eat, typically what happens is ghrelin levels go down. So, it's a very logical levels go down. So, it's a very logical levels go down. So, it's a very logical system. Now, system. Now, system. Now, when we eat, assuming that we eat when we eat, assuming that we eat when we eat, assuming that we eat carbohydrates, but even if we just eat carbohydrates, but even if we just eat carbohydrates, but even if we just eat some protein and some fats, we will some protein and some fats, we will some protein and some fats, we will experience a slight or in some cases a experience a slight or in some cases a experience a slight or in some cases a large rise in blood glucose. large rise in blood glucose. large rise in blood glucose. Blood glucose is simply blood sugar, Blood glucose is simply blood sugar, Blood glucose is simply blood sugar, and the body and brain, and the body and brain, and the body and brain, we should say, particular the nervous we should say, particular the nervous we should say, particular the nervous system doesn't function well if blood system doesn't function well if blood system doesn't function well if blood sugar is too high or too low. So, as a sugar is too high or too low. So, as a sugar is too high or too low. So, as a consequence, we have another hormone, consequence, we have another hormone, consequence, we have another hormone, which is released from the pancreas, which is released from the pancreas, which is released from the pancreas, which is called insulin, which helps which is called insulin, which helps which is called insulin, which helps regulate the amount of glucose in the regulate the amount of glucose in the regulate the amount of glucose in the bloodstream. Now, one of the chief bloodstream. Now, one of the chief bloodstream. Now, one of the chief organs for glucose utilization is the organs for glucose utilization is the organs for glucose utilization is the brain. Neurons are tremendously brain. Neurons are tremendously brain. Neurons are tremendously metabolically active, and their metabolically active, and their metabolically active, and their preferred mode of metabolism is glucose preferred mode of metabolism is glucose preferred mode of metabolism is glucose metabolism. The same thing is also true metabolism. The same thing is also true metabolism. The same thing is also true for the neurons in your body. The way for the neurons in your body. The way for the neurons in your body. The way that you are able to move the limbs of that you are able to move the limbs of that you are able to move the limbs of your body, the way that you are able to your body, the way that you are able to your body, the way that you are able to perform exercise or movement of any kind perform exercise or movement of any kind perform exercise or movement of any kind for that matter, is because neurons for that matter, is because neurons for that matter, is because neurons called motor neurons send electrical called motor neurons send electrical called motor neurons send electrical potentials to the muscle fibers. Those potentials to the muscle fibers. Those potentials to the muscle fibers. Those neurons are also very metabolically neurons are also very metabolically neurons are also very metabolically demanding, especially when you're doing demanding, especially when you're doing demanding, especially when you're doing demanding types of physical work, but demanding types of physical work, but demanding types of physical work, but also deliberate thought, deliberately also deliberate thought, deliberately also deliberate thought, deliberately controlling the way that your brain and controlling the way that your brain and controlling the way that your brain and body is moving requires more glucose body is moving requires more glucose body is moving requires more glucose uptake, more energy in those very uptake, more energy in those very uptake, more energy in those very neurons. And this is also why after neurons. And this is also why after neurons. And this is also why after doing a long bout of exercise, you might doing a long bout of exercise, you might doing a long bout of exercise, you might be tired, but also if you do a bout of be tired, but also if you do a bout of be tired, but also if you do a bout of skill learning of any kind, or if you've skill learning of any kind, or if you've skill learning of any kind, or if you've been reading and thinking about what been reading and thinking about what been reading and thinking about what you're reading, or if you had a intense you're reading, or if you had a intense you're reading, or if you had a intense conversation with somebody where you're conversation with somebody where you're conversation with somebody where you're really forcing yourself to listen, really forcing yourself to listen, really forcing yourself to listen, that's work, and that work requires that's work, and that work requires that's work, and that work requires glucose uptake by neurons both in the glucose uptake by neurons both in the glucose uptake by neurons both in the brain and in your body. Now that we've brain and in your body. Now that we've brain and in your body. Now that we've established that glucose is the established that glucose is the established that glucose is the preferred source of fuel for the nervous preferred source of fuel for the nervous preferred source of fuel for the nervous system, I'd like to concentrate on a few of the I'd like to concentrate on a few of the I'd like to concentrate on a few of the other types of sugars that we ingest on other types of sugars that we ingest on other types of sugars that we ingest on a common basis, and the impact that a common basis, and the impact that a common basis, and the impact that those have on brain function and body those have on brain function and body those have on brain function and body function. I'd particularly like to focus function. I'd particularly like to focus function. I'd particularly like to focus on fructose. Fructose, of course, is on fructose. Fructose, of course, is on fructose. Fructose, of course, is found in fruit. It's also found in the found in fruit. It's also found in the found in fruit. It's also found in the infamous high fructose corn syrup, which infamous high fructose corn syrup, which infamous high fructose corn syrup, which we will talk about today. we will talk about today. we will talk about today. It's worth pointing out that the It's worth pointing out that the It's worth pointing out that the concentrations of fructose in fruit is concentrations of fructose in fruit is concentrations of fructose in fruit is quite low compared to the concentrations quite low compared to the concentrations quite low compared to the concentrations of fructose in high fructose corn syrup. of fructose in high fructose corn syrup. of fructose in high fructose corn syrup. Typically, the amount of fructose, Typically, the amount of fructose, Typically, the amount of fructose, I think is the proper fructose, I think is the proper fructose, I think is the proper pronunciation that people are always pronunciation that people are always pronunciation that people are always correcting me, fructose, correcting me, fructose, correcting me, fructose, is anywhere from 1% to about 10%. Now, is anywhere from 1% to about 10%. Now, is anywhere from 1% to about 10%. Now, high fructose corn syrup is a different high fructose corn syrup is a different high fructose corn syrup is a different issue, and too much consumption of issue, and too much consumption of issue, and too much consumption of anything, but fructose included, can be anything, but fructose included, can be anything, but fructose included, can be a problem for the ways that it impacts a problem for the ways that it impacts a problem for the ways that it impacts the neural circuits that process sugar, the neural circuits that process sugar, the neural circuits that process sugar, not just glucose, but fructose. One of not just glucose, but fructose. One of not just glucose, but fructose. One of the key distinctions between glucose and the key distinctions between glucose and the key distinctions between glucose and fructose is that fructose most likely fructose is that fructose most likely fructose is that fructose most likely cannot directly access the brain. It cannot directly access the brain. It cannot directly access the brain. It actually needs to be converted into actually needs to be converted into actually needs to be converted into glucose in the liver. And the way that glucose in the liver. And the way that glucose in the liver. And the way that conversion occurs conversion occurs conversion occurs feeds back to a set of hormones and feeds back to a set of hormones and feeds back to a set of hormones and neural pathways that we talked about neural pathways that we talked about neural pathways that we talked about earlier, which have a lot to do with earlier, which have a lot to do with earlier, which have a lot to do with appetite. And to just summarize what is appetite. And to just summarize what is appetite. And to just summarize what is now a lot of very solid data, now a lot of very solid data, now a lot of very solid data, fructose, and specifically fructose, and specifically fructose, and specifically fructose, has the ability to reduce certain has the ability to reduce certain has the ability to reduce certain hormones and peptides in our body whose hormones and peptides in our body whose hormones and peptides in our body whose main job is to suppress ghrelin. So, main job is to suppress ghrelin. So, main job is to suppress ghrelin. So, although I, and I think pretty much although I, and I think pretty much although I, and I think pretty much everyone out there, save for a few everyone out there, save for a few everyone out there, save for a few individuals, agrees that calories in, calories out is agrees that calories in, calories out is agrees that calories in, calories out is the fundamental principle of weight the fundamental principle of weight the fundamental principle of weight loss, weight maintenance, or loss, weight maintenance, or loss, weight maintenance, or weight gain, ingesting fructose shifts weight gain, ingesting fructose shifts weight gain, ingesting fructose shifts our hormone system, our hormone system, our hormone system, and as a consequence, our neural and as a consequence, our neural and as a consequence, our neural pathways within our brain, the pathways within our brain, the pathways within our brain, the hypothalamus, to be hungrier, hypothalamus, to be hungrier, hypothalamus, to be hungrier, regardless of how many calories we've regardless of how many calories we've regardless of how many calories we've eaten. So, eaten. So, eaten. So, current recommendations for most people current recommendations for most people current recommendations for most people are to eat more fruits and vegetables, are to eat more fruits and vegetables, are to eat more fruits and vegetables, but for those of you that are trying to but for those of you that are trying to but for those of you that are trying to control your hunger, control your hunger, control your hunger, ingesting a lot of fructose ingesting a lot of fructose ingesting a lot of fructose is probably not going to be a good idea. is probably not going to be a good idea. is probably not going to be a good idea. Certainly, ingesting it from high Certainly, ingesting it from high Certainly, ingesting it from high fructose corn syrup is not going to be a fructose corn syrup is not going to be a fructose corn syrup is not going to be a good idea because of the enormous good idea because of the enormous good idea because of the enormous percentages of fructose in high fructose percentages of fructose in high fructose percentages of fructose in high fructose corn syrup, 50% or sometimes even more. corn syrup, 50% or sometimes even more. corn syrup, 50% or sometimes even more. Fructose provides a bridge for us Fructose provides a bridge for us Fructose provides a bridge for us between a particular kind of sugar, hormone a particular kind of sugar, hormone a particular kind of sugar, hormone function, in this case ghrelin, and the in this case ghrelin, and the in this case ghrelin, and the hypothalamus, which leads us to the next question, which leads us to the next question, which leads us to the next question, which is what is it about sugar that which is what is it about sugar that which is what is it about sugar that makes it such an attractive thing for makes it such an attractive thing for makes it such an attractive thing for us? Why do we like it so much? And the us? Why do we like it so much? And the us? Why do we like it so much? And the obvious answer that most people arrive obvious answer that most people arrive obvious answer that most people arrive at is well, it just tastes really at is well, it just tastes really at is well, it just tastes really good. But that's actually not the way it good. But that's actually not the way it good. But that's actually not the way it works. The rewarding properties, as we works. The rewarding properties, as we works. The rewarding properties, as we say, of sugar, whether or not they come say, of sugar, whether or not they come say, of sugar, whether or not they come in the form of sucrose or fructose or in the form of sucrose or fructose or in the form of sucrose or fructose or foods that increase glucose to a very foods that increase glucose to a very foods that increase glucose to a very high level high level high level actually is not just related to the actually is not just related to the actually is not just related to the taste of the foods that produce that taste of the foods that produce that taste of the foods that produce that elevation in glucose, sucrose, or elevation in glucose, sucrose, or elevation in glucose, sucrose, or fructose. It is in part, but that's only part of It is in part, but that's only part of It is in part, but that's only part of the story. And the rest of the story, the story. And the rest of the story, the story. And the rest of the story, once you understand it, can actually once you understand it, can actually once you understand it, can actually place you in a position to much better place you in a position to much better place you in a position to much better control your sugar intake of all kinds, control your sugar intake of all kinds, control your sugar intake of all kinds, but also your food intake in ways that but also your food intake in ways that but also your food intake in ways that can allow you to make much better can allow you to make much better can allow you to make much better choices about the foods you ingest. So, choices about the foods you ingest. So, choices about the foods you ingest. So, now I want to take us on a journey into now I want to take us on a journey into now I want to take us on a journey into the nervous system to explain the nervous system to explain the nervous system to explain the pathways in the brain and body that pathways in the brain and body that pathways in the brain and body that regulate our appetite for sugar. regulate our appetite for sugar. regulate our appetite for sugar. Now, keep in mind what I already told Now, keep in mind what I already told Now, keep in mind what I already told you before, which is that when we ingest you before, which is that when we ingest you before, which is that when we ingest foods, they're broken down into various foods, they're broken down into various foods, they're broken down into various components, and glucose is going to be components, and glucose is going to be components, and glucose is going to be shuttled to the brain and, of course, to shuttled to the brain and, of course, to shuttled to the brain and, of course, to other neurons in our spinal cord and other neurons in our spinal cord and other neurons in our spinal cord and elsewhere and to our muscles, etc., in elsewhere and to our muscles, etc., in elsewhere and to our muscles, etc., in order for all of those cells and organs order for all of those cells and organs order for all of those cells and organs and tissues to be able to function. The and tissues to be able to function. The and tissues to be able to function. The fact that so many cells and organs and fact that so many cells and organs and fact that so many cells and organs and tissues require glucose in order to tissues require glucose in order to tissues require glucose in order to function has led to a situation where function has led to a situation where function has led to a situation where you have dedicated neural machinery, you have dedicated neural machinery, you have dedicated neural machinery, pieces of your brain, that are almost pieces of your brain, that are almost pieces of your brain, that are almost entirely, if not entirely, devoted to entirely, if not entirely, devoted to entirely, if not entirely, devoted to seeking out of sugar seeking out of sugar seeking out of sugar or foods that contain sugars, or foods that contain sugars, or foods that contain sugars, and to make sure that you not only seek and to make sure that you not only seek and to make sure that you not only seek those out, but you know where those out, but you know where those out, but you know where those foods are, and that you ingest more and foods are, and that you ingest more and foods are, and that you ingest more and more and more of them. And there are two more and more of them. And there are two more and more of them. And there are two main ways that these neural circuits main ways that these neural circuits main ways that these neural circuits work. In fact, we can say that there are work. In fact, we can say that there are work. In fact, we can say that there are two neural circuits entirely that work two neural circuits entirely that work two neural circuits entirely that work in parallel. In the case of sugar in parallel. In the case of sugar in parallel. In the case of sugar consumption the two parallel pathways involve one the two parallel pathways involve one the two parallel pathways involve one pathway related to the actual taste and pathway related to the actual taste and pathway related to the actual taste and the perception of sweet taste that lead the perception of sweet taste that lead the perception of sweet taste that lead not just you, but every animal that not just you, but every animal that not just you, but every animal that we're aware of, to seek more sweet we're aware of, to seek more sweet we're aware of, to seek more sweet containing foods. containing foods. containing foods. The other parallel pathway is related to The other parallel pathway is related to The other parallel pathway is related to the nutritive component of sweet foods, the nutritive component of sweet foods, the nutritive component of sweet foods, meaning the degree to which a given food meaning the degree to which a given food meaning the degree to which a given food will raise blood glucose. I want to will raise blood glucose. I want to will raise blood glucose. I want to repeat that. One pathway in your brain repeat that. One pathway in your brain repeat that. One pathway in your brain and body is devoted to getting you to and body is devoted to getting you to and body is devoted to getting you to seek out sweet tasting things that you seek out sweet tasting things that you seek out sweet tasting things that you perceive as sweet, and another parallel perceive as sweet, and another parallel perceive as sweet, and another parallel pathway is devoted to getting you to pathway is devoted to getting you to pathway is devoted to getting you to seek out foods that lead to increases in seek out foods that lead to increases in seek out foods that lead to increases in blood glucose. blood glucose. blood glucose. It just so happens that the foods that It just so happens that the foods that It just so happens that the foods that lead to big increases in blood glucose lead to big increases in blood glucose lead to big increases in blood glucose typically are associated with that sweet typically are associated with that sweet typically are associated with that sweet taste. Now, this is distinctly different taste. Now, this is distinctly different taste. Now, this is distinctly different than the neural pathways that control than the neural pathways that control than the neural pathways that control seeking of savory foods, or salty foods, seeking of savory foods, or salty foods, seeking of savory foods, or salty foods, or spicy foods for that matter, or spicy foods for that matter, or spicy foods for that matter, or bitter foods. The sweet pathway is what bitter foods. The sweet pathway is what bitter foods. The sweet pathway is what we would call hardwired. It exists as we would call hardwired. It exists as we would call hardwired. It exists as far as we know in every mammal. far as we know in every mammal. far as we know in every mammal. Basically, getting sweet stuff into the Basically, getting sweet stuff into the Basically, getting sweet stuff into the body might seem like it has a lot to do with might seem like it has a lot to do with might seem like it has a lot to do with the taste, but it has just as much to do the taste, but it has just as much to do the taste, but it has just as much to do with the nutritive components that sweet with the nutritive components that sweet with the nutritive components that sweet tasting foods carry, and the fact that tasting foods carry, and the fact that tasting foods carry, and the fact that your nervous system and so many cells in your nervous system and so many cells in your nervous system and so many cells in your brain and body run on glucose. your brain and body run on glucose. your brain and body run on glucose. If you recall earlier, I said even if If you recall earlier, I said even if If you recall earlier, I said even if you ingest fructose, fructose can be you ingest fructose, fructose can be you ingest fructose, fructose can be converted into glucose in the liver. The converted into glucose in the liver. The converted into glucose in the liver. The fundamental thing to understand here is fundamental thing to understand here is fundamental thing to understand here is that when you think you want a piece of that when you think you want a piece of that when you think you want a piece of chocolate, or you think you want a piece chocolate, or you think you want a piece chocolate, or you think you want a piece of cake, or you're craving something of cake, or you're craving something of cake, or you're craving something sweet, you are both craving the taste, sweet, you are both craving the taste, sweet, you are both craving the taste, and your neurons are literally craving and your neurons are literally craving and your neurons are literally craving the nutritive components that arrive the nutritive components that arrive the nutritive components that arrive with that taste. Okay, two parallel with that taste. Okay, two parallel with that taste. Okay, two parallel pathways. One of the parallel pathways has to do One of the parallel pathways has to do One of the parallel pathways has to do with conscious perception. So, when you with conscious perception. So, when you with conscious perception. So, when you ingest something sweet, very quickly ingest something sweet, very quickly ingest something sweet, very quickly there are signals sent from those there are signals sent from those there are signals sent from those neurons in your mouth to brain areas neurons in your mouth to brain areas neurons in your mouth to brain areas that cause you to seek out or at least that cause you to seek out or at least that cause you to seek out or at least pay attention to the source and the pay attention to the source and the pay attention to the source and the abundance of those sweet things. They abundance of those sweet things. They abundance of those sweet things. They literally change your perception. Does literally change your perception. Does literally change your perception. Does that mean that you should never ingest that mean that you should never ingest that mean that you should never ingest anything sweet? No, certainly I'm not anything sweet? No, certainly I'm not anything sweet? No, certainly I'm not saying that. saying that. saying that. Everyone has to decide for themselves Everyone has to decide for themselves Everyone has to decide for themselves what the appropriate amount of sugar what the appropriate amount of sugar what the appropriate amount of sugar intake is, but I find it remarkable when intake is, but I find it remarkable when intake is, but I find it remarkable when people say, "Oh, you know, I need to get people say, "Oh, you know, I need to get people say, "Oh, you know, I need to get my sugar fix or I need to have my sugar fix or I need to have my sugar fix or I need to have my chocolate or I need to have a little bit chocolate or I need to have a little bit chocolate or I need to have a little bit of something to just kind of take care of something to just kind of take care of something to just kind of take care of that sugar appetite." Because in of that sugar appetite." Because in of that sugar appetite." Because in taking care of that sugar appetite, taking care of that sugar appetite, taking care of that sugar appetite, maybe for the very disciplined of you, maybe for the very disciplined of you, maybe for the very disciplined of you, you can just have that one piece of you can just have that one piece of you can just have that one piece of chocolate and it's great and you can chocolate and it's great and you can chocolate and it's great and you can relish in it. But, relish in it. But, relish in it. But, it does shift the way that you perceive it does shift the way that you perceive it does shift the way that you perceive other foods as well. And the way it does other foods as well. And the way it does other foods as well. And the way it does that is through our probably, if you're that is through our probably, if you're that is through our probably, if you're listening to this podcast, now old listening to this podcast, now old listening to this podcast, now old friend, but incredible neuromodulator, friend, but incredible neuromodulator, friend, but incredible neuromodulator, dopamine. Dopamine is a molecule that is dopamine. Dopamine is a molecule that is dopamine. Dopamine is a molecule that is released from several places in the released from several places in the released from several places in the brain. There's a so-called mesolimbic reward There's a so-called mesolimbic reward There's a so-called mesolimbic reward pathway, which is a whole set of places pathway, which is a whole set of places pathway, which is a whole set of places in the brain or circuits designed to get in the brain or circuits designed to get in the brain or circuits designed to get us motivated and craving and in pursuit us motivated and craving and in pursuit us motivated and craving and in pursuit of things. And then, of course, there of things. And then, of course, there of things. And then, of course, there are areas of the brain that are involved are areas of the brain that are involved are areas of the brain that are involved in movement that are linked up with in movement that are linked up with in movement that are linked up with those areas involved in motivation. That those areas involved in motivation. That those areas involved in motivation. That makes perfect sense. Why would you have makes perfect sense. Why would you have makes perfect sense. Why would you have a brain area involved in motivation if a brain area involved in motivation if a brain area involved in motivation if you couldn't actually do something with you couldn't actually do something with you couldn't actually do something with that motivation? When we ingest that motivation? When we ingest that motivation? When we ingest something sweet, something sweet, something sweet, the perception of that sweet taste the perception of that sweet taste the perception of that sweet taste increases dopamine in the mesolimbic increases dopamine in the mesolimbic increases dopamine in the mesolimbic reward pathways, which then are conveyed reward pathways, which then are conveyed reward pathways, which then are conveyed to pathways for motor behavior, to pathways for motor behavior, to pathways for motor behavior, and in general place us into modes of and in general place us into modes of and in general place us into modes of focused action toward getting more of focused action toward getting more of focused action toward getting more of whatever was sweet. But, if you whatever was sweet. But, if you whatever was sweet. But, if you understand the way that dopamine works, understand the way that dopamine works, understand the way that dopamine works, what you'll realize is that when this what you'll realize is that when this what you'll realize is that when this dopamine pathway is triggered, it tends dopamine pathway is triggered, it tends dopamine pathway is triggered, it tends to create not the sensation or the to create not the sensation or the to create not the sensation or the perception of satiety, of feeling like perception of satiety, of feeling like perception of satiety, of feeling like something is enough, but rather to something is enough, but rather to something is enough, but rather to produce the sensation of wanting more. produce the sensation of wanting more. produce the sensation of wanting more. In fact, we can say that the longer it's In fact, we can say that the longer it's In fact, we can say that the longer it's been since you've indulged in something been since you've indulged in something been since you've indulged in something that you really enjoy or would like, that you really enjoy or would like, that you really enjoy or would like, the greater the dopamine you will the greater the dopamine you will the greater the dopamine you will experience when you finally engage in experience when you finally engage in experience when you finally engage in that behavior or indulge that thing, that behavior or indulge that thing, that behavior or indulge that thing, ingest that thing. Now, I again, I'm not ingest that thing. Now, I again, I'm not ingest that thing. Now, I again, I'm not saying that you shouldn't pursue saying that you shouldn't pursue saying that you shouldn't pursue pleasurable things. These dopamine pleasurable things. These dopamine pleasurable things. These dopamine pathways are not evil, they're not bad, pathways are not evil, they're not bad, pathways are not evil, they're not bad, but once you understand the way they but once you understand the way they but once you understand the way they work, you can leverage them to your work, you can leverage them to your work, you can leverage them to your advantage as opposed to them leveraging advantage as opposed to them leveraging advantage as opposed to them leveraging you to their advantage. Now, there's the you to their advantage. Now, there's the you to their advantage. Now, there's the second pathway. The second pathway is second pathway. The second pathway is second pathway. The second pathway is what's called the post-ingestive what's called the post-ingestive what's called the post-ingestive reinforcing properties of sugar, which reinforcing properties of sugar, which reinforcing properties of sugar, which is really just a fancy nerd speak way of is really just a fancy nerd speak way of is really just a fancy nerd speak way of saying there are events that happen saying there are events that happen saying there are events that happen within your within your stomach and within your within your stomach and within your within your stomach and below your conscious detection that are below your conscious detection that are below your conscious detection that are also driving you to seek out also driving you to seek out also driving you to seek out sweet-tasting things independent of sweet-tasting things independent of sweet-tasting things independent of their taste and foods that increase their taste and foods that increase their taste and foods that increase blood glucose independent of their blood glucose independent of their blood glucose independent of their taste. And here's how it works. We all taste. And here's how it works. We all taste. And here's how it works. We all have neurons within our gut. These have neurons within our gut. These have neurons within our gut. These neurons have a name, they are called neurons have a name, they are called neurons have a name, they are called neuropod cells. Neuropod cells were neuropod cells. Neuropod cells were neuropod cells. Neuropod cells were famously discovered by Professor Dr. famously discovered by Professor Dr. famously discovered by Professor Dr. Diego Bohórquez at Duke University and Diego Bohórquez at Duke University and Diego Bohórquez at Duke University and these cells respond to, among other these cells respond to, among other these cells respond to, among other things, to the presence of sugar within the gut. to the presence of sugar within the gut. to the presence of sugar within the gut. These neuropod cells send electrical These neuropod cells send electrical These neuropod cells send electrical signals through a particular highway within the through a particular highway within the through a particular highway within the vagus to the so-called nodos ganglion, vagus to the so-called nodos ganglion, vagus to the so-called nodos ganglion, and this is a cluster A ganglion is just and this is a cluster A ganglion is just and this is a cluster A ganglion is just a cluster of neurons. a cluster of neurons. a cluster of neurons. And then the nodos ganglion sends on And then the nodos ganglion sends on And then the nodos ganglion sends on information to the nucleus of the information to the nucleus of the information to the nucleus of the solitary tract. The nucleus of the solitary tract. The nucleus of the solitary tract. The nucleus of the solitary tract is very important for solitary tract is very important for solitary tract is very important for understanding sugar preference. So, understanding sugar preference. So, understanding sugar preference. So, we've all heard of hidden sugars, we've all heard of hidden sugars, we've all heard of hidden sugars, meaning the sugars that manufacturers meaning the sugars that manufacturers meaning the sugars that manufacturers have put into foods and disguised them have put into foods and disguised them have put into foods and disguised them with other flavors. The with other flavors. The with other flavors. The savory foods are often laden with these savory foods are often laden with these savory foods are often laden with these hidden sugars that we can't register as hidden sugars that we can't register as hidden sugars that we can't register as sweetness, but trigger the neuropod sweetness, but trigger the neuropod sweetness, but trigger the neuropod cells, which then further trigger cells, which then further trigger cells, which then further trigger dopamine, which make us want more of dopamine, which make us want more of dopamine, which make us want more of them. Now, we may be able to resist them. Now, we may be able to resist them. Now, we may be able to resist eating more of them, but it makes us eating more of them, but it makes us eating more of them, but it makes us crave more food in general. Now, we will crave more food in general. Now, we will crave more food in general. Now, we will talk about ways to regulate this talk about ways to regulate this talk about ways to regulate this pathway. To sort of intervene in this To sort of intervene in this To sort of intervene in this subconscious pathway. subconscious pathway. subconscious pathway. But, for now, But, for now, But, for now, I'm hoping that just the understanding I'm hoping that just the understanding I'm hoping that just the understanding that we all have this pathway, this is that we all have this pathway, this is that we all have this pathway, this is hardwired into our body, hardwired into our body, hardwired into our body, could potentially allow people to better could potentially allow people to better could potentially allow people to better understand why is it that their cravings understand why is it that their cravings understand why is it that their cravings are so intense, that it's not are so intense, that it's not are so intense, that it's not necessarily just about the taste of that necessarily just about the taste of that necessarily just about the taste of that food. And when you consider this, you food. And when you consider this, you food. And when you consider this, you start to realize that there are multiple start to realize that there are multiple start to realize that there are multiple mechanisms hardwired into us that make mechanisms hardwired into us that make mechanisms hardwired into us that make it especially hard to not eat the sweet it especially hard to not eat the sweet it especially hard to not eat the sweet thing, or to not eat the food that we're thing, or to not eat the food that we're thing, or to not eat the food that we're craving. And indeed, that's the case. We craving. And indeed, that's the case. We craving. And indeed, that's the case. We have two major accelerators. It's like a have two major accelerators. It's like a have two major accelerators. It's like a car with two accelerators, and we will car with two accelerators, and we will car with two accelerators, and we will talk about the brakes, but two ways that talk about the brakes, but two ways that talk about the brakes, but two ways that really get us into forward motion toward really get us into forward motion toward really get us into forward motion toward pursuing the consumption of sweet foods. pursuing the consumption of sweet foods. pursuing the consumption of sweet foods. Now, some of you have probably heard of Now, some of you have probably heard of Now, some of you have probably heard of the so-called glycemic index, which is the so-called glycemic index, which is the so-called glycemic index, which is basically a measurement of how high, and basically a measurement of how high, and basically a measurement of how high, and to some extent, how fast blood sugar to some extent, how fast blood sugar to some extent, how fast blood sugar rises in response to ingesting rises in response to ingesting rises in response to ingesting particular foods. And very broadly particular foods. And very broadly particular foods. And very broadly speaking, we can say that there are low speaking, we can say that there are low speaking, we can say that there are low glycemic index foods of less than 55, glycemic index foods of less than 55, glycemic index foods of less than 55, typically is the measurement, or medium typically is the measurement, or medium typically is the measurement, or medium glycemic index foods, which go from glycemic index foods, which go from glycemic index foods, which go from about 55 to 69, and then so-called high about 55 to 69, and then so-called high about 55 to 69, and then so-called high glycemic foods, which are above 70. And glycemic foods, which are above 70. And glycemic foods, which are above 70. And of course, there's additional nuance of course, there's additional nuance of course, there's additional nuance related to glycemic load, and many more related to glycemic load, and many more related to glycemic load, and many more features of the glycemic index. features of the glycemic index. features of the glycemic index. A couple of things to understand about A couple of things to understand about A couple of things to understand about how the glycemic index is measured, and how the glycemic index is measured, and how the glycemic index is measured, and then I'd like to just briefly talk about then I'd like to just briefly talk about then I'd like to just briefly talk about how the glycemic index can be leveraged how the glycemic index can be leveraged how the glycemic index can be leveraged to short-circuit some of the neural to short-circuit some of the neural to short-circuit some of the neural circuits that would otherwise lead us to circuits that would otherwise lead us to circuits that would otherwise lead us to crave and perhaps even ingest sugary crave and perhaps even ingest sugary crave and perhaps even ingest sugary foods. First of all, First of all, First of all, measurements of glycemic indices of food measurements of glycemic indices of food measurements of glycemic indices of food are typically made by having people are typically made by having people are typically made by having people ingest those foods in isolation. And in ingest those foods in isolation. And in ingest those foods in isolation. And in general, we can say that anytime we general, we can say that anytime we general, we can say that anytime we ingest fiber and or fat lipids along ingest fiber and or fat lipids along ingest fiber and or fat lipids along with a particular food, it will with a particular food, it will with a particular food, it will reduce the glycemic index of that reduce the glycemic index of that reduce the glycemic index of that particular food. Either the absolute particular food. Either the absolute particular food. Either the absolute level of blood glucose that a particular level of blood glucose that a particular level of blood glucose that a particular food causes or food causes or food causes or the rate at which that elevation in the rate at which that elevation in the rate at which that elevation in blood glucose occurs. Okay? And this is blood glucose occurs. Okay? And this is blood glucose occurs. Okay? And this is why there are some seemingly paradoxical why there are some seemingly paradoxical why there are some seemingly paradoxical aspects to sweet stuff in terms of the aspects to sweet stuff in terms of the aspects to sweet stuff in terms of the glycemic index. For instance, ice cream glycemic index. For instance, ice cream glycemic index. For instance, ice cream has a lower glycemic index provided it's has a lower glycemic index provided it's has a lower glycemic index provided it's ice cream that includes fat, which I ice cream that includes fat, which I ice cream that includes fat, which I hope it would cuz that's the good hope it would cuz that's the good hope it would cuz that's the good tasting ice cream in my opinion, tasting ice cream in my opinion, tasting ice cream in my opinion, compared to something like uh mangoes or compared to something like uh mangoes or compared to something like uh mangoes or table sugar. The glycemic index is not table sugar. The glycemic index is not table sugar. The glycemic index is not something to hold wholly in most cases something to hold wholly in most cases something to hold wholly in most cases because most people are not ingesting because most people are not ingesting because most people are not ingesting foods in isolation. Now, why am I foods in isolation. Now, why am I foods in isolation. Now, why am I telling you about the glycemic index? telling you about the glycemic index? telling you about the glycemic index? Well, if we zoom out and take our perspective if we zoom out and take our perspective if we zoom out and take our perspective on all of this discussion about the on all of this discussion about the on all of this discussion about the glycemic index through the lens of the glycemic index through the lens of the glycemic index through the lens of the nervous system, nervous system, nervous system, and we remind ourselves that neurons and we remind ourselves that neurons and we remind ourselves that neurons prefer glucose for energy and that all prefer glucose for energy and that all prefer glucose for energy and that all sweet things sweet things sweet things or things that we perceive as sweet, but or things that we perceive as sweet, but or things that we perceive as sweet, but also sweet things that are ingested and also sweet things that are ingested and also sweet things that are ingested and registered by those neuropod cells in registered by those neuropod cells in registered by those neuropod cells in our gut trigger the release of dopamine our gut trigger the release of dopamine our gut trigger the release of dopamine and trigger these neural circuits to and trigger these neural circuits to and trigger these neural circuits to make us want to eat more of these foods, make us want to eat more of these foods, make us want to eat more of these foods, what we start to realize is that a sharp what we start to realize is that a sharp what we start to realize is that a sharp rise in blood glucose or a very high rise in blood glucose or a very high rise in blood glucose or a very high degree of elevation in blood glucose is degree of elevation in blood glucose is degree of elevation in blood glucose is going to be a much more potent signal going to be a much more potent signal going to be a much more potent signal than will a more moderate rise in blood than will a more moderate rise in blood than will a more moderate rise in blood glucose or a slower rise in blood glucose. or a slower rise in blood glucose. or a slower rise in blood glucose. And so, for those of you that are trying And so, for those of you that are trying And so, for those of you that are trying to reduce sugar intake and you want to reduce sugar intake and you want to reduce sugar intake and you want to do that and you want to short circuit do that and you want to short circuit do that and you want to short circuit some of the dopamine release that's some of the dopamine release that's some of the dopamine release that's caused by ingesting sugary foods, it can be advantageous to ingest sweet it can be advantageous to ingest sweet it can be advantageous to ingest sweet foods in combination with foods that foods in combination with foods that foods in combination with foods that reduce glycemic index or reduce glycemic reduce glycemic index or reduce glycemic reduce glycemic index or reduce glycemic load. So, that might mean making load. So, that might mean making load. So, that might mean making different food choices. So, paying different food choices. So, paying different food choices. So, paying attention to sweet-tasting foods that attention to sweet-tasting foods that attention to sweet-tasting foods that can satisfy sugar cravings, but do not can satisfy sugar cravings, but do not can satisfy sugar cravings, but do not have as steep, or I should say do not have as steep, or I should say do not have as steep, or I should say do not cause a steeper rise in blood sugar. Or, cause a steeper rise in blood sugar. Or, cause a steeper rise in blood sugar. Or, it could mean consuming other foods it could mean consuming other foods it could mean consuming other foods along with sweet foods in order to along with sweet foods in order to along with sweet foods in order to reduce the glycemic index, and thereby reduce the glycemic index, and thereby reduce the glycemic index, and thereby slow or blunt the release of dopamine. slow or blunt the release of dopamine. slow or blunt the release of dopamine. So, if you really wanted to adjust your So, if you really wanted to adjust your So, if you really wanted to adjust your sugar cravings, and you really still sugar cravings, and you really still sugar cravings, and you really still want to ingest some sugary foods, you want to ingest some sugary foods, you want to ingest some sugary foods, you probably would better off combining probably would better off combining probably would better off combining fiber with that sugary or sweet food. fiber with that sugary or sweet food. fiber with that sugary or sweet food. So, what we're really talking about here So, what we're really talking about here So, what we're really talking about here is trying to reduce the dopamine signal is trying to reduce the dopamine signal is trying to reduce the dopamine signal that is the consequence of ingesting that is the consequence of ingesting that is the consequence of ingesting sweet foods. And we're talking about sweet foods. And we're talking about sweet foods. And we're talking about doing that through these different doing that through these different doing that through these different parallel pathways, not just by parallel pathways, not just by parallel pathways, not just by preventing sweet taste, but also by preventing sweet taste, but also by preventing sweet taste, but also by preventing the post-ingestive effects of preventing the post-ingestive effects of preventing the post-ingestive effects of sweet foods. sweet foods. sweet foods. And of course, the backdrop to all of And of course, the backdrop to all of And of course, the backdrop to all of this is that most of us, again, most of this is that most of us, again, most of this is that most of us, again, most of us, not all of us, should probably be us, not all of us, should probably be us, not all of us, should probably be ingesting fewer refined sugars. So, what ingesting fewer refined sugars. So, what ingesting fewer refined sugars. So, what are some ways that we can reduce our are some ways that we can reduce our are some ways that we can reduce our sugar cravings? sugar cravings? sugar cravings? And ideally, ways that we can do that And ideally, ways that we can do that And ideally, ways that we can do that also benefit us in other ways, both that also benefit us in other ways, both that also benefit us in other ways, both nutritionally and from the neuroscience nutritionally and from the neuroscience nutritionally and from the neuroscience standpoint. The fact that these neuropod standpoint. The fact that these neuropod standpoint. The fact that these neuropod cells, and I should say other neurons cells, and I should say other neurons cells, and I should say other neurons within the gut, respond very robustly to within the gut, respond very robustly to within the gut, respond very robustly to the presence of particular amino acids, the presence of particular amino acids, the presence of particular amino acids, is also a potential lever by which one is also a potential lever by which one is also a potential lever by which one could reduce sugar cravings. And there's could reduce sugar cravings. And there's could reduce sugar cravings. And there's an interesting literature around the an interesting literature around the an interesting literature around the amino acid glutamine, in particular amino acid glutamine, in particular amino acid glutamine, in particular supplementing with the amino acid supplementing with the amino acid supplementing with the amino acid glutamine as it relates to sugar glutamine as it relates to sugar glutamine as it relates to sugar cravings, and certainly as it relates to cravings, and certainly as it relates to cravings, and certainly as it relates to other aspects of the gut, in particular other aspects of the gut, in particular other aspects of the gut, in particular leaky gut. The use of supplemental leaky gut. The use of supplemental leaky gut. The use of supplemental glutamine to try and treat leaky gut is glutamine to try and treat leaky gut is glutamine to try and treat leaky gut is not a new phenomenon. There are other not a new phenomenon. There are other not a new phenomenon. There are other approaches, too, of course. But, approaches, too, of course. But, approaches, too, of course. But, there are many people who are there are many people who are there are many people who are experimenting with supplementing with experimenting with supplementing with experimenting with supplementing with glutamine, several grams per day, often glutamine, several grams per day, often glutamine, several grams per day, often even, you know, 5 g distributed through even, you know, 5 g distributed through even, you know, 5 g distributed through three or four different servings three or four different servings three or four different servings throughout the day, in as a way to blunt throughout the day, in as a way to blunt throughout the day, in as a way to blunt their sugar cravings. Now, there has not their sugar cravings. Now, there has not their sugar cravings. Now, there has not yet been a large-scale clinical trial yet been a large-scale clinical trial yet been a large-scale clinical trial using glutamine to reduce sugar using glutamine to reduce sugar using glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, but the results of the few cravings, but the results of the few cravings, but the results of the few studies that I looked at, as well as my studies that I looked at, as well as my studies that I looked at, as well as my understanding of the logic of these understanding of the logic of these understanding of the logic of these neural circuits, including the neuropod neural circuits, including the neuropod neural circuits, including the neuropod cells, brings us to a conclusion that it cells, brings us to a conclusion that it cells, brings us to a conclusion that it makes sense why, if there's a population makes sense why, if there's a population makes sense why, if there's a population of neurons within our gut that responds of neurons within our gut that responds of neurons within our gut that responds very robustly to the presence of sugar, very robustly to the presence of sugar, very robustly to the presence of sugar, fatty acids, or amino acids, that the fatty acids, or amino acids, that the fatty acids, or amino acids, that the intake of particular amino acids intake of particular amino acids intake of particular amino acids would allow the dopamine pathways that would allow the dopamine pathways that would allow the dopamine pathways that might otherwise be triggered by sugar to might otherwise be triggered by sugar to might otherwise be triggered by sugar to be triggered by something like be triggered by something like be triggered by something like glutamine, which has very few or no glutamine, which has very few or no glutamine, which has very few or no calories. I know some people who calories. I know some people who calories. I know some people who actually take glutamine and mix it with actually take glutamine and mix it with actually take glutamine and mix it with full-fat cream and take it kind of like full-fat cream and take it kind of like full-fat cream and take it kind of like a shot of full-fat cream, which sounds a shot of full-fat cream, which sounds a shot of full-fat cream, which sounds absolutely delicious, by the way. absolutely delicious, by the way. absolutely delicious, by the way. Glutamine is a little bit chalky, so Glutamine is a little bit chalky, so Glutamine is a little bit chalky, so it's not that great tasting to ingest it's not that great tasting to ingest it's not that great tasting to ingest with sugar. I should mention if you do with sugar. I should mention if you do with sugar. I should mention if you do try and take this approach of ingesting try and take this approach of ingesting try and take this approach of ingesting glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, you glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, you glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, you want to increase the amount of glutamine want to increase the amount of glutamine want to increase the amount of glutamine that you take somewhat gradually. It can that you take somewhat gradually. It can that you take somewhat gradually. It can create some gastric distress if you create some gastric distress if you create some gastric distress if you just, you know, I would certainly just, you know, I would certainly just, you know, I would certainly wouldn't take a big tablespoon of it, wouldn't take a big tablespoon of it, wouldn't take a big tablespoon of it, throw it in water, and chug it down throw it in water, and chug it down throw it in water, and chug it down three times a day. Please also realize three times a day. Please also realize three times a day. Please also realize that there's an entire literature that there's an entire literature that there's an entire literature devoted to the potential hazards of devoted to the potential hazards of devoted to the potential hazards of increasing glutamine if you have a increasing glutamine if you have a increasing glutamine if you have a pre-existing cancer. So, if you have pre-existing cancer. So, if you have pre-existing cancer. So, if you have cancer or you're cancer prone, I would cancer or you're cancer prone, I would cancer or you're cancer prone, I would really discourage you from this approach really discourage you from this approach really discourage you from this approach and in any case, as always, talk to your and in any case, as always, talk to your and in any case, as always, talk to your doctor. Now, there are other ways to doctor. Now, there are other ways to doctor. Now, there are other ways to reduce sugar craving, and there are reduce sugar craving, and there are reduce sugar craving, and there are certainly ways to reduce the sharp rise certainly ways to reduce the sharp rise certainly ways to reduce the sharp rise in blood glucose that can occur when we in blood glucose that can occur when we in blood glucose that can occur when we ingest sugary sweet foods or even just ingest sugary sweet foods or even just ingest sugary sweet foods or even just an abundance of carbohydrate foods. And an abundance of carbohydrate foods. And an abundance of carbohydrate foods. And there are huge number of these things. there are huge number of these things. there are huge number of these things. I'm going to sort of layer up through I'm going to sort of layer up through I'm going to sort of layer up through the ones that you might find in your the ones that you might find in your the ones that you might find in your cupboard at the grocery store, and then cupboard at the grocery store, and then cupboard at the grocery store, and then get into some of the more, um, get into some of the more, um, get into some of the more, um, extravagant, or I should say, um, extravagant, or I should say, um, extravagant, or I should say, um, esoteric ones, many of which, however, esoteric ones, many of which, however, esoteric ones, many of which, however, um, um can be quite potent. The first of um, um can be quite potent. The first of um, um can be quite potent. The first of which um is simple lemon juice, right? which um is simple lemon juice, right? which um is simple lemon juice, right? Or lime juice. Regardless, Or lime juice. Regardless, Or lime juice. Regardless, there are now data pointing to the fact there are now data pointing to the fact there are now data pointing to the fact that lemon juice and lime juice, that lemon juice and lime juice, that lemon juice and lime juice, a couple tablespoons or so, a couple tablespoons or so, a couple tablespoons or so, if ingested before or even during or if ingested before or even during or if ingested before or even during or even after consumption of sugary foods even after consumption of sugary foods even after consumption of sugary foods or I should say foods that sharply or I should say foods that sharply or I should say foods that sharply increase blood glucose or large increase blood glucose or large increase blood glucose or large carbohydrate meals can actually blunt carbohydrate meals can actually blunt carbohydrate meals can actually blunt the blood glucose response. And I did the blood glucose response. And I did the blood glucose response. And I did see that when I did my own experiments see that when I did my own experiments see that when I did my own experiments on myself with continuous glucose on myself with continuous glucose on myself with continuous glucose monitor. It was kind of fun to do those exper- It was kind of fun to do those exper- It was kind of fun to do those exper- experiments. Um I preferred to do those experiments. Um I preferred to do those experiments. Um I preferred to do those experiments by eating somewhat larger experiments by eating somewhat larger experiments by eating somewhat larger meals of things that didn't contain a meals of things that didn't contain a meals of things that didn't contain a lot of sugar. I saw some big increases lot of sugar. I saw some big increases lot of sugar. I saw some big increases in blood glucose in certain instances, in blood glucose in certain instances, in blood glucose in certain instances, and then I would ingest some lemon and then I would ingest some lemon and then I would ingest some lemon juice or lime juice, typically mixed in juice or lime juice, typically mixed in juice or lime juice, typically mixed in with water, and sure enough, you could with water, and sure enough, you could with water, and sure enough, you could see a blunting of the blood glucose see a blunting of the blood glucose see a blunting of the blood glucose response. And of course, this was response. And of course, this was response. And of course, this was real-time continuous, hence continuous real-time continuous, hence continuous real-time continuous, hence continuous blood glucose monitoring. When you blood glucose monitoring. When you blood glucose monitoring. When you ingest lemon juice or lime juice, the ingest lemon juice or lime juice, the ingest lemon juice or lime juice, the mechanism by which it blunts blood mechanism by which it blunts blood mechanism by which it blunts blood glucose is probably twofold. One is glucose is probably twofold. One is glucose is probably twofold. One is probably through the post-ingestive probably through the post-ingestive probably through the post-ingestive effects of glucose in the gut, meaning effects of glucose in the gut, meaning effects of glucose in the gut, meaning the way in which sugars the way in which sugars the way in which sugars are interacting with neurons and other are interacting with neurons and other are interacting with neurons and other components of your gut circuitry to components of your gut circuitry to components of your gut circuitry to impact things like gastric emptying time, to things like gastric emptying time, to things like gastric emptying time, to impact things like impact things like impact things like the firing of those neuropod cells and the firing of those neuropod cells and the firing of those neuropod cells and their signaling to the brain. But almost their signaling to the brain. But almost their signaling to the brain. But almost certainly, it has something to do also certainly, it has something to do also certainly, it has something to do also with the perception of sour taste on the with the perception of sour taste on the with the perception of sour taste on the tongue. We didn't go into this too much tongue. We didn't go into this too much tongue. We didn't go into this too much today, but today, but today, but you of course don't just have sweet you of course don't just have sweet you of course don't just have sweet taste receptors in your mouth. You also taste receptors in your mouth. You also taste receptors in your mouth. You also have bitter taste receptors, you have bitter taste receptors, you have bitter taste receptors, you have salty taste receptors, you have sour salty taste receptors, you have sour salty taste receptors, you have sour taste receptors in your mouth and on taste receptors in your mouth and on taste receptors in your mouth and on your and of course, that means your and of course, that means your and of course, that means your tongue and palate. And those are tongue and palate. And those are tongue and palate. And those are interacting. If you ingest a substance interacting. If you ingest a substance interacting. If you ingest a substance that's just sweet or mostly sweet, that's just sweet or mostly sweet, that's just sweet or mostly sweet, that causes a certain set of effects on that causes a certain set of effects on that causes a certain set of effects on your blood glucose, but also your brain, your blood glucose, but also your brain, your blood glucose, but also your brain, dopamine, and the other neural circuits dopamine, and the other neural circuits dopamine, and the other neural circuits of your brain. of your brain. of your brain. If you also ingest something that's If you also ingest something that's If you also ingest something that's sour, like lemon juice or lime juice, it like lemon juice or lime juice, it like lemon juice or lime juice, it adjusts the output of those neural adjusts the output of those neural adjusts the output of those neural circuits in your brain. So, again, we circuits in your brain. So, again, we circuits in your brain. So, again, we have a situation we have two parallel have a situation we have two parallel have a situation we have two parallel pathways, one that's post-ingestive pathways, one that's post-ingestive pathways, one that's post-ingestive coming from phenomena within our gut coming from phenomena within our gut coming from phenomena within our gut neurons, but also things like gastric neurons, but also things like gastric neurons, but also things like gastric emptying time, the clearance and the emptying time, the clearance and the emptying time, the clearance and the transfer of transfer of transfer of food and the conversion of food into food and the conversion of food into food and the conversion of food into particular nutrients and the circulation particular nutrients and the circulation particular nutrients and the circulation of glucose in your bloodstream and how of glucose in your bloodstream and how of glucose in your bloodstream and how it gets into the brain, but also simply it gets into the brain, but also simply it gets into the brain, but also simply by ingesting something sour, by ingesting something sour, by ingesting something sour, you are changing the way that sweet you are changing the way that sweet you are changing the way that sweet things impact your brain. And so, I think it impact your brain. And so, I think it impact your brain. And so, I think it stands to reason that the lemon juice, stands to reason that the lemon juice, stands to reason that the lemon juice, lime juice effect is not going to be lime juice effect is not going to be lime juice effect is not going to be magic, it's going to have everything to magic, it's going to have everything to magic, it's going to have everything to do with the way that ingesting sour do with the way that ingesting sour do with the way that ingesting sour foods can adjust the neural response to foods can adjust the neural response to foods can adjust the neural response to taste of sweet foods. And in fact, we taste of sweet foods. And in fact, we taste of sweet foods. And in fact, we know, based on the beautiful work of know, based on the beautiful work of know, based on the beautiful work of Charles Zucker at Columbia Charles Zucker at Columbia Charles Zucker at Columbia Medical School, that that's exactly what Medical School, that that's exactly what Medical School, that that's exactly what happens. Now, some of you have probably happens. Now, some of you have probably happens. Now, some of you have probably heard that cinnamon can be a useful tool heard that cinnamon can be a useful tool heard that cinnamon can be a useful tool for controlling blood sugar, and indeed, for controlling blood sugar, and indeed, for controlling blood sugar, and indeed, that's the case. that's the case. that's the case. It's very clear that cinnamon can adjust It's very clear that cinnamon can adjust It's very clear that cinnamon can adjust the rate of glucose entry into the rate of glucose entry into the rate of glucose entry into the bloodstream, possibly by changing um the rate of possibly by changing um the rate of possibly by changing um the rate of gastric emptying. It might slow the rate gastric emptying. It might slow the rate gastric emptying. It might slow the rate of gastric emptying and thereby also of gastric emptying and thereby also of gastric emptying and thereby also reduce the glycemic index of particular reduce the glycemic index of particular reduce the glycemic index of particular foods. So, I suppose if I were going to foods. So, I suppose if I were going to foods. So, I suppose if I were going to eat a mango and I hadn't just done a eat a mango and I hadn't just done a eat a mango and I hadn't just done a bunch of hard training, I might sprinkle bunch of hard training, I might sprinkle bunch of hard training, I might sprinkle some cinnamon on it. You know, I always some cinnamon on it. You know, I always some cinnamon on it. You know, I always enjoy kind of coming up with new ideas enjoy kind of coming up with new ideas enjoy kind of coming up with new ideas of ways that I can eat foods during of ways that I can eat foods during of ways that I can eat foods during these podcasts. I do want to provide a these podcasts. I do want to provide a these podcasts. I do want to provide a cautionary note about cinnamon, however. cautionary note about cinnamon, however. cautionary note about cinnamon, however. Cinnamon contains something called Cinnamon contains something called Cinnamon contains something called coumadin, which coumadin, which coumadin, which can be toxic at high levels. So, you can be toxic at high levels. So, you can be toxic at high levels. So, you don't want to ingest more than about a don't want to ingest more than about a don't want to ingest more than about a teaspoon, maybe a teaspoon and a half of teaspoon, maybe a teaspoon and a half of teaspoon, maybe a teaspoon and a half of cinnamon per day, cinnamon per day, cinnamon per day, because you'll start to exceed the because you'll start to exceed the because you'll start to exceed the threshold at which cinnamon could start threshold at which cinnamon could start threshold at which cinnamon could start to be problematic. So, we've talked to be problematic. So, we've talked to be problematic. So, we've talked about lemon juice and lime juice and about lemon juice and lime juice and about lemon juice and lime juice and cinnamon. These are kind of commonplace cinnamon. These are kind of commonplace cinnamon. These are kind of commonplace in many kitchens. in many kitchens. in many kitchens. Then, of course, we can venture into the Then, of course, we can venture into the Then, of course, we can venture into the more esoteric, or I would say the more esoteric, or I would say the more esoteric, or I would say the more advanced tools for adjusting sugar advanced tools for adjusting sugar advanced tools for adjusting sugar intake. The one that comes to mind is, intake. The one that comes to mind is, intake. The one that comes to mind is, of course, berberine. Using berberine is of course, berberine. Using berberine is of course, berberine. Using berberine is a serious step. You should absolutely a serious step. You should absolutely a serious step. You should absolutely talk to your doctor about it. It is true talk to your doctor about it. It is true talk to your doctor about it. It is true that if you ingest berberine, your blood that if you ingest berberine, your blood that if you ingest berberine, your blood glucose will plummet. And I point that glucose will plummet. And I point that glucose will plummet. And I point that out because I've actually tried it out because I've actually tried it out because I've actually tried it before. It gave me brutal headaches, and before. It gave me brutal headaches, and before. It gave me brutal headaches, and I felt really dizzy, and I felt like I felt really dizzy, and I felt like I felt really dizzy, and I felt like I couldn't see straight. And actually, I couldn't see straight. And actually, I couldn't see straight. And actually, I couldn't see straight. Why did it do couldn't see straight. Why did it do couldn't see straight. Why did it do that? Well, it made me hypoglycemic. It that? Well, it made me hypoglycemic. It that? Well, it made me hypoglycemic. It actually drove my blood glucose down too actually drove my blood glucose down too actually drove my blood glucose down too far. And the reason it did that is that far. And the reason it did that is that far. And the reason it did that is that I took berberine on an empty stomach. If I took berberine on an empty stomach. If I took berberine on an empty stomach. If I took berberine along with a very large I took berberine along with a very large I took berberine along with a very large meal that included a lot of meal that included a lot of meal that included a lot of carbohydrates, then I felt perfectly carbohydrates, then I felt perfectly carbohydrates, then I felt perfectly fine on even up to 750 mg or a gram of fine on even up to 750 mg or a gram of fine on even up to 750 mg or a gram of berberine. But again, talk to your berberine. But again, talk to your berberine. But again, talk to your doctor. I would place berberine, and of doctor. I would place berberine, and of doctor. I would place berberine, and of course, metformin and glyburide in the course, metformin and glyburide in the course, metformin and glyburide in the kind of the heavy-hitting, potent tools kind of the heavy-hitting, potent tools kind of the heavy-hitting, potent tools for regulating blood glucose. for regulating blood glucose. for regulating blood glucose. And there are some other substances like And there are some other substances like And there are some other substances like sodium caprate, which are known to sodium caprate, which are known to sodium caprate, which are known to augment the effects of berberine via the augment the effects of berberine via the augment the effects of berberine via the AMPK pathways. They basically can AMPK pathways. They basically can AMPK pathways. They basically can increase the ability for berberine to increase the ability for berberine to increase the ability for berberine to have its glucose-lowering actions. But have its glucose-lowering actions. But have its glucose-lowering actions. But that, of course, is getting into the that, of course, is getting into the that, of course, is getting into the really potent, what I would call sharp really potent, what I would call sharp really potent, what I would call sharp blade tools for controlling blood blade tools for controlling blood blade tools for controlling blood glucose. And listen, anytime you're glucose. And listen, anytime you're glucose. And listen, anytime you're dealing with blood glucose, you are dealing with blood glucose, you are dealing with blood glucose, you are dealing with the brain's preferred dealing with the brain's preferred dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel. And anytime you're source of fuel. And anytime you're source of fuel. And anytime you're dealing with the brain's preferred dealing with the brain's preferred dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel, you have to be source of fuel, you have to be source of fuel, you have to be especially cautious about depriving the especially cautious about depriving the especially cautious about depriving the brain of what it needs. These substances brain of what it needs. These substances brain of what it needs. These substances like berberine are very, very potent, like berberine are very, very potent, like berberine are very, very potent, and you need to take them seriously. and you need to take them seriously. and you need to take them seriously. There is yet another tool for There is yet another tool for There is yet another tool for controlling sugar cravings and the controlling sugar cravings and the controlling sugar cravings and the neural circuits that regulate sugar neural circuits that regulate sugar neural circuits that regulate sugar craving and its downstream consequences. craving and its downstream consequences. craving and its downstream consequences. And this tool is what I would call a And this tool is what I would call a And this tool is what I would call a high-performance tool, but it's one that high-performance tool, but it's one that high-performance tool, but it's one that you probably didn't suspect, and that's you probably didn't suspect, and that's you probably didn't suspect, and that's sleep. I've done extensive episodes sleep. I've done extensive episodes sleep. I've done extensive episodes about sleep. We actually have an episode about sleep. We actually have an episode about sleep. We actually have an episode called Master Your Sleep. You can find called Master Your Sleep. You can find called Master Your Sleep. You can find that episode easily at hubermanlab.com. that episode easily at hubermanlab.com. that episode easily at hubermanlab.com. It's available on all the various It's available on all the various It's available on all the various formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc. formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc. formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc. And provides a lot of tools and on And provides a lot of tools and on And provides a lot of tools and on social media I provide a lot of tools. social media I provide a lot of tools. social media I provide a lot of tools. What is the role of sleep in What is the role of sleep in What is the role of sleep in sugar metabolism, sugar hunger, and the way metabolism, sugar hunger, and the way metabolism, sugar hunger, and the way that the brain regulates those things? that the brain regulates those things? that the brain regulates those things? Well, there's a really exciting study Well, there's a really exciting study Well, there's a really exciting study that came out just last year. that came out just last year. that came out just last year. The study was published in the journal The study was published in the journal The study was published in the journal Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. The reason I love excellent journal. The reason I love excellent journal. The reason I love this study so much is it involved having this study so much is it involved having this study so much is it involved having people, so yes, this was done in humans, people, so yes, this was done in humans, people, so yes, this was done in humans, sleep in the laboratory. That's not sleep in the laboratory. That's not sleep in the laboratory. That's not unusual, there's a sleep lab at unusual, there's a sleep lab at unusual, there's a sleep lab at Stanford, there's sleep labs elsewhere. Stanford, there's sleep labs elsewhere. Stanford, there's sleep labs elsewhere. What they did was they actually measured What they did was they actually measured What they did was they actually measured from the breath of these people, and from the breath of these people, and from the breath of these people, and they extracted from their breath the they extracted from their breath the they extracted from their breath the metabolites that would allow them to metabolites that would allow them to metabolites that would allow them to understand what sorts of metabolism was understand what sorts of metabolism was understand what sorts of metabolism was occurring in these people's bodies at occurring in these people's bodies at occurring in these people's bodies at different phases of sleep. They actually different phases of sleep. They actually different phases of sleep. They actually did this did this did this every 10 seconds throughout the entire every 10 seconds throughout the entire every 10 seconds throughout the entire night. What they discovered was that night. What they discovered was that night. What they discovered was that each stage of sleep each stage of sleep each stage of sleep was associated with a very particular was associated with a very particular was associated with a very particular signature pattern of metabolism. signature pattern of metabolism. signature pattern of metabolism. And particular phases of sleep are And particular phases of sleep are And particular phases of sleep are associated with sugar metabolism or more associated with sugar metabolism or more associated with sugar metabolism or more with fat metabolism or more with other with fat metabolism or more with other with fat metabolism or more with other aspects of metabolism. And aspects of metabolism. And aspects of metabolism. And the reason why I think this study is the reason why I think this study is the reason why I think this study is important to discuss in the context of important to discuss in the context of important to discuss in the context of today's discussion about sugar in the today's discussion about sugar in the today's discussion about sugar in the brain is that many people have brain is that many people have brain is that many people have experienced the effects of disrupted sleep on their the effects of disrupted sleep on their the effects of disrupted sleep on their appetite, and in particular it's been appetite, and in particular it's been appetite, and in particular it's been reported that when people are sleep reported that when people are sleep reported that when people are sleep deprived or the quality of their sleep deprived or the quality of their sleep deprived or the quality of their sleep is disrupted, their appetite for sugary is disrupted, their appetite for sugary is disrupted, their appetite for sugary foods increases. Now, we don't want to foods increases. Now, we don't want to foods increases. Now, we don't want to leap too far from this study to sugar leap too far from this study to sugar leap too far from this study to sugar metabolism and the neural circuits metabolism and the neural circuits metabolism and the neural circuits controlling sugar metabolism, but I will controlling sugar metabolism, but I will controlling sugar metabolism, but I will say this. There say this. There say this. There is now a plethora of data pointing to is now a plethora of data pointing to is now a plethora of data pointing to the fact that getting quality sleep each the fact that getting quality sleep each the fact that getting quality sleep each night helps regulate not only appetite, night helps regulate not only appetite, night helps regulate not only appetite, but also the specific forms of but also the specific forms of but also the specific forms of metabolism that drive specific metabolism that drive specific metabolism that drive specific appetites. So, we can't overstate the appetites. So, we can't overstate the appetites. So, we can't overstate the importance of getting regular importance of getting regular importance of getting regular sufficient amount of high-quality sleep sufficient amount of high-quality sleep sufficient amount of high-quality sleep at least 80% of the time, not just for at least 80% of the time, not just for at least 80% of the time, not just for sake of immune system function, for sake of immune system function, for sake of immune system function, for clear thinking, etc., but also for clear thinking, etc., but also for clear thinking, etc., but also for properly regulating our metabolism, properly regulating our metabolism, properly regulating our metabolism, including our sugar metabolism. Thank including our sugar metabolism. Thank including our sugar metabolism. Thank you for joining me for this discussion you for joining me for this discussion you for joining me for this discussion about sugar and the nervous system and about sugar and the nervous system and about sugar and the nervous system and how they are regulating each other in how they are regulating each other in how they are regulating each other in both the brain and body. And last, but both the brain and body. And last, but both the brain and body. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.