Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now for Stanford School of Medicine. And now for Stanford School of Medicine. And now for my discussion with Dr. Nolan Williams. my discussion with Dr. Nolan Williams. my discussion with Dr. Nolan Williams. Thanks for joining today. I'm really Thanks for joining today. I'm really Thanks for joining today. I'm really excited to have this conversation. I excited to have this conversation. I excited to have this conversation. I have a lot of questions about different have a lot of questions about different have a lot of questions about different compounds, psychedelics in particular. compounds, psychedelics in particular. compounds, psychedelics in particular. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But before we get into that discussion, &gt;&gt; But before we get into that discussion, &gt;&gt; But before we get into that discussion, I want to ask you about depression, I want to ask you about depression, I want to ask you about depression, broadly speaking. broadly speaking. broadly speaking. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; I heard you say in a wonderful talk that &gt;&gt; I heard you say in a wonderful talk that &gt;&gt; I heard you say in a wonderful talk that you gave that depression perhaps the you gave that depression perhaps the you gave that depression perhaps the most debilitating condition worldwide. most debilitating condition worldwide. most debilitating condition worldwide. Yet in contrast to other medical Yet in contrast to other medical Yet in contrast to other medical conditions like cancer, we actually have conditions like cancer, we actually have conditions like cancer, we actually have a fairly limited number of tools to a fairly limited number of tools to a fairly limited number of tools to approach depression. And yet the number approach depression. And yet the number approach depression. And yet the number of tools and the potency of those tools of tools and the potency of those tools of tools and the potency of those tools is growing. is growing. is growing. &gt;&gt; Depression is u the most disabling &gt;&gt; Depression is u the most disabling &gt;&gt; Depression is u the most disabling condition worldwide. Um what's condition worldwide. Um what's condition worldwide. Um what's interesting about depression is it's interesting about depression is it's interesting about depression is it's both a risk factor um for other both a risk factor um for other both a risk factor um for other illnesses and it makes other medical and illnesses and it makes other medical and illnesses and it makes other medical and psychiatric illnesses worse. Right? So psychiatric illnesses worse. Right? So psychiatric illnesses worse. Right? So recently the American Heart Association recently the American Heart Association recently the American Heart Association added depression as the fourth uh major added depression as the fourth uh major added depression as the fourth uh major risk factor for coronary artery disease. risk factor for coronary artery disease. risk factor for coronary artery disease. Right? So alongside the risk factors Right? So alongside the risk factors Right? So alongside the risk factors that we know hypertension, high blood that we know hypertension, high blood that we know hypertension, high blood pressure, hyper lipidmia, high pressure, hyper lipidmia, high pressure, hyper lipidmia, high cholesterol and diabetes, you know, high cholesterol and diabetes, you know, high cholesterol and diabetes, you know, high blood sugar, those three have been on blood sugar, those three have been on blood sugar, those three have been on the list for a long time and depression the list for a long time and depression the list for a long time and depression end up, you know, being added to the end up, you know, being added to the end up, you know, being added to the list as the fourth one. A lot of what list as the fourth one. A lot of what list as the fourth one. A lot of what we're doing in the lab actually is um is we're doing in the lab actually is um is we're doing in the lab actually is um is measuring kind of brain heart measuring kind of brain heart measuring kind of brain heart connections and we can actually with connections and we can actually with connections and we can actually with transcranial magnetic stimulation a form transcranial magnetic stimulation a form transcranial magnetic stimulation a form of brain stimulation we can actually of brain stimulation we can actually of brain stimulation we can actually decelerate the heart rate we can capture decelerate the heart rate we can capture decelerate the heart rate we can capture that heart rate deceleration um over the that heart rate deceleration um over the that heart rate deceleration um over the mood regulatory regions and so actually mood regulatory regions and so actually mood regulatory regions and so actually a direct probe of that connection. We've a direct probe of that connection. We've a direct probe of that connection. We've been very interested in a very been very interested in a very been very interested in a very particular um clinical set of problems particular um clinical set of problems particular um clinical set of problems around the most severe and the most around the most severe and the most around the most severe and the most high acuity settings that folks with high acuity settings that folks with high acuity settings that folks with depression end up being in and that's in depression end up being in and that's in depression end up being in and that's in you know emergency settings where they you know emergency settings where they you know emergency settings where they go into inpatient units. the field go into inpatient units. the field go into inpatient units. the field really hasn't developed a way of um you really hasn't developed a way of um you really hasn't developed a way of um you know consistently being able to treat know consistently being able to treat know consistently being able to treat that problem and folks end up getting that problem and folks end up getting that problem and folks end up getting the same standard oral anti-depressants the same standard oral anti-depressants the same standard oral anti-depressants that they've been getting outpatient and that they've been getting outpatient and that they've been getting outpatient and I came to this because I've you know and I came to this because I've you know and I came to this because I've you know dual trained as a neurologist and dual trained as a neurologist and dual trained as a neurologist and psychiatrist went back and forth between psychiatrist went back and forth between psychiatrist went back and forth between neurology and psychiatry saw that in neurology and psychiatry saw that in neurology and psychiatry saw that in neurology we have all of these ways of neurology we have all of these ways of neurology we have all of these ways of treating acute brainbased problems and treating acute brainbased problems and treating acute brainbased problems and really wanted to emulate that in really wanted to emulate that in really wanted to emulate that in psychiatry and find ways to develop and psychiatry and find ways to develop and psychiatry and find ways to develop and engineer new, you know, brainbased engineer new, you know, brainbased engineer new, you know, brainbased solutions. &gt;&gt; Many people out there probably think of &gt;&gt; Many people out there probably think of &gt;&gt; Many people out there probably think of the relationship between the heart the relationship between the heart the relationship between the heart and the mind as kind of woo or kind of a and the mind as kind of woo or kind of a and the mind as kind of woo or kind of a soft biology. But here you're talking a soft biology. But here you're talking a soft biology. But here you're talking about an actual physical connection. about an actual physical connection. about an actual physical connection. &gt;&gt; Y what area of the brain is it? &gt;&gt; Y what area of the brain is it? &gt;&gt; Y what area of the brain is it? &gt;&gt; You know, the first place where the &gt;&gt; You know, the first place where the &gt;&gt; You know, the first place where the stimulation goes is called the stimulation goes is called the stimulation goes is called the dorsalateral prefrontal cortex. It's dorsalateral prefrontal cortex. It's dorsalateral prefrontal cortex. It's kind of the sense of control kind of kind of the sense of control kind of kind of the sense of control kind of governor of the brain. And then it'll governor of the brain. And then it'll governor of the brain. And then it'll and then what we know is that when you and then what we know is that when you and then what we know is that when you use a magnet kind of what we call use a magnet kind of what we call use a magnet kind of what we call Faraday's law this idea of um using a Faraday's law this idea of um using a Faraday's law this idea of um using a magnetic pulse to induce uh an magnetic pulse to induce uh an magnetic pulse to induce uh an electrical current in electrically electrical current in electrically electrical current in electrically conducting substances. So in this case conducting substances. So in this case conducting substances. So in this case brain tissue but not skull or sk sc brain tissue but not skull or sk sc brain tissue but not skull or sk sc scalp or any of that or hair you avoid scalp or any of that or hair you avoid scalp or any of that or hair you avoid all that just the brain tissue. Then you all that just the brain tissue. Then you all that just the brain tissue. Then you have a direct depolarization of cortical have a direct depolarization of cortical have a direct depolarization of cortical neurons, you know, the surface of the neurons, you know, the surface of the neurons, you know, the surface of the brain's neurons in this dorsal brain's neurons in this dorsal brain's neurons in this dorsal prefrontal. And if you do that in the prefrontal. And if you do that in the prefrontal. And if you do that in the actual scanner, which we can do, you can actual scanner, which we can do, you can actual scanner, which we can do, you can see that distributes down into the see that distributes down into the see that distributes down into the anterior singulate in the insula and the anterior singulate in the insula and the anterior singulate in the insula and the amydala and ultimately the tract goes amydala and ultimately the tract goes amydala and ultimately the tract goes into something called the nucleus tract into something called the nucleus tract into something called the nucleus tract of solitarius and ultimately into the of solitarius and ultimately into the of solitarius and ultimately into the vagus nerve into the heart. So the vagus nerve into the heart. So the vagus nerve into the heart. So the heart uh very consistently seems to be heart uh very consistently seems to be heart uh very consistently seems to be the end organ of the uh dorsal the end organ of the uh dorsal the end organ of the uh dorsal prefrontal cortex and if you do that prefrontal cortex and if you do that prefrontal cortex and if you do that over visual cortex you don't get that or over visual cortex you don't get that or over visual cortex you don't get that or motor cortex you don't get any of those motor cortex you don't get any of those motor cortex you don't get any of those findings it's really specific to this findings it's really specific to this findings it's really specific to this kind of control region of the brain and kind of control region of the brain and kind of control region of the brain and so yeah it seems to you know it's our so yeah it seems to you know it's our so yeah it seems to you know it's our work other folks work Martin ARS work other folks work Martin ARS work other folks work Martin ARS in um in Europe uh the Netherlands in um in Europe uh the Netherlands in um in Europe uh the Netherlands work showing the same connections I work showing the same connections I work showing the same connections I think it's been replicated like four or think it's been replicated like four or think it's been replicated like four or five times where I think TMS is really five times where I think TMS is really five times where I think TMS is really interesting. Actually, we had a lot of interesting. Actually, we had a lot of interesting. Actually, we had a lot of patients who've told me like my patients who've told me like my patients who've told me like my therapist told me that I wasn't trying therapist told me that I wasn't trying therapist told me that I wasn't trying hard enough in therapy. These are, you hard enough in therapy. These are, you hard enough in therapy. These are, you know, moderate to pretty severe know, moderate to pretty severe know, moderate to pretty severe depressed patients. And as soon as we depressed patients. And as soon as we depressed patients. And as soon as we get them well with the TMS get them well with the TMS get them well with the TMS approaches, you know, kind of rapid, you approaches, you know, kind of rapid, you approaches, you know, kind of rapid, you know, 5day approach, and the next week know, 5day approach, and the next week know, 5day approach, and the next week we come in and see them and they'll say, we come in and see them and they'll say, we come in and see them and they'll say, you know what I did all weekend is I you know what I did all weekend is I you know what I did all weekend is I looked at my therapy books and now I can looked at my therapy books and now I can looked at my therapy books and now I can understand it. And so, you know, I understand it. And so, you know, I understand it. And so, you know, I actually see TMS as a way of having kind actually see TMS as a way of having kind actually see TMS as a way of having kind of exogenous sorts of cognitive of exogenous sorts of cognitive of exogenous sorts of cognitive functions that in milder forms of functions that in milder forms of functions that in milder forms of depression, we can pull off with depression, we can pull off with depression, we can pull off with psychotherapy. You know, this idea of psychotherapy. You know, this idea of psychotherapy. You know, this idea of being able to kind of turn that being able to kind of turn that being able to kind of turn that prefrontal cortex on and have it govern prefrontal cortex on and have it govern prefrontal cortex on and have it govern these deeper regions. In depression, the these deeper regions. In depression, the these deeper regions. In depression, the deeper regions govern the prefrontal deeper regions govern the prefrontal deeper regions govern the prefrontal cortex. In one case, it's like the coach cortex. In one case, it's like the coach cortex. In one case, it's like the coach telling the player what to do and in the telling the player what to do and in the telling the player what to do and in the other case it's like a player telling other case it's like a player telling other case it's like a player telling the coach what to do and you restore the coach what to do and you restore the coach what to do and you restore order to the game. order to the game. order to the game. &gt;&gt; You restore order to the game and what &gt;&gt; You restore order to the game and what &gt;&gt; You restore order to the game and what it looks like is depression is a bunch it looks like is depression is a bunch it looks like is depression is a bunch of kind of spontaneous content that's of kind of spontaneous content that's of kind of spontaneous content that's semi valitional that's being kind of semi valitional that's being kind of semi valitional that's being kind of generated out of this conflict um generated out of this conflict um generated out of this conflict um detection system. the singulate. In detection system. the singulate. In detection system. the singulate. In depression, it looks like the left depression, it looks like the left depression, it looks like the left dorsal lateral does not sufficiently dorsal lateral does not sufficiently dorsal lateral does not sufficiently clamp down on it. And what therapy clamp down on it. And what therapy clamp down on it. And what therapy appears to do is to kind of restore appears to do is to kind of restore appears to do is to kind of restore that. What we see with TMS over that that. What we see with TMS over that that. What we see with TMS over that region is that we just exogenously do region is that we just exogenously do region is that we just exogenously do the same sort of thing. We restore the same sort of thing. We restore the same sort of thing. We restore the governance of the left dorsal lateral governance of the left dorsal lateral governance of the left dorsal lateral over the singulate area and that is over the singulate area and that is over the singulate area and that is correlated with treatment improvement. correlated with treatment improvement. correlated with treatment improvement. So the degree in which you can re- time So the degree in which you can re- time So the degree in which you can re- time or reeregulate in time the left dorsal or reeregulate in time the left dorsal or reeregulate in time the left dorsal lateral over the singulate, the more of lateral over the singulate, the more of lateral over the singulate, the more of an anti-depressant effect you have. TMS an anti-depressant effect you have. TMS an anti-depressant effect you have. TMS is almost like exercise for the brain, is almost like exercise for the brain, is almost like exercise for the brain, right? You're kind of exercising this right? You're kind of exercising this right? You're kind of exercising this region over and over again with a region over and over again with a region over and over again with a physiologically relevant signal and kind physiologically relevant signal and kind physiologically relevant signal and kind of turning that system on. And what's of turning that system on. And what's of turning that system on. And what's interesting for this show is, you know, interesting for this show is, you know, interesting for this show is, you know, we had a couple of folks um you know, we had a couple of folks um you know, we had a couple of folks um you know, probably five or six folks that have probably five or six folks that have probably five or six folks that have actually told me this where if they actually told me this where if they actually told me this where if they remit early enough in the week, we have remit early enough in the week, we have remit early enough in the week, we have this very dense stimulation approach this very dense stimulation approach this very dense stimulation approach where we can stimulate people really where we can stimulate people really where we can stimulate people really rapidly over a 5day block. By Wednesday, rapidly over a 5day block. By Wednesday, rapidly over a 5day block. By Wednesday, they're like totally zero down on the they're like totally zero down on the they're like totally zero down on the depression scales, you know, even better depression scales, you know, even better depression scales, you know, even better than most people walking around, like than most people walking around, like than most people walking around, like really no anxiety, no depression or really no anxiety, no depression or really no anxiety, no depression or anything. By Thursday, the first guy anything. By Thursday, the first guy anything. By Thursday, the first guy that told me this, he came in and that told me this, he came in and that told me this, he came in and he said, "You know, I was driving back he said, "You know, I was driving back he said, "You know, I was driving back to my hotel and I decided to go to the to my hotel and I decided to go to the to my hotel and I decided to go to the beach and I just sat there and I was beach and I just sat there and I was beach and I just sat there and I was totally present in the present moment totally present in the present moment totally present in the present moment for an hour." And he's like, "I read for an hour." And he's like, "I read for an hour." And he's like, "I read about this in my mindfulness books, but about this in my mindfulness books, but about this in my mindfulness books, but I experienced it last night and I've I experienced it last night and I've I experienced it last night and I've never experienced anything like this never experienced anything like this never experienced anything like this before." And I was like, "hm, that's before." And I was like, "hm, that's before." And I was like, "hm, that's interesting, but kind of wasn't sure." interesting, but kind of wasn't sure." interesting, but kind of wasn't sure." And then and then I didn't tell any, you And then and then I didn't tell any, you And then and then I didn't tell any, you know, obviously any more patients about know, obviously any more patients about know, obviously any more patients about that. And then about five over the last that. And then about five over the last that. And then about five over the last couple of years when they get they were couple of years when they get they were couple of years when they get they were mid early in the week by the end of the mid early in the week by the end of the mid early in the week by the end of the week they're like going to the beach and week they're like going to the beach and week they're like going to the beach and they're like totally having a what they're like totally having a what they're like totally having a what people describe as a pretty mindful people describe as a pretty mindful people describe as a pretty mindful present moment sort of experience which present moment sort of experience which present moment sort of experience which is really interesting you know what that is really interesting you know what that is really interesting you know what that is. I mean, I don't have full-on is. I mean, I don't have full-on is. I mean, I don't have full-on scientific data to tell you, but it it's scientific data to tell you, but it it's scientific data to tell you, but it it's just it's a it's an interesting just it's a it's an interesting just it's a it's an interesting anecdote, right, that folks when anecdote, right, that folks when anecdote, right, that folks when you push them through this point of you push them through this point of you push them through this point of feeling kind of clinically well that feeling kind of clinically well that feeling kind of clinically well that some people end up reporting this some people end up reporting this some people end up reporting this additional set of features. So, additional set of features. So, additional set of features. So, &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that before we dive &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that before we dive &gt;&gt; I want to make sure that before we dive into ketamine and psilocybin that we do into ketamine and psilocybin that we do into ketamine and psilocybin that we do touch on SSRI, selective serotonin touch on SSRI, selective serotonin touch on SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, because we can't reuptake inhibitors, because we can't reuptake inhibitors, because we can't really have a discussion about really have a discussion about really have a discussion about depression without talking about SSRIs. depression without talking about SSRIs. depression without talking about SSRIs. My understanding is that the SSRIs are My understanding is that the SSRIs are My understanding is that the SSRIs are powerfully effective for certain forms powerfully effective for certain forms powerfully effective for certain forms of obsessive obsessivempulsive disorder of obsessive obsessivempulsive disorder of obsessive obsessivempulsive disorder and may also be effective for treatment and may also be effective for treatment and may also be effective for treatment of depression. Is that right? And how of depression. Is that right? And how of depression. Is that right? And how should we think about SSRIs? Are they should we think about SSRIs? Are they should we think about SSRIs? Are they useful? Are they not useful? SSRIs useful? Are they not useful? SSRIs useful? Are they not useful? SSRIs clearly work. Um, you know, many clearly work. Um, you know, many clearly work. Um, you know, many metaanalyses kind of proving that out, metaanalyses kind of proving that out, metaanalyses kind of proving that out, right? That that in a subopul of right? That that in a subopul of right? That that in a subopul of individuals, they achieve great benefit individuals, they achieve great benefit individuals, they achieve great benefit for depression, for obsessivempulsive for depression, for obsessivempulsive for depression, for obsessivempulsive disorder, for generalized anxiety disorder, for generalized anxiety disorder, for generalized anxiety disorder, panic, you know, all these disorder, panic, you know, all these disorder, panic, you know, all these things, you can see an improvement in things, you can see an improvement in things, you can see an improvement in those symptoms um with what we call those symptoms um with what we call those symptoms um with what we call SSRIs or selective serotonin reuptake SSRIs or selective serotonin reuptake SSRIs or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. The issue is that they don't inhibitors. The issue is that they don't inhibitors. The issue is that they don't work immediately, right? So they don't work immediately, right? So they don't work immediately, right? So they don't work like the same day you start taking work like the same day you start taking work like the same day you start taking them. And that suggests that them. And that suggests that them. And that suggests that probably it's not exactly the serotonin probably it's not exactly the serotonin probably it's not exactly the serotonin being in there that's directly driving being in there that's directly driving being in there that's directly driving it. That it's much more likely that it it. That it's much more likely that it it. That it's much more likely that it may have some brain plasticity effects, may have some brain plasticity effects, may have some brain plasticity effects, right? There's not a deficit of right? There's not a deficit of right? There's not a deficit of serotonin. You're not born with uh what serotonin. You're not born with uh what serotonin. You're not born with uh what people call a chemical imbalance. And people call a chemical imbalance. And people call a chemical imbalance. And psychiatry has known this. This is not psychiatry has known this. This is not psychiatry has known this. This is not actually new information anybody, you actually new information anybody, you actually new information anybody, you know, it's kind of a rehashing of a know, it's kind of a rehashing of a know, it's kind of a rehashing of a bunch of information we've known for a bunch of information we've known for a bunch of information we've known for a while now. But in the lay press, it's while now. But in the lay press, it's while now. But in the lay press, it's kind of hit in a way that it didn't seem kind of hit in a way that it didn't seem kind of hit in a way that it didn't seem to grab attention um before with to grab attention um before with to grab attention um before with previous publications. But this idea previous publications. But this idea previous publications. But this idea that this chemical imbalance idea is that this chemical imbalance idea is that this chemical imbalance idea is wrong. I really think that part's wrong. I really think that part's wrong. I really think that part's important because I think that what I'll important because I think that what I'll important because I think that what I'll call psychiatry 1.0, right? this kind of call psychiatry 1.0, right? this kind of call psychiatry 1.0, right? this kind of idea of Freud and psychotherapy and idea of Freud and psychotherapy and idea of Freud and psychotherapy and its and its origins. Um, it was a lot its and its origins. Um, it was a lot its and its origins. Um, it was a lot around, you know, the your family and around, you know, the your family and around, you know, the your family and those experiences and psychotherapy kind those experiences and psychotherapy kind those experiences and psychotherapy kind of going in and correcting or helping of going in and correcting or helping of going in and correcting or helping you to figure out or, you know, show you to figure out or, you know, show you to figure out or, you know, show you being able to see or people hear you so being able to see or people hear you so being able to see or people hear you so that you can eventually come to the that you can eventually come to the that you can eventually come to the conclusion of certain cognitions that conclusion of certain cognitions that conclusion of certain cognitions that aren't helping you, right? Things like aren't helping you, right? Things like aren't helping you, right? Things like the schizophrenogenic mother and all of the schizophrenogenic mother and all of the schizophrenogenic mother and all of that, you know, that was a concept at that, you know, that was a concept at that, you know, that was a concept at some point, right? And so we've some point, right? And so we've some point, right? And so we've transitioned from that to the you transitioned from that to the you transitioned from that to the you know for a long time the chemical know for a long time the chemical know for a long time the chemical imbalance which I'll call psychiatry imbalance which I'll call psychiatry imbalance which I'll call psychiatry 2.0. You know this idea that there's 2.0. You know this idea that there's 2.0. You know this idea that there's something chemically missing. The something chemically missing. The something chemically missing. The trouble there for a patient right is trouble there for a patient right is trouble there for a patient right is that it's telling it's sending a message that it's telling it's sending a message that it's telling it's sending a message of there's something missing with me. of there's something missing with me. of there's something missing with me. Whether it be my experiences I had no Whether it be my experiences I had no Whether it be my experiences I had no control of over when I was a child or um control of over when I was a child or um control of over when I was a child or um a chemical in my brain. What I think's a chemical in my brain. What I think's a chemical in my brain. What I think's really powerful with TMS, really powerful with TMS, really powerful with TMS, um, you know, really powerful with TMS um, you know, really powerful with TMS um, you know, really powerful with TMS and a level even powerful with the and a level even powerful with the and a level even powerful with the psychedelic story is it's saying psychedelic story is it's saying psychedelic story is it's saying something different. You know, TMS works something different. You know, TMS works something different. You know, TMS works and there's no serotonin coming in or and there's no serotonin coming in or and there's no serotonin coming in or out of the brain, right? And we're doing out of the brain, right? And we're doing out of the brain, right? And we're doing a rapid form of TMS that works in 1 to 5 a rapid form of TMS that works in 1 to 5 a rapid form of TMS that works in 1 to 5 days. So, there's no there's it's very days. So, there's no there's it's very days. So, there's no there's it's very unlikely that there's some long-term unlikely that there's some long-term unlikely that there's some long-term kind of upregulation of serotonin that's kind of upregulation of serotonin that's kind of upregulation of serotonin that's driving that. So our work actually kind driving that. So our work actually kind driving that. So our work actually kind of pushes back on this serotonin of pushes back on this serotonin of pushes back on this serotonin hypothesis as being kind of the center hypothesis as being kind of the center hypothesis as being kind of the center of depression because it says look we're of depression because it says look we're of depression because it says look we're not giving anybody any serotonin. We're not giving anybody any serotonin. We're not giving anybody any serotonin. We're simply turning these brain regions on simply turning these brain regions on simply turning these brain regions on and we're focused on the circuitry and we're focused on the circuitry and we're focused on the circuitry and that's psychiatry 3.0. It's not just that's psychiatry 3.0. It's not just that's psychiatry 3.0. It's not just like neurom modulation. Neurom like neurom modulation. Neurom like neurom modulation. Neurom modulation is a really nice you know use modulation is a really nice you know use modulation is a really nice you know use case for psychiatry 3.0 because it's a case for psychiatry 3.0 because it's a case for psychiatry 3.0 because it's a way to focally and directly perturb way to focally and directly perturb way to focally and directly perturb brain regions in whatever modality brain regions in whatever modality brain regions in whatever modality you're using. But you know there are a you're using. But you know there are a you're using. But you know there are a lot of a lot of groups that are actually lot of a lot of groups that are actually lot of a lot of groups that are actually doing neuroiming before and after and doing neuroiming before and after and doing neuroiming before and after and they're able to see circuit level they're able to see circuit level they're able to see circuit level changes for something like psilocybin or changes for something like psilocybin or changes for something like psilocybin or ketamine long after the drug is gone. ketamine long after the drug is gone. ketamine long after the drug is gone. Right? Suggesting in those same brain Right? Suggesting in those same brain Right? Suggesting in those same brain regions converge. So the subgenial regions converge. So the subgenial regions converge. So the subgenial default mode network connection that we default mode network connection that we default mode network connection that we see is changing with our stand see is changing with our stand see is changing with our stand um Stanford neurom modulation therapy um Stanford neurom modulation therapy um Stanford neurom modulation therapy technique. It's that same set of brain technique. It's that same set of brain technique. It's that same set of brain regions that ketamine and uh regions that ketamine and uh regions that ketamine and uh psilocybin seem to act on act on these psilocybin seem to act on act on these psilocybin seem to act on act on these connections between brain networks that connections between brain networks that connections between brain networks that seem to shift. And so it refocuses the seem to shift. And so it refocuses the seem to shift. And so it refocuses the story on something that's highly story on something that's highly story on something that's highly correctable and it's basically correctable and it's basically correctable and it's basically electrphysiology and it's basically kind of recalibrating and it's basically kind of recalibrating and it's basically kind of recalibrating a circuit that is re-calibratable a circuit that is re-calibratable a circuit that is re-calibratable instead of I have something missing or I instead of I have something missing or I instead of I have something missing or I have some set of experiences early in have some set of experiences early in have some set of experiences early in life that are um that are going to life that are um that are going to life that are um that are going to forever trap me in these forever trap me in these forever trap me in these psychiatric diagnoses. And so it kind of psychiatric diagnoses. And so it kind of psychiatric diagnoses. And so it kind of challenges that idea. And I think that's challenges that idea. And I think that's challenges that idea. And I think that's what's so powerful about psychiatry 3.0. what's so powerful about psychiatry 3.0. what's so powerful about psychiatry 3.0. Um this idea of focusing on the circuit Um this idea of focusing on the circuit Um this idea of focusing on the circuit because it gets us gets us into thinking because it gets us gets us into thinking because it gets us gets us into thinking about psychiatry and psychiatric about psychiatry and psychiatric about psychiatry and psychiatric illnesses is something that are illnesses is something that are illnesses is something that are recoverable. People can get better. recoverable. People can get better. recoverable. People can get better. People, you know, we've seen with our People, you know, we've seen with our People, you know, we've seen with our TMS techniques, we've seen it with TMS techniques, we've seen it with TMS techniques, we've seen it with some of the psychedelic work that we've some of the psychedelic work that we've some of the psychedelic work that we've done where people are actually in normal done where people are actually in normal done where people are actually in normal levels of mood for sustained periods of levels of mood for sustained periods of levels of mood for sustained periods of time or time or time or &gt;&gt; within 5 days &gt;&gt; within 5 days &gt;&gt; within 5 days &gt;&gt; within five or less days. And in the &gt;&gt; within five or less days. And in the &gt;&gt; within five or less days. And in the case of the psychedelics within a few case of the psychedelics within a few case of the psychedelics within a few days, right? So we can get people out of days, right? So we can get people out of days, right? So we can get people out of these states, they're totally well. these states, they're totally well. these states, they're totally well. There's no drug in their system at that There's no drug in their system at that There's no drug in their system at that point. In the case of the psychedelics, point. In the case of the psychedelics, point. In the case of the psychedelics, it was never a drug in their system in it was never a drug in their system in it was never a drug in their system in the case of TMS. And it and it just the case of TMS. And it and it just the case of TMS. And it and it just tells us that it's tells us that it's tells us that it's fixable. It's just like an arrhythmia in fixable. It's just like an arrhythmia in fixable. It's just like an arrhythmia in the heart. It's like a broken leg. We the heart. It's like a broken leg. We the heart. It's like a broken leg. We can go in and do something and we can go in and do something and we can go in and do something and we can get somebody better. Then I think what's get somebody better. Then I think what's get somebody better. Then I think what's empowering and what a lot of what's empowering and what a lot of what's empowering and what a lot of patients have told me is they say you patients have told me is they say you patients have told me is they say you know I've gotten dep you know some know I've gotten dep you know some know I've gotten dep you know some people will relapse and need more people will relapse and need more people will relapse and need more stimulation or need more psychedelics or stimulation or need more psychedelics or stimulation or need more psychedelics or whatever it is but they'll tell me I whatever it is but they'll tell me I whatever it is but they'll tell me I don't fear that I'm chronically broken. don't fear that I'm chronically broken. don't fear that I'm chronically broken. I don't fear that the chemical imbalance I don't fear that the chemical imbalance I don't fear that the chemical imbalance is still imbalanced. I don't fear that is still imbalanced. I don't fear that is still imbalanced. I don't fear that these things that I couldn't control in these things that I couldn't control in these things that I couldn't control in my childhood, you know, are going to be my childhood, you know, are going to be my childhood, you know, are going to be there and drive this problem forever. there and drive this problem forever. there and drive this problem forever. And I think that's what's so And I think that's what's so And I think that's what's so powerful about this. powerful about this. powerful about this. &gt;&gt; And that brings me to this uh question &gt;&gt; And that brings me to this uh question &gt;&gt; And that brings me to this uh question about psychedelics and the frankly about psychedelics and the frankly about psychedelics and the frankly the altered thinking and perception that the altered thinking and perception that the altered thinking and perception that occurs in highdose psilocybin occurs in highdose psilocybin occurs in highdose psilocybin clinical uh sessions. Many people do clinical uh sessions. Many people do clinical uh sessions. Many people do report improvements in uh trauma related report improvements in uh trauma related report improvements in uh trauma related symptomology and depression as I symptomology and depression as I symptomology and depression as I understand it from my read of the understand it from my read of the understand it from my read of the clinical trials after taking psilocybin clinical trials after taking psilocybin clinical trials after taking psilocybin because during those sessions something because during those sessions something because during those sessions something comes to mind spontaneously. They will comes to mind spontaneously. They will comes to mind spontaneously. They will report, for instance, a new way of report, for instance, a new way of report, for instance, a new way of seeing the old problem. That's right. seeing the old problem. That's right. seeing the old problem. That's right. &gt;&gt; And the old problem could be the voice &gt;&gt; And the old problem could be the voice &gt;&gt; And the old problem could be the voice that they're no good. They'll never that they're no good. They'll never that they're no good. They'll never nothing will ever work out or could be nothing will ever work out or could be nothing will ever work out or could be even more subtle than that. Why do you even more subtle than that. Why do you even more subtle than that. Why do you think the brain would ever hold on to think the brain would ever hold on to think the brain would ever hold on to rules that um uh don't serve us well? rules that um uh don't serve us well? rules that um uh don't serve us well? &gt;&gt; I think it's an it's an it's an evol &gt;&gt; I think it's an it's an it's an evol &gt;&gt; I think it's an it's an it's an evol evolutionary neurobiology answer, right? evolutionary neurobiology answer, right? evolutionary neurobiology answer, right? I think that we end up being a result of I think that we end up being a result of I think that we end up being a result of probably a lot of biology that's not of probably a lot of biology that's not of probably a lot of biology that's not that useful in the modern era. And I that useful in the modern era. And I that useful in the modern era. And I think in the brain for say let's say think in the brain for say let's say think in the brain for say let's say PTSD, right? A lot of a lot of veterans PTSD, right? A lot of a lot of veterans PTSD, right? A lot of a lot of veterans come back and they experience these PTSD come back and they experience these PTSD come back and they experience these PTSD symptoms and they're not at all useful symptoms and they're not at all useful symptoms and they're not at all useful back home, right? They hear some loud back home, right? They hear some loud back home, right? They hear some loud noise and all of a sudden they're behind noise and all of a sudden they're behind noise and all of a sudden they're behind a car or they're behind a you know I've a car or they're behind a you know I've a car or they're behind a you know I've heard of folks you jump and run behind a heard of folks you jump and run behind a heard of folks you jump and run behind a trash can or whatever in the middle of trash can or whatever in the middle of trash can or whatever in the middle of San Francisco when they hear a loud San Francisco when they hear a loud San Francisco when they hear a loud noise. But if you put them back in the noise. But if you put them back in the noise. But if you put them back in the battlefield, &gt;&gt; highly adaptive. &gt;&gt; highly adaptive. &gt;&gt; highly adaptive. &gt;&gt; That's highly adaptive, right? We hold &gt;&gt; That's highly adaptive, right? We hold &gt;&gt; That's highly adaptive, right? We hold on to those things from I think an on to those things from I think an on to those things from I think an evolutionary neurobiology standpoint. evolutionary neurobiology standpoint. evolutionary neurobiology standpoint. But what seems to for whatever reason But what seems to for whatever reason But what seems to for whatever reason kind of alleviate that are these um are kind of alleviate that are these um are kind of alleviate that are these um are these substances some new like MDMA, these substances some new like MDMA, these substances some new like MDMA, some that have been around for thousands some that have been around for thousands some that have been around for thousands of years like psilocybin seem to have a of years like psilocybin seem to have a of years like psilocybin seem to have a therapeutic effect that seems to be therapeutic effect that seems to be therapeutic effect that seems to be pretty longlasting for these phenomenon. pretty longlasting for these phenomenon. pretty longlasting for these phenomenon. And so it's just curious, right? And so it's just curious, right? And so it's just curious, right? It's curious that in the absence of that It's curious that in the absence of that It's curious that in the absence of that these things will keep going on and on these things will keep going on and on these things will keep going on and on but in the presence of that exposure but in the presence of that exposure but in the presence of that exposure then all of a sudden you see a then all of a sudden you see a then all of a sudden you see a resolution of the problem and we have resolution of the problem and we have resolution of the problem and we have some work now we're treating folks with some work now we're treating folks with some work now we're treating folks with Navy Seals the anecdotes that we're Navy Seals the anecdotes that we're Navy Seals the anecdotes that we're getting right are folks are coming back getting right are folks are coming back getting right are folks are coming back and they're saying these set of PTSD and they're saying these set of PTSD and they're saying these set of PTSD symptoms are finally gone and so this symptoms are finally gone and so this symptoms are finally gone and so this idea that for whatever reason going into idea that for whatever reason going into idea that for whatever reason going into what's probably a highly plastic state what's probably a highly plastic state what's probably a highly plastic state and reexperienced memories and then as and reexperienced memories and then as and reexperienced memories and then as you know, you know, we you know, you know, we you know, you know, we reconsolidating it in that state for reconsolidating it in that state for reconsolidating it in that state for whatever reason um may drive um drive a whatever reason um may drive um drive a whatever reason um may drive um drive a therapeutic effect. My business is to therapeutic effect. My business is to therapeutic effect. My business is to find treatments that help people. And so find treatments that help people. And so find treatments that help people. And so I'm much more like pragmatic about it. I'm much more like pragmatic about it. I'm much more like pragmatic about it. You know, if this sort of thing, You know, if this sort of thing, You know, if this sort of thing, which um has a lot of cultural baggage, which um has a lot of cultural baggage, which um has a lot of cultural baggage, um but if this sort of thing ultimately um but if this sort of thing ultimately um but if this sort of thing ultimately ends up being therapeutic, if we can ends up being therapeutic, if we can ends up being therapeutic, if we can design trials that convince me and design trials that convince me and design trials that convince me and others that it is, then we should others that it is, then we should others that it is, then we should absolutely use it. And if it doesn't, absolutely use it. And if it doesn't, absolutely use it. And if it doesn't, then we clearly shouldn't use it, right? then we clearly shouldn't use it, right? then we clearly shouldn't use it, right? The work that's been done so far, the The work that's been done so far, the The work that's been done so far, the first psilocybin trial, um the first psilocybin trial, um the first psilocybin trial, um the first MDMA trial that's published in nature MDMA trial that's published in nature MDMA trial that's published in nature medicine recently. Um medicine recently. Um medicine recently. Um &gt;&gt; and what do those generally say? Let's &gt;&gt; and what do those generally say? Let's &gt;&gt; and what do those generally say? Let's let's uh start with psilocybin and MDMA. let's uh start with psilocybin and MDMA. let's uh start with psilocybin and MDMA. So MDMA appears to in um you know one So MDMA appears to in um you know one So MDMA appears to in um you know one to a few MDMA sessions have an anti-PTSD to a few MDMA sessions have an anti-PTSD to a few MDMA sessions have an anti-PTSD effect that seems to be you know um effect that seems to be you know um effect that seems to be you know um outside of the kind of um standard outside of the kind of um standard outside of the kind of um standard assumed levels of PTSD improvement that assumed levels of PTSD improvement that assumed levels of PTSD improvement that you can observe in individuals um with you can observe in individuals um with you can observe in individuals um with this level of PTSD. Right? So, this level of PTSD. Right? So, this level of PTSD. Right? So, &gt;&gt; so does that mean that um for people &gt;&gt; so does that mean that um for people &gt;&gt; so does that mean that um for people that have trauma who do a and again that have trauma who do a and again that have trauma who do a and again we're talking about in a clinical we're talking about in a clinical we're talking about in a clinical setting they take a one or two setting they take a one or two setting they take a one or two doses of MDM I think the standard doses of MDM I think the standard doses of MDM I think the standard MAPS dose is 150 to 175 milligrams again MAPS dose is 150 to 175 milligrams again MAPS dose is 150 to 175 milligrams again doing this with a physician etc control doing this with a physician etc control doing this with a physician etc control clinical trial legal clinical trial legal clinical trial legal &gt;&gt; exactly &gt;&gt; exactly &gt;&gt; exactly &gt;&gt; they do it once or twice and broadly &gt;&gt; they do it once or twice and broadly &gt;&gt; they do it once or twice and broadly speaking what percentage of people who speaking what percentage of people who speaking what percentage of people who had trauma report feeling significant had trauma report feeling significant had trauma report feeling significant relief from their tra trauma afterward relief from their tra trauma afterward relief from their tra trauma afterward &gt;&gt; it's about twothirds of people had a had &gt;&gt; it's about twothirds of people had a had &gt;&gt; it's about twothirds of people had a had um a clinically significant uh change in um a clinically significant uh change in um a clinically significant uh change in their PTSD. their PTSD. their PTSD. &gt;&gt; That's impressive. And how &gt;&gt; That's impressive. And how &gt;&gt; That's impressive. And how longasting was that? longasting was that? longasting was that? &gt;&gt; It appears to last for a while. In the &gt;&gt; It appears to last for a while. In the &gt;&gt; It appears to last for a while. In the earlier trials where they followed earlier trials where they followed earlier trials where they followed people out, it seemed to last for kind people out, it seemed to last for kind people out, it seemed to last for kind of in the years range for some people. of in the years range for some people. of in the years range for some people. And so it's, you know, it's pretty it's And so it's, you know, it's pretty it's And so it's, you know, it's pretty it's pretty compelling. In contrast that with pretty compelling. In contrast that with pretty compelling. In contrast that with ketamine, which only on average lasts ketamine, which only on average lasts ketamine, which only on average lasts about a week and a half for a single about a week and a half for a single about a week and a half for a single infusion. So it's a much shorter. infusion. So it's a much shorter. infusion. So it's a much shorter. &gt;&gt; So they have to get repeated infusions &gt;&gt; So they have to get repeated infusions &gt;&gt; So they have to get repeated infusions of ketamine every 10 days or so of ketamine every 10 days or so of ketamine every 10 days or so &gt;&gt; for some people. or they end up getting &gt;&gt; for some people. or they end up getting &gt;&gt; for some people. or they end up getting like a bunch of doses for a like a bunch of doses for a like a bunch of doses for a couple of weeks and then for some people couple of weeks and then for some people couple of weeks and then for some people that seems to last a while. Um you know that seems to last a while. Um you know that seems to last a while. Um you know that's where I think I think the that's where I think I think the that's where I think I think the psilocybin story for depression and the psilocybin story for depression and the psilocybin story for depression and the um in the MDMA story for PTSD seem more um in the MDMA story for PTSD seem more um in the MDMA story for PTSD seem more interesting to me. interesting to me. interesting to me. &gt;&gt; So for psilocybin what is the um rough &gt;&gt; So for psilocybin what is the um rough &gt;&gt; So for psilocybin what is the um rough percentages on and this would be relief percentages on and this would be relief percentages on and this would be relief not from trauma but from depression. not from trauma but from depression. not from trauma but from depression. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So it's, you know, in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So it's, you know, in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So it's, you know, in open label studies, it's closer to like open label studies, it's closer to like open label studies, it's closer to like half to 2/3 of people end up getting half to 2/3 of people end up getting half to 2/3 of people end up getting better depending upon their level of better depending upon their level of better depending upon their level of treatment resistance. In the in the treatment resistance. In the in the treatment resistance. In the in the blinded trials, it was more like a third blinded trials, it was more like a third blinded trials, it was more like a third or so of people. or so of people. or so of people. &gt;&gt; Since you mentioned psilocybin, let's &gt;&gt; Since you mentioned psilocybin, let's &gt;&gt; Since you mentioned psilocybin, let's talk a little bit about the talk a little bit about the talk a little bit about the neurochemistry of psilocybin. What's neurochemistry of psilocybin. What's neurochemistry of psilocybin. What's going on when one takes psilocybin and going on when one takes psilocybin and going on when one takes psilocybin and um why is it interesting in light of um why is it interesting in light of um why is it interesting in light of depression? &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely. So David Nut and Robin &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely. So David Nut and Robin &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely. So David Nut and Robin Card Harris's work around neuroiming Card Harris's work around neuroiming Card Harris's work around neuroiming psychedelics were kind of the some of psychedelics were kind of the some of psychedelics were kind of the some of the first folks to do that work and um the first folks to do that work and um the first folks to do that work and um you know and to their great surprise you know and to their great surprise you know and to their great surprise they thought there was going to be an they thought there was going to be an they thought there was going to be an increase in activity on psychedelics and increase in activity on psychedelics and increase in activity on psychedelics and what they found is the opposite right what they found is the opposite right what they found is the opposite right there's kind of a an overall decrease in there's kind of a an overall decrease in there's kind of a an overall decrease in the level of activity in the brain um the level of activity in the brain um the level of activity in the brain um with psychedelics but they they've also with psychedelics but they they've also with psychedelics but they they've also looked at connectivity and there's this looked at connectivity and there's this looked at connectivity and there's this kind of small world you know large world kind of small world you know large world kind of small world you know large world connectivity that you think about connectivity that you think about connectivity that you think about and So you know small world meaning and So you know small world meaning and So you know small world meaning there's a lot there's kind of a much there's a lot there's kind of a much there's a lot there's kind of a much more kind of focused kind of cortical more kind of focused kind of cortical more kind of focused kind of cortical function or you know subcortical function or you know subcortical function or you know subcortical function or whatever it is and uh and function or whatever it is and uh and function or whatever it is and uh and what you see is a difference in that um what you see is a difference in that um what you see is a difference in that um in that level of engagement of brain in that level of engagement of brain in that level of engagement of brain regions the connectivity kind of global regions the connectivity kind of global regions the connectivity kind of global connectivity kind of increases and so connectivity kind of increases and so connectivity kind of increases and so it's interesting you know I think to it's interesting you know I think to it's interesting you know I think to kind of have a convergent theory on this kind of have a convergent theory on this kind of have a convergent theory on this it's still you know to be determined it's still you know to be determined it's still you know to be determined there's still a lot of work I think that there's still a lot of work I think that there's still a lot of work I think that needs to be done. But um but it's needs to be done. But um but it's needs to be done. But um but it's certainly um suggestive that there's certainly um suggestive that there's certainly um suggestive that there's pretty profound changes in um in brain pretty profound changes in um in brain pretty profound changes in um in brain activity and brain connectivity after. activity and brain connectivity after. activity and brain connectivity after. And what we found to be really And what we found to be really And what we found to be really interesting is the anti-depressant interesting is the anti-depressant interesting is the anti-depressant effects of psilocybin effects of psilocybin effects of psilocybin have a particular um connectivity change have a particular um connectivity change have a particular um connectivity change that we also see with our TMS that we also see with our TMS that we also see with our TMS approaches, right? And it's this approaches, right? And it's this approaches, right? And it's this connectivity between the subgenial connectivity between the subgenial connectivity between the subgenial anterior singulate and the default mode anterior singulate and the default mode anterior singulate and the default mode network. And so when we do this network. And so when we do this network. And so when we do this effective Stanford neurom modulation effective Stanford neurom modulation effective Stanford neurom modulation therapy stimulation, we see a down therapy stimulation, we see a down therapy stimulation, we see a down reggulation the connectivity between the reggulation the connectivity between the reggulation the connectivity between the negatively valanced mood state in the negatively valanced mood state in the negatively valanced mood state in the case of depressed individuals and the case of depressed individuals and the case of depressed individuals and the self-representation of the brain. And self-representation of the brain. And self-representation of the brain. And you see that same connectivity change you see that same connectivity change you see that same connectivity change occur posts psilocybin, occur posts psilocybin, occur posts psilocybin, you know, suggesting there's a you know, suggesting there's a you know, suggesting there's a convergent mechanism. And it makes convergent mechanism. And it makes convergent mechanism. And it makes sense, right? you've kind of got an sense, right? you've kind of got an sense, right? you've kind of got an overconnected negatively balanced overconnected negatively balanced overconnected negatively balanced system, conflict system that's kind of, system, conflict system that's kind of, system, conflict system that's kind of, you know, kind of attached on to the you know, kind of attached on to the you know, kind of attached on to the self-representation and people feel self-representation and people feel self-representation and people feel stuck, right? And then when you when you stuck, right? And then when you when you stuck, right? And then when you when you do whatever you do that's effective, it do whatever you do that's effective, it do whatever you do that's effective, it unpairs those two systems. it unpairs those two systems. it unpairs those two systems. &gt;&gt; I want to ask you about Ibagane. Is it &gt;&gt; I want to ask you about Ibagane. Is it &gt;&gt; I want to ask you about Ibagane. Is it legal in the US in terms as a clinical legal in the US in terms as a clinical legal in the US in terms as a clinical tool? Who's using it and for what tool? Who's using it and for what tool? Who's using it and for what purposes? Ibugane is a um is one of the purposes? Ibugane is a um is one of the purposes? Ibugane is a um is one of the alkaloids that you can extract from a um alkaloids that you can extract from a um alkaloids that you can extract from a um an ibogga tree root bark that's um an ibogga tree root bark that's um an ibogga tree root bark that's um typically growing in the country of typically growing in the country of typically growing in the country of Gabon Africa. So what uh individuals Gabon Africa. So what uh individuals Gabon Africa. So what uh individuals taking ibeame will say is that open eyes taking ibeame will say is that open eyes taking ibeame will say is that open eyes they don't see anything but closed eyes they don't see anything but closed eyes they don't see anything but closed eyes they'll go back through and reexperience they'll go back through and reexperience they'll go back through and reexperience earlier life memories and they will be earlier life memories and they will be earlier life memories and they will be able to experience it from a place of able to experience it from a place of able to experience it from a place of empathy not only for themselves but from empathy not only for themselves but from empathy not only for themselves but from others and kind of a detached empathy others and kind of a detached empathy others and kind of a detached empathy and being able to see this as almost a and being able to see this as almost a and being able to see this as almost a third party even though they were there. third party even though they were there. third party even though they were there. Ibegan is in no way a recreational Ibegan is in no way a recreational Ibegan is in no way a recreational substance. You're essentially having substance. You're essentially having substance. You're essentially having this what they call a life review. They this what they call a life review. They this what they call a life review. They also call it 10 years of psychotherapy also call it 10 years of psychotherapy also call it 10 years of psychotherapy in a night. So these are the terminology in a night. So these are the terminology in a night. So these are the terminology that people talk about the issue. that people talk about the issue. that people talk about the issue. &gt;&gt; How long does it last? Is it truly one &gt;&gt; How long does it last? Is it truly one &gt;&gt; How long does it last? Is it truly one night &gt;&gt; depending upon how fast you metabolize &gt;&gt; depending upon how fast you metabolize &gt;&gt; depending upon how fast you metabolize it? Sometimes 24, sometimes 36 hours, it? Sometimes 24, sometimes 36 hours, it? Sometimes 24, sometimes 36 hours, sometimes it can be shorter. But it is a sometimes it can be shorter. But it is a sometimes it can be shorter. But it is a long time. long time. long time. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; It's a very long time. So it's &gt;&gt; It's a very long time. So it's &gt;&gt; It's a very long time. So it's definitely the longest acting definitely the longest acting definitely the longest acting psychedelic substance I know of. And so, psychedelic substance I know of. And so, psychedelic substance I know of. And so, you know, we have over the last couple you know, we have over the last couple you know, we have over the last couple of years been able to um to do this of years been able to um to do this of years been able to um to do this first in human kind of full first in human kind of full first in human kind of full neurobiological clinical neurocognitive neurobiological clinical neurocognitive neurobiological clinical neurocognitive evaluation of what I is doing in this evaluation of what I is doing in this evaluation of what I is doing in this case in uh special operations, case in uh special operations, case in uh special operations, special forces individuals, former Navy special forces individuals, former Navy special forces individuals, former Navy Seals, former Army Rangers, that Seals, former Army Rangers, that Seals, former Army Rangers, that kind of crew of folks and look at the kind of crew of folks and look at the kind of crew of folks and look at the pre-post changes that we um that they're pre-post changes that we um that they're pre-post changes that we um that they're experiencing and be able to totally experiencing and be able to totally experiencing and be able to totally quantitate all of that and so we've been quantitate all of that and so we've been quantitate all of that and so we've been able to capture all the clinical scales able to capture all the clinical scales able to capture all the clinical scales you know depression scales PTSD scales you know depression scales PTSD scales you know depression scales PTSD scales all that standard stuff neurokcognitive all that standard stuff neurokcognitive all that standard stuff neurokcognitive batteries so how does your executive batteries so how does your executive batteries so how does your executive function work specifically how does your function work specifically how does your function work specifically how does your verbal memory all of that and then neuro verbal memory all of that and then neuro verbal memory all of that and then neuro imaging and EEG so this will be the imaging and EEG so this will be the imaging and EEG so this will be the first human study of ibugane for those first human study of ibugane for those first human study of ibugane for those and the reason why is because I gain and the reason why is because I gain and the reason why is because I gain kind of the both seemingly the most kind of the both seemingly the most kind of the both seemingly the most potent and most um potent and most um potent and most um in and mo seemingly to me at least most in and mo seemingly to me at least most in and mo seemingly to me at least most powerful um psychedelic, but the one powerful um psychedelic, but the one powerful um psychedelic, but the one that has the most risk too because it that has the most risk too because it that has the most risk too because it has a cardiac effect. It seems to be has a cardiac effect. It seems to be has a cardiac effect. It seems to be that you can screen people out that have that you can screen people out that have that you can screen people out that have risk off of their electroc cardiogram risk off of their electroc cardiogram risk off of their electroc cardiogram and reduce the risk quite a bit and reduce the risk quite a bit and reduce the risk quite a bit and that's what we all did. But um but that's what we all did. But um but that's what we all did. But um but that's why people haven't really but that's why people haven't really but that's why people haven't really studied it as much. Um and it's it isn't studied it as much. Um and it's it isn't studied it as much. Um and it's it isn't as uh in addition there's nobody goes to as uh in addition there's nobody goes to as uh in addition there's nobody goes to rave on ibain. There's no recreation at rave on ibain. There's no recreation at rave on ibain. There's no recreation at all with it. all with it. all with it. &gt;&gt; It's not fun. People say that it's &gt;&gt; It's not fun. People say that it's &gt;&gt; It's not fun. People say that it's relieving, but it's hard work, right? relieving, but it's hard work, right? relieving, but it's hard work, right? Because yeah, you're re you're Because yeah, you're re you're Because yeah, you're re you're re-examining things. So then we see re-examining things. So then we see re-examining things. So then we see these folks after and I I'll tell you, these folks after and I I'll tell you, these folks after and I I'll tell you, you know, we haven't fully analyze the you know, we haven't fully analyze the you know, we haven't fully analyze the data yet, but I'll tell you that from data yet, but I'll tell you that from data yet, but I'll tell you that from what my folks are telling me, it's what my folks are telling me, it's what my folks are telling me, it's pretty dramatic. You know, people come pretty dramatic. You know, people come pretty dramatic. You know, people come back and they're doing a lot better. back and they're doing a lot better. back and they're doing a lot better. Soldiers experience something called Soldiers experience something called Soldiers experience something called moral injury, right? Where they maybe moral injury, right? Where they maybe moral injury, right? Where they maybe they accidentally blew something up and they accidentally blew something up and they accidentally blew something up and it had a kid in it or something like it had a kid in it or something like it had a kid in it or something like that. you know, you know, if they're in that. you know, you know, if they're in that. you know, you know, if they're in Afghanistan or Iraq, maybe, you know, a Afghanistan or Iraq, maybe, you know, a Afghanistan or Iraq, maybe, you know, a child died on accident or maybe maybe, child died on accident or maybe maybe, child died on accident or maybe maybe, you know, a civilian died or whatever it you know, a civilian died or whatever it you know, a civilian died or whatever it was, right? And they and they suffer was, right? And they and they suffer was, right? And they and they suffer these moral injuries as part of the job. these moral injuries as part of the job. these moral injuries as part of the job. And it's almost one of the kind of, you And it's almost one of the kind of, you And it's almost one of the kind of, you know, vocational risks. They come back know, vocational risks. They come back know, vocational risks. They come back and say that they've um and say that they've um and say that they've um forgiven themselves, you know, which is forgiven themselves, you know, which is forgiven themselves, you know, which is which is huge, right? And and part of which is huge, right? And and part of which is huge, right? And and part of that is being able to see themsel in a that is being able to see themsel in a that is being able to see themsel in a different light and having empathy different light and having empathy different light and having empathy finally for themsel and being able to finally for themsel and being able to finally for themsel and being able to kind of have that experience of kind of have that experience of kind of have that experience of forgiving. And so there's this kind of forgiving. And so there's this kind of forgiving. And so there's this kind of Timothy Liry kind of socioultural Timothy Liry kind of socioultural Timothy Liry kind of socioultural construct that ends up being overlaid construct that ends up being overlaid construct that ends up being overlaid over psychedelics. And what I think is over psychedelics. And what I think is over psychedelics. And what I think is that if you rid yourself of all of those that if you rid yourself of all of those that if you rid yourself of all of those preconceived notions of what it is and preconceived notions of what it is and preconceived notions of what it is and isn't and the counterculture movement, isn't and the counterculture movement, isn't and the counterculture movement, all that stuff that neither of us were all that stuff that neither of us were all that stuff that neither of us were ever involved in, neither of us are ever involved in, neither of us are ever involved in, neither of us are ever partake in, you know, as is kind of partake in, you know, as is kind of partake in, you know, as is kind of straight scientists looking at this, straight scientists looking at this, straight scientists looking at this, right? If you can kind of rid yourself right? If you can kind of rid yourself right? If you can kind of rid yourself of all those socioultural constructions of all those socioultural constructions of all those socioultural constructions and then re-examine this, these if we and then re-examine this, these if we and then re-examine this, these if we just discovered these today, we would just discovered these today, we would just discovered these today, we would say that these sorts of drugs are a huge say that these sorts of drugs are a huge say that these sorts of drugs are a huge breakthrough in psychiatry because they breakthrough in psychiatry because they breakthrough in psychiatry because they allow for us to do a lot of the sorts of allow for us to do a lot of the sorts of allow for us to do a lot of the sorts of things we've been thinking about with things we've been thinking about with things we've been thinking about with SSRIs, with psychotherapy, but kind with SSRIs, with psychotherapy, but kind with SSRIs, with psychotherapy, but kind of combined, right? psychotherapy plus of combined, right? psychotherapy plus of combined, right? psychotherapy plus drugs in a in a substance that plus drugs in a in a substance that plus drugs in a in a substance that kind of allows you to reexamine these kind of allows you to reexamine these kind of allows you to reexamine these things. And so it's interesting. things. And so it's interesting. things. And so it's interesting. It'll you know there's a lot to do to It'll you know there's a lot to do to It'll you know there's a lot to do to try to figure out if that's true, you try to figure out if that's true, you try to figure out if that's true, you know, and I can say that as it know, and I can say that as it know, and I can say that as it stands right now, we don't know if it's stands right now, we don't know if it's stands right now, we don't know if it's that statement is true, right? There's a that statement is true, right? There's a that statement is true, right? There's a lot more work that needs to happen for lot more work that needs to happen for lot more work that needs to happen for that statement to be proven to be true. that statement to be proven to be true. that statement to be proven to be true. But the hypothesis is if it is true then But the hypothesis is if it is true then But the hypothesis is if it is true then it's very likely that it's very likely that it's very likely that this will be seen as a breakthrough this will be seen as a breakthrough this will be seen as a breakthrough because it allows you to do these sorts because it allows you to do these sorts because it allows you to do these sorts of things that you can't do with normal of things that you can't do with normal of things that you can't do with normal waking consciousness. waking consciousness. waking consciousness. But also why we have to really think But also why we have to really think But also why we have to really think about this and you know these drugs about this and you know these drugs about this and you know these drugs can't be recreational drugs. They really can't be recreational drugs. They really can't be recreational drugs. They really shouldn't be recreational drugs, right? shouldn't be recreational drugs, right? shouldn't be recreational drugs, right? they're really too powerful to be used they're really too powerful to be used they're really too powerful to be used in the context of recreation because in the context of recreation because in the context of recreation because they can put you into these states and they can put you into these states and they can put you into these states and the this generation of psychedelic and the this generation of psychedelic and the this generation of psychedelic researchers are really clear about that. researchers are really clear about that. researchers are really clear about that. You know, I think the ' 60s folks were You know, I think the ' 60s folks were You know, I think the ' 60s folks were not clear about that and they felt not clear about that and they felt not clear about that and they felt like there was this whole kind of like there was this whole kind of like there was this whole kind of cultural thing that was going on there. cultural thing that was going on there. cultural thing that was going on there. But I think this cohort of individuals But I think this cohort of individuals But I think this cohort of individuals really understands that in order to really understands that in order to really understands that in order to really make this happen, we have to really make this happen, we have to really make this happen, we have to understand that if you need a understand that if you need a understand that if you need a prescription for an SSRI, which doesn't prescription for an SSRI, which doesn't prescription for an SSRI, which doesn't change your consciousness a whole lot, change your consciousness a whole lot, change your consciousness a whole lot, and we we're very worried about that and we we're very worried about that and we we're very worried about that and the doctor has to evaluate you for that the doctor has to evaluate you for that the doctor has to evaluate you for that every week, that the idea that some of every week, that the idea that some of every week, that the idea that some of these substances would go outside these substances would go outside these substances would go outside of very strict medical supervision is of very strict medical supervision is of very strict medical supervision is uh is kind of preposterous, actually. uh is kind of preposterous, actually. uh is kind of preposterous, actually. It's kind of it's kind of a dumb It's kind of it's kind of a dumb It's kind of it's kind of a dumb moment, I think, for all of medicine moment, I think, for all of medicine moment, I think, for all of medicine to say, "Look, we've, you know, if we're to say, "Look, we've, you know, if we're to say, "Look, we've, you know, if we're going to do this right, we've got to do going to do this right, we've got to do going to do this right, we've got to do it in such a way that's so protected, it in such a way that's so protected, it in such a way that's so protected, that's so safe that we make sure people that's so safe that we make sure people that's so safe that we make sure people know these things are not recreational, know these things are not recreational, know these things are not recreational, and they're really for the pure purposes and they're really for the pure purposes and they're really for the pure purposes of really powerfully changing um of really powerfully changing um of really powerfully changing um cognition for a while and letting people cognition for a while and letting people cognition for a while and letting people have these what seem to be, you know, have these what seem to be, you know, have these what seem to be, you know, relatively therapeutic states. Tell me relatively therapeutic states. Tell me relatively therapeutic states. Tell me about Iawaska um and as a plant. Is it about Iawaska um and as a plant. Is it about Iawaska um and as a plant. Is it useful for the same sorts of conditions useful for the same sorts of conditions useful for the same sorts of conditions that we've talked about um thus far? And that we've talked about um thus far? And that we've talked about um thus far? And if you could um perhaps tell me a little if you could um perhaps tell me a little if you could um perhaps tell me a little bit also about the um Brazilian prisoner bit also about the um Brazilian prisoner bit also about the um Brazilian prisoner study. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; definitely. IA is another psychedelic. &gt;&gt; definitely. IA is another psychedelic. &gt;&gt; definitely. IA is another psychedelic. It's used as a sacrament um in um in It's used as a sacrament um in um in It's used as a sacrament um in um in Brazil and um in Peru and Ecuador and Brazil and um in Peru and Ecuador and Brazil and um in Peru and Ecuador and Colombia. So a lot of the South American Colombia. So a lot of the South American Colombia. So a lot of the South American countries and um and what they do is countries and um and what they do is countries and um and what they do is they combine two plants together where they combine two plants together where they combine two plants together where one plant of the two plant combination one plant of the two plant combination one plant of the two plant combination would effectively do nothing but the two would effectively do nothing but the two would effectively do nothing but the two plant combination together is capable of plant combination together is capable of plant combination together is capable of producing this very profound psychedelic producing this very profound psychedelic producing this very profound psychedelic effect. And what's really kind of effect. And what's really kind of effect. And what's really kind of curious is that there are, as I curious is that there are, as I curious is that there are, as I understand it, 10 to 20,000 plant understand it, 10 to 20,000 plant understand it, 10 to 20,000 plant species in the Amazon. And somehow species in the Amazon. And somehow species in the Amazon. And somehow somebody &gt;&gt; someone tried them all &gt;&gt; someone tried them all &gt;&gt; someone tried them all &gt;&gt; combined these two plants together in &gt;&gt; combined these two plants together in &gt;&gt; combined these two plants together in certain proportionality certain proportionality certain proportionality and cooked this for five 10 hours to the and cooked this for five 10 hours to the and cooked this for five 10 hours to the point where you cook out the point where you cook out the point where you cook out the dimethylryptamine out of one of the dimethylryptamine out of one of the dimethylryptamine out of one of the plants and cook out the reversible plants and cook out the reversible plants and cook out the reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor out of the monoamine oxidase inhibitor out of the monoamine oxidase inhibitor out of the other plant. It's such a way that the other plant. It's such a way that the other plant. It's such a way that the reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor prevents the GI breakdown of the prevents the GI breakdown of the prevents the GI breakdown of the dimethylrypamine in such a way that it's dimethylrypamine in such a way that it's dimethylrypamine in such a way that it's then allowed to cross the bloodb brain then allowed to cross the bloodb brain then allowed to cross the bloodb brain barrier and get into the brain. And if barrier and get into the brain. And if barrier and get into the brain. And if you didn't add the reversible monomine you didn't add the reversible monomine you didn't add the reversible monomine oxidase inhibitor plantder derived into oxidase inhibitor plantder derived into oxidase inhibitor plantder derived into this combination then it would never this combination then it would never this combination then it would never cross the brain. If you put people on a cross the brain. If you put people on a cross the brain. If you put people on a standard psychiatry prescribed standard psychiatry prescribed standard psychiatry prescribed monoimmune oxidase inhibitor that wasn't monoimmune oxidase inhibitor that wasn't monoimmune oxidase inhibitor that wasn't reversible, you'd throw them into reversible, you'd throw them into reversible, you'd throw them into serotonin syndrome. Right? So this kind serotonin syndrome. Right? So this kind serotonin syndrome. Right? So this kind of like sweet spot that somehow I of like sweet spot that somehow I of like sweet spot that somehow I practitioners have found of being able practitioners have found of being able practitioners have found of being able to get DMT into the brain from an oral to get DMT into the brain from an oral to get DMT into the brain from an oral source with this combination of a source with this combination of a source with this combination of a monomine oxidase inhibitor. It's monomine oxidase inhibitor. It's monomine oxidase inhibitor. It's curious. Um and so that substance curious. Um and so that substance curious. Um and so that substance has been explored as an anti-depressant has been explored as an anti-depressant has been explored as an anti-depressant agent and some studies have looked at agent and some studies have looked at agent and some studies have looked at that. It also seems to be very safe that. It also seems to be very safe that. It also seems to be very safe there. Um there was a there's a there. Um there was a there's a there. Um there was a there's a psychiatrist down at um UCLA Harbor psychiatrist down at um UCLA Harbor psychiatrist down at um UCLA Harbor who's done a lot of work with this where who's done a lot of work with this where who's done a lot of work with this where um where he's looked at children even um where he's looked at children even um where he's looked at children even that have been exposed to kind of that have been exposed to kind of that have been exposed to kind of small doses of Iawaska as is kind of a small doses of Iawaska as is kind of a small doses of Iawaska as is kind of a sacrament within Amazonian tribes and sacrament within Amazonian tribes and sacrament within Amazonian tribes and found no neurocognitive effects, no found no neurocognitive effects, no found no neurocognitive effects, no neurocognitive effects in adults. And so neurocognitive effects in adults. And so neurocognitive effects in adults. And so it appears to be safe. It's kind of part it appears to be safe. It's kind of part it appears to be safe. It's kind of part and brought into various religions and brought into various religions and brought into various religions including kind of merged with including kind of merged with including kind of merged with Catholicism in South America which is Catholicism in South America which is Catholicism in South America which is kind of very interesting. And so you kind of very interesting. And so you kind of very interesting. And so you know in some know in some know in some sects of Catholicism in Brazil it's used sects of Catholicism in Brazil it's used sects of Catholicism in Brazil it's used as a sacrament during religious um as a sacrament during religious um as a sacrament during religious um ceremonies. And so it became interesting ceremonies. And so it became interesting ceremonies. And so it became interesting to Brazilian researchers as to whether to Brazilian researchers as to whether to Brazilian researchers as to whether or not they could affect recidivism or not they could affect recidivism or not they could affect recidivism rates for prisoners in Brazilian rates for prisoners in Brazilian rates for prisoners in Brazilian prisons, right? So they gave half of the prisons, right? So they gave half of the prisons, right? So they gave half of the prisoners um you know some sort of inert substance um you know some sort of inert substance um you know some sort of inert substance and half of the prisoners a um an and half of the prisoners a um an and half of the prisoners a um an Iawaska session. And the uh Iawaska session. And the uh Iawaska session. And the uh recidivism rate or the return to prison recidivism rate or the return to prison recidivism rate or the return to prison rate in the Iawaska exposed individuals rate in the Iawaska exposed individuals rate in the Iawaska exposed individuals was statistically significantly lower was statistically significantly lower was statistically significantly lower than the recidivism rate in the uh in than the recidivism rate in the uh in than the recidivism rate in the uh in the control group. suggesting that um the control group. suggesting that um the control group. suggesting that um you know whatever is going on there you know whatever is going on there you know whatever is going on there seems to have an effect on whatever seems to have an effect on whatever seems to have an effect on whatever drives criminal behavior whatever drives criminal behavior whatever drives criminal behavior whatever criminal behavior that happened to be criminal behavior that happened to be criminal behavior that happened to be and I don't have the details on the and I don't have the details on the and I don't have the details on the exact nature of the crime. Um you know exact nature of the crime. Um you know exact nature of the crime. Um you know no I am also in no way saying that we no I am also in no way saying that we no I am also in no way saying that we should just be giving psychedelics to should just be giving psychedelics to should just be giving psychedelics to folks in prison and all of that. I to folks in prison and all of that. I to folks in prison and all of that. I think that is a very edgy think that is a very edgy think that is a very edgy thing to do and probably not something thing to do and probably not something thing to do and probably not something that anybody should try. But but it does that anybody should try. But but it does that anybody should try. But but it does it does kind of bring up this it does kind of bring up this it does kind of bring up this curious question of what is it about curious question of what is it about curious question of what is it about that would drive people to um to that would drive people to um to that would drive people to um to change those behaviors and why change those behaviors and why change those behaviors and why do people make those behavioral do people make those behavioral do people make those behavioral decisions? &gt;&gt; Before we wrap, I do want to give you &gt;&gt; Before we wrap, I do want to give you &gt;&gt; Before we wrap, I do want to give you the opportunity to talk about the Saint the opportunity to talk about the Saint the opportunity to talk about the Saint study. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Saint or what we're calling &gt;&gt; Yeah. Saint or what we're calling &gt;&gt; Yeah. Saint or what we're calling it S&amp;T now. Um Stanford accelerated it S&amp;T now. Um Stanford accelerated it S&amp;T now. Um Stanford accelerated intelligent neurom modulation therapy or intelligent neurom modulation therapy or intelligent neurom modulation therapy or now what we're calling Stanford neurom now what we're calling Stanford neurom now what we're calling Stanford neurom modulation therapy. The idea there is modulation therapy. The idea there is modulation therapy. The idea there is that TMS um is a device that delivers um that TMS um is a device that delivers um that TMS um is a device that delivers um that delivers a treatment and the that delivers a treatment and the that delivers a treatment and the treatment is the protocol and the treatment is the protocol and the treatment is the protocol and the protocol is the stimulation parameter protocol is the stimulation parameter protocol is the stimulation parameter set in a specific brain region for a set in a specific brain region for a set in a specific brain region for a specific condition. Whether it be specific condition. Whether it be specific condition. Whether it be transcranial magnetic stimulation or transcranial magnetic stimulation or transcranial magnetic stimulation or transcranial direct current stimulation transcranial direct current stimulation transcranial direct current stimulation or deep brain stimulation like what or deep brain stimulation like what or deep brain stimulation like what Casey Halpern talked about. In all of Casey Halpern talked about. In all of Casey Halpern talked about. In all of those cases, the device itself is a those cases, the device itself is a those cases, the device itself is a physical layer conduit of a stimulation physical layer conduit of a stimulation physical layer conduit of a stimulation protocol that's therapeutic for a given protocol that's therapeutic for a given protocol that's therapeutic for a given condition in a given brain region. We condition in a given brain region. We condition in a given brain region. We decided gosh, you know, this problem I decided gosh, you know, this problem I decided gosh, you know, this problem I talked about at the beginning of the talked about at the beginning of the talked about at the beginning of the show where you have these, you know, show where you have these, you know, show where you have these, you know, this problem that we don't have a this problem that we don't have a this problem that we don't have a treatment for people who are in these treatment for people who are in these treatment for people who are in these high acuity psychiatric emergency high acuity psychiatric emergency high acuity psychiatric emergency states, right? this idea that we're states, right? this idea that we're states, right? this idea that we're going to engineer a treatment where we going to engineer a treatment where we going to engineer a treatment where we can reorganize the stimulation approach can reorganize the stimulation approach can reorganize the stimulation approach in time to be much more efficient by in time to be much more efficient by in time to be much more efficient by utilizing something called space utilizing something called space utilizing something called space learning theory. And so you probably learning theory. And so you probably learning theory. And so you probably know about the space learning theory. So know about the space learning theory. So know about the space learning theory. So the idea for the for the viewers is if the idea for the for the viewers is if the idea for the for the viewers is if I'm cramming for a test, what I do is I I'm cramming for a test, what I do is I I'm cramming for a test, what I do is I write out 60 note cards and I read each write out 60 note cards and I read each write out 60 note cards and I read each one for a minute until I get to the one for a minute until I get to the one for a minute until I get to the first note card and again and that's first note card and again and that's first note card and again and that's about an hour later, right? That's space about an hour later, right? That's space about an hour later, right? That's space learning theory. It's this idea that you learning theory. It's this idea that you learning theory. It's this idea that you need to see it about every hour to an need to see it about every hour to an need to see it about every hour to an hour and a half and that optimizes hour and a half and that optimizes hour and a half and that optimizes learning. What we found was is that the learning. What we found was is that the learning. What we found was is that the old way of doing TMS, this idea of just old way of doing TMS, this idea of just old way of doing TMS, this idea of just doing it once a day, every day, 5 days a doing it once a day, every day, 5 days a doing it once a day, every day, 5 days a week for 6 weeks, didn't utilize the week for 6 weeks, didn't utilize the week for 6 weeks, didn't utilize the space learning theory. It's like space learning theory. It's like space learning theory. It's like studying for a month or two, just a studying for a month or two, just a studying for a month or two, just a little bit once a day. Like you remember little bit once a day. Like you remember little bit once a day. Like you remember some of that stuff, but it's like not as some of that stuff, but it's like not as some of that stuff, but it's like not as potent as that week where you're kind of potent as that week where you're kind of potent as that week where you're kind of cramming, right? And what we realized is cramming, right? And what we realized is cramming, right? And what we realized is that if we could reorganize the that if we could reorganize the that if we could reorganize the stimulation in times that we took the stimulation in times that we took the stimulation in times that we took the whole six week course, we actually whole six week course, we actually whole six week course, we actually figured out a way to do it in a day. And figured out a way to do it in a day. And figured out a way to do it in a day. And then what we also figured out is that then what we also figured out is that then what we also figured out is that people were underdosing TMS because if people were underdosing TMS because if people were underdosing TMS because if you just keep going after 6 weeks out to you just keep going after 6 weeks out to you just keep going after 6 weeks out to month three, four, five, more and more month three, four, five, more and more month three, four, five, more and more people got better. So we figured out people got better. So we figured out people got better. So we figured out it's not just one day. We're going to it's not just one day. We're going to it's not just one day. We're going to give five times the normal dose. We're give five times the normal dose. We're give five times the normal dose. We're going to give 7 and 1/2 months worth in going to give 7 and 1/2 months worth in going to give 7 and 1/2 months worth in 5 days using space learning theory. So 5 days using space learning theory. So 5 days using space learning theory. So every hour every hour every hour &gt;&gt; every hour for 10 hours &gt;&gt; every hour for 10 hours &gt;&gt; every hour for 10 hours &gt;&gt; for 5 days &gt;&gt; for 5 days &gt;&gt; for 5 days &gt;&gt; for 5 days. So it's a 50-hour block. &gt;&gt; for 5 days. So it's a 50-hour block. &gt;&gt; for 5 days. So it's a 50-hour block. It's 90 minutes of actual stimulation It's 90 minutes of actual stimulation It's 90 minutes of actual stimulation but spread out through the day in the but spread out through the day in the but spread out through the day in the same way of learning. What we've found same way of learning. What we've found same way of learning. What we've found is that folks will um will within one to is that folks will um will within one to is that folks will um will within one to five days, you know, in more cases five days, you know, in more cases five days, you know, in more cases than not, depending upon if you're than not, depending upon if you're than not, depending upon if you're looking at this open label or in trials, looking at this open label or in trials, looking at this open label or in trials, somewhere between 60 and 90% of the somewhere between 60 and 90% of the somewhere between 60 and 90% of the time, they will go into full-on time, they will go into full-on time, they will go into full-on remission in the sense they're totally remission in the sense they're totally remission in the sense they're totally normal from a mood standpoint at the end normal from a mood standpoint at the end normal from a mood standpoint at the end of this. And like I said, with variable of this. And like I said, with variable of this. And like I said, with variable dur durability. So that's the part we dur durability. So that's the part we dur durability. So that's the part we have to figure out now about dosing and have to figure out now about dosing and have to figure out now about dosing and how to keep people well. But for some how to keep people well. But for some how to keep people well. But for some people, you know, we've had four years people, you know, we've had four years people, you know, we've had four years of remission, you know, a year of remission, you know, a year of remission, you know, a year of remission. And it's really that remission. And it's really that remission. And it's really that cramming of the test. It's really that cramming of the test. It's really that cramming of the test. It's really that idea that you're laying in that idea that you're laying in that idea that you're laying in that information to the exact right spot. And information to the exact right spot. And information to the exact right spot. And the signal is a simple signal, but the signal is a simple signal, but the signal is a simple signal, but it's a profound one, which is turn on, it's a profound one, which is turn on, it's a profound one, which is turn on, stay on, remember to stay on. You know stay on, remember to stay on. You know stay on, remember to stay on. You know that idea that you're si you're sending that idea that you're si you're sending that idea that you're si you're sending this memory signal into the brain and this memory signal into the brain and this memory signal into the brain and you're doing it in such a way that you're doing it in such a way that you're doing it in such a way that you're telling the system you're kind of you're telling the system you're kind of you're telling the system you're kind of taking it out of the hippocampus's hand taking it out of the hippocampus's hand taking it out of the hippocampus's hand your own hippocampus' hand and you're your own hippocampus' hand and you're your own hippocampus' hand and you're sending the same signal the hippocampus sending the same signal the hippocampus sending the same signal the hippocampus normally signals out. Now you're sending normally signals out. Now you're sending normally signals out. Now you're sending that signal into the prefrontal cortex that signal into the prefrontal cortex that signal into the prefrontal cortex and kind of utilizing the brain's own and kind of utilizing the brain's own and kind of utilizing the brain's own communication style to get it to get out communication style to get it to get out communication style to get it to get out of this state. And what's very cool of this state. And what's very cool of this state. And what's very cool about this is that um is that people about this is that um is that people about this is that um is that people when they when they kind of exit out of when they when they kind of exit out of when they when they kind of exit out of that, they end up um they end up saying that, they end up um they end up saying that, they end up um they end up saying they don't have any side effects they don't have any side effects they don't have any side effects from it and they feel back to normal. from it and they feel back to normal. from it and they feel back to normal. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much uh for taking us on &gt;&gt; Thank you so much uh for taking us on &gt;&gt; Thank you so much uh for taking us on this incredible voyage through the this incredible voyage through the this incredible voyage through the neurosircuitry underlying certain neurosircuitry underlying certain neurosircuitry underlying certain aspects of depression, the coverage of aspects of depression, the coverage of aspects of depression, the coverage of the different types of depression, the different types of depression, the different types of depression, the various uh therapeutic compounds, how various uh therapeutic compounds, how various uh therapeutic compounds, how they work. We've um talked about a lot they work. We've um talked about a lot they work. We've um talked about a lot of things today and you you've shared so of things today and you you've shared so of things today and you you've shared so much knowledge and even as I say that I much knowledge and even as I say that I much knowledge and even as I say that I um I very much want to have you back to um I very much want to have you back to um I very much want to have you back to talk about many other things as well talk about many other things as well talk about many other things as well that we didn't have time to cover. But that we didn't have time to cover. But that we didn't have time to cover. But to take the time to sit down with us and to take the time to sit down with us and to take the time to sit down with us and share all this knowledge that really is share all this knowledge that really is share all this knowledge that really is in service to mental health and in service to mental health and in service to mental health and human feeling better and in fact human feeling better and in fact human feeling better and in fact avoiding often suicidal depression. It's avoiding often suicidal depression. It's avoiding often suicidal depression. It's just incredible work and an incredible just incredible work and an incredible just incredible work and an incredible generosity and just thank you so much. generosity and just thank you so much. generosity and just thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Thank you.