Social anxiety is something we really Social anxiety is something we really Social anxiety is something we really can help people with. Essentially, the can help people with. Essentially, the can help people with. Essentially, the strategy is very simple. If you are strategy is very simple. If you are strategy is very simple. If you are afraid of talking with a stranger or afraid of talking with a stranger or afraid of talking with a stranger or having a deep conversation, the way to having a deep conversation, the way to having a deep conversation, the way to get over that is not to simulate it or get over that is not to simulate it or get over that is not to simulate it or to imagine. It's not like you get up and to imagine. It's not like you get up and to imagine. It's not like you get up and you give a pretend speech. That's you give a pretend speech. That's you give a pretend speech. That's what psychologists were doing for years. what psychologists were doing for years. what psychologists were doing for years. It doesn't work because it's still It doesn't work because it's still It doesn't work because it's still pretending. It has to be real. You send pretending. It has to be real. You send pretending. It has to be real. You send people out in the world and to do the people out in the world and to do the people out in the world and to do the thing for real. You're worried about thing for real. You're worried about thing for real. You're worried about getting rejected. Go out and start getting rejected. Go out and start getting rejected. Go out and start asking people for help and you'll learn asking people for help and you'll learn asking people for help and you'll learn that your fear is misplaced get accepted that your fear is misplaced get accepted that your fear is misplaced get accepted more often than you might guess. more often than you might guess. more often than you might guess. Exposing people to that thing that they Exposing people to that thing that they Exposing people to that thing that they are anxious of, when the belief is are anxious of, when the belief is are anxious of, when the belief is misplaced, and with social anxiety it is misplaced, and with social anxiety it is misplaced, and with social anxiety it is usually wildly misplaced. That's what we usually wildly misplaced. That's what we usually wildly misplaced. That's what we find over and over again is a mistaken find over and over again is a mistaken find over and over again is a mistaken barrier to connecting with other people. barrier to connecting with other people. barrier to connecting with other people. That's how you ease that social That's how you ease that social That's how you ease that social anxiety and get rid of it. Not because anxiety and get rid of it. Not because anxiety and get rid of it. Not because you do you do you do you dull your anxiety so much. It's you dull your anxiety so much. It's you dull your anxiety so much. It's because you change your beliefs because you change your beliefs because you change your beliefs about what other people are like. about what other people are like. about what other people are like. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based [music] tools for everyday science-based [music] tools for everyday science-based [music] tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Nick Epley. Dr. Nick Epley today is Dr. Nick Epley. Dr. Nick Epley today is Dr. Nick Epley. Dr. Nick Epley is a behavioral scientist at the is a behavioral scientist at the is a behavioral scientist at the University of Chicago and an expert University of Chicago and an expert University of Chicago and an expert researcher on the science of social researcher on the science of social researcher on the science of social connection. What's different about connection. What's different about connection. What's different about today's conversation in the context of today's conversation in the context of today's conversation in the context of social connection is that it doesn't social connection is that it doesn't social connection is that it doesn't just center on improving relationships just center on improving relationships just center on improving relationships with friends or family or co-workers. We with friends or family or co-workers. We with friends or family or co-workers. We do talk about that, but we also talk do talk about that, but we also talk do talk about that, but we also talk about the smaller everyday conversations about the smaller everyday conversations about the smaller everyday conversations that we have with people that we don't that we have with people that we don't that we have with people that we don't know so well and the positive impact know so well and the positive impact know so well and the positive impact that can have on mental and that can have on mental and that can have on mental and physical health. Now, I want to be physical health. Now, I want to be physical health. Now, I want to be clear, we're not talking about engaging clear, we're not talking about engaging clear, we're not talking about engaging in small talk for small talk's sake. in small talk for small talk's sake. in small talk for small talk's sake. We're talking about taking opportunities We're talking about taking opportunities We're talking about taking opportunities to connect with people once or several to connect with people once or several to connect with people once or several times per day and the tremendous times per day and the tremendous times per day and the tremendous benefits that can have for people's benefits that can have for people's benefits that can have for people's mental and physical health, including mental and physical health, including mental and physical health, including yours. We also talk a lot about the yours. We also talk a lot about the yours. We also talk a lot about the assumptions that we tend to make about assumptions that we tend to make about assumptions that we tend to make about other people, both in real life and other people, both in real life and other people, both in real life and online, and how those actually match up online, and how those actually match up online, and how those actually match up with reality. We also talk about Nick with reality. We also talk about Nick with reality. We also talk about Nick Epley himself because his life strongly Epley himself because his life strongly Epley himself because his life strongly has informed his research. We talk about has informed his research. We talk about has informed his research. We talk about his biological and his adopted children, his biological and his adopted children, his biological and his adopted children, raising a child with additional needs, raising a child with additional needs, raising a child with additional needs, and the incredible joy and growth those and the incredible joy and growth those and the incredible joy and growth those choices have brought him and his family choices have brought him and his family choices have brought him and his family by virtue of the sorts of social by virtue of the sorts of social by virtue of the sorts of social connections that they've brought. I must connections that they've brought. I must connections that they've brought. I must say today's conversation went a lot of say today's conversation went a lot of say today's conversation went a lot of places that I did not anticipate, and it places that I did not anticipate, and it places that I did not anticipate, and it certainly inspired me to look certainly inspired me to look certainly inspired me to look differently at everyday interactions as differently at everyday interactions as differently at everyday interactions as far from trivial, and in fact key to the far from trivial, and in fact key to the far from trivial, and in fact key to the fabric of social connection and our fabric of social connection and our fabric of social connection and our mental and physical health. Before we mental and physical health. Before we mental and physical health. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Nick Epley. Dr. Nick Epley, welcome. Dr. Nick Epley. Dr. Nick Epley, welcome. Dr. Nick Epley. Dr. Nick Epley, welcome. Thank you so much for having me. We make Thank you so much for having me. We make Thank you so much for having me. We make a lot of assumptions about other people, a lot of assumptions about other people, a lot of assumptions about other people, and in my case, cuz I have a new puppy, and in my case, cuz I have a new puppy, and in my case, cuz I have a new puppy, about animals. about animals. about animals. You know, we're always thinking that we You know, we're always thinking that we You know, we're always thinking that we know what other beings are thinking. know what other beings are thinking. know what other beings are thinking. Yeah. But as you've pointed out, and as Yeah. But as you've pointed out, and as Yeah. But as you've pointed out, and as a colleague of mine in neurosciences, a colleague of mine in neurosciences, a colleague of mine in neurosciences, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, has pointed out, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, has pointed out, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, has pointed out, most of the time we don't even know what most of the time we don't even know what most of the time we don't even know what we're thinking. Like there's stuff going we're thinking. Like there's stuff going we're thinking. Like there's stuff going on in there, but like we're not on in there, but like we're not on in there, but like we're not that good at thinking, "Oh, that last that good at thinking, "Oh, that last that good at thinking, "Oh, that last thought was a complete sentence that thought was a complete sentence that thought was a complete sentence that means blank." That's not how the means blank." That's not how the means blank." That's not how the human mind works. human mind works. human mind works. &gt;&gt; Right. So, &gt;&gt; Right. So, &gt;&gt; Right. So, usually when we hear the word usually when we hear the word usually when we hear the word anthropomorphism, we're talking about anthropomorphism, we're talking about anthropomorphism, we're talking about humans making assumptions about other humans making assumptions about other humans making assumptions about other animals. &gt;&gt; Mhm. But humans are animals. We just &gt;&gt; Mhm. But humans are animals. We just &gt;&gt; Mhm. But humans are animals. We just happen to be the curators of the planet. happen to be the curators of the planet. happen to be the curators of the planet. So, why and how do we anthropomorphize So, why and how do we anthropomorphize So, why and how do we anthropomorphize about other people, and how does it hurt about other people, and how does it hurt about other people, and how does it hurt us, and how does it help us? us, and how does it help us? us, and how does it help us? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I think the way to think about &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I think the way to think about &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I think the way to think about anthropomorphism is that what we are anthropomorphism is that what we are anthropomorphism is that what we are doing is we're trying to understand doing is we're trying to understand doing is we're trying to understand what's going on within another agent, what's going on within another agent, what's going on within another agent, essentially. And so, anything that acts essentially. And so, anything that acts essentially. And so, anything that acts independently, right? You got a ball independently, right? You got a ball independently, right? You got a ball rolling across the table. If something rolling across the table. If something rolling across the table. If something else bumps into it and it moves in else bumps into it and it moves in else bumps into it and it moves in perfect, you know, the perfect perfect, you know, the perfect perfect, you know, the perfect deflection off of it, you don't need deflection off of it, you don't need deflection off of it, you don't need anything to explain why that ball moved anything to explain why that ball moved anything to explain why that ball moved as it did. But if this ball is coming as it did. But if this ball is coming as it did. But if this ball is coming across the table, another one hits it across the table, another one hits it across the table, another one hits it and it just keeps going or it goes some and it just keeps going or it goes some and it just keeps going or it goes some other direction, well, then it seems other direction, well, then it seems other direction, well, then it seems like there's something going inside that like there's something going inside that like there's something going inside that thing that might be driving it, right? thing that might be driving it, right? thing that might be driving it, right? And that in that thing that's inside And that in that thing that's inside And that in that thing that's inside that ball might be a mind, right? Might that ball might be a mind, right? Might that ball might be a mind, right? Might be a set of thoughts or beliefs or be a set of thoughts or beliefs or be a set of thoughts or beliefs or attitudes, some kind of psychology attitudes, some kind of psychology attitudes, some kind of psychology that's pushing it. At least that's the that's pushing it. At least that's the that's pushing it. At least that's the way we interpret what an independent way we interpret what an independent way we interpret what an independent agent might be doing. We do this when we agent might be doing. We do this when we agent might be doing. We do this when we think about other people, right? You're think about other people, right? You're think about other people, right? You're nodding your head now. I think you're nodding your head now. I think you're nodding your head now. I think you're thinking about something, right? You thinking about something, right? You thinking about something, right? You move this way or that, you wanted to do move this way or that, you wanted to do move this way or that, you wanted to do this thing or that thing. We do that this thing or that thing. We do that this thing or that thing. We do that same kind of mind reading, right? With same kind of mind reading, right? With same kind of mind reading, right? With non-human agents, animals, gods non-human agents, animals, gods non-human agents, animals, gods sometimes, the planet, even ourselves, sometimes, the planet, even ourselves, sometimes, the planet, even ourselves, right? We reflect on ourselves. We have right? We reflect on ourselves. We have right? We reflect on ourselves. We have experience at least with having certain experience at least with having certain experience at least with having certain mental states come to mind and we use mental states come to mind and we use mental states come to mind and we use that experience as a guide to what's that experience as a guide to what's that experience as a guide to what's going on in other people, too. That kind going on in other people, too. That kind going on in other people, too. That kind of anthropomorphism, that kind of mind of anthropomorphism, that kind of mind of anthropomorphism, that kind of mind reading, right? Where we infer others' reading, right? Where we infer others' reading, right? Where we infer others' thoughts or beliefs or attitudes, that's thoughts or beliefs or attitudes, that's thoughts or beliefs or attitudes, that's helpful to us for at least two reasons. helpful to us for at least two reasons. helpful to us for at least two reasons. One is it gives me some sense of why One is it gives me some sense of why One is it gives me some sense of why you're doing what you're doing now. It you're doing what you're doing now. It you're doing what you're doing now. It allows me to understand what you're allows me to understand what you're allows me to understand what you're doing right now. Are you trying to be doing right now. Are you trying to be doing right now. Are you trying to be kind? Are you trying to be uh kind? Are you trying to be uh kind? Are you trying to be uh aggressive? Are you trying to be aggressive? Are you trying to be aggressive? Are you trying to be friendly? But it also is pretty good at friendly? But it also is pretty good at friendly? But it also is pretty good at allowing me to predict what you're allowing me to predict what you're allowing me to predict what you're likely to do next. So if I think you likely to do next. So if I think you likely to do next. So if I think you feel hungry, well, you're going to go feel hungry, well, you're going to go feel hungry, well, you're going to go try to eat something. If I think you try to eat something. If I think you try to eat something. If I think you don't like me very well, you're going to don't like me very well, you're going to don't like me very well, you're going to behave a particular way towards me. So behave a particular way towards me. So behave a particular way towards me. So this kind of mental state inference, this kind of mental state inference, this kind of mental state inference, this kind of mind reading, serves us this kind of mind reading, serves us this kind of mind reading, serves us pretty well for getting around in a pretty well for getting around in a pretty well for getting around in a social world. social world. social world. Don't always get it right, but in Don't always get it right, but in Don't always get it right, but in general, it's better than not doing it general, it's better than not doing it general, it's better than not doing it at all. at all. at all. So as we make assumptions about others So as we make assumptions about others So as we make assumptions about others and their intentions and their and their intentions and their and their intentions and their past &gt;&gt; Mhm. choices in some cases, right? Like &gt;&gt; Mhm. choices in some cases, right? Like &gt;&gt; Mhm. choices in some cases, right? Like if somebody hits somebody else, we if somebody hits somebody else, we if somebody hits somebody else, we make an assumption about the certain make an assumption about the certain make an assumption about the certain things might have led up to that. things might have led up to that. things might have led up to that. &gt;&gt; Yes, right. Are we mainly paying &gt;&gt; Yes, right. Are we mainly paying &gt;&gt; Yes, right. Are we mainly paying attention to behavior? Mhm. And or are attention to behavior? Mhm. And or are attention to behavior? Mhm. And or are we paying attention to we paying attention to we paying attention to what they seem to be paying attention what they seem to be paying attention what they seem to be paying attention to? So called theory of mind. to? So called theory of mind. to? So called theory of mind. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it depends a lot on what kind &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it depends a lot on what kind &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it depends a lot on what kind of environment we're in. We think about of environment we're in. We think about of environment we're in. We think about the minds of others in lots and lots of the minds of others in lots and lots of the minds of others in lots and lots of different context. My wife right now is different context. My wife right now is different context. My wife right now is back home in Illinois. I can think about back home in Illinois. I can think about back home in Illinois. I can think about what she might want for dinner, right? what she might want for dinner, right? what she might want for dinner, right? Or what she's feeling at any given time. Or what she's feeling at any given time. Or what she's feeling at any given time. We can think about people when they're We can think about people when they're We can think about people when they're not present. We can think about not present. We can think about not present. We can think about strangers, people we know nothing about. strangers, people we know nothing about. strangers, people we know nothing about. I write a book. I'm trying to think I write a book. I'm trying to think I write a book. I'm trying to think about how will people understand this about how will people understand this about how will people understand this book, right? These are all cases where book, right? These are all cases where book, right? These are all cases where there's not somebody in front of us at there's not somebody in front of us at there's not somebody in front of us at all, right? And when we're doing that, all, right? And when we're doing that, all, right? And when we're doing that, particularly with strangers, people we particularly with strangers, people we particularly with strangers, people we know nothing about, things we know nothing about, things we know nothing about, things we know nothing about, then the one thing we nothing about, then the one thing we nothing about, then the one thing we have at our disposal is ourselves. We have at our disposal is ourselves. We have at our disposal is ourselves. We can use our own minds, right? So, if I can use our own minds, right? So, if I can use our own minds, right? So, if I walk into a classroom and I think it's walk into a classroom and I think it's walk into a classroom and I think it's kind of cold in here, well, I can assume kind of cold in here, well, I can assume kind of cold in here, well, I can assume that other people will think it's cold, that other people will think it's cold, that other people will think it's cold, too. I'm using myself as a guide. too. I'm using myself as a guide. too. I'm using myself as a guide. Once I know a little more maybe about Once I know a little more maybe about Once I know a little more maybe about you, right? I learn that you are, you you, right? I learn that you are, you you, right? I learn that you are, you know, you're a PhD from Stanford. I know, you're a PhD from Stanford. I know, you're a PhD from Stanford. I learn that um learn that um learn that um you know, somebody is a is an athlete or you know, somebody is a is an athlete or you know, somebody is a is an athlete or whatever. I learn something about you. whatever. I learn something about you. whatever. I learn something about you. You're you're a doctor or you're a You're you're a doctor or you're a You're you're a doctor or you're a lawyer. Then I can use that information, lawyer. Then I can use that information, lawyer. Then I can use that information, my beliefs about groups of people, as a my beliefs about groups of people, as a my beliefs about groups of people, as a guide. That's stereotyping. And guide. That's stereotyping. And guide. That's stereotyping. And stereotypes contain a fair bit of stereotypes contain a fair bit of stereotypes contain a fair bit of accuracy to them. If I know that you're accuracy to them. If I know that you're accuracy to them. If I know that you're a Democrat or a Republican, I can make a Democrat or a Republican, I can make a Democrat or a Republican, I can make some reasonable inferences about other some reasonable inferences about other some reasonable inferences about other thoughts you might have, other beliefs thoughts you might have, other beliefs thoughts you might have, other beliefs you might have. Not perfect, but better you might have. Not perfect, but better you might have. Not perfect, but better than chance guessing. than chance guessing. than chance guessing. And then once I see you, like what we're And then once I see you, like what we're And then once I see you, like what we're doing right now, if I can see you, then doing right now, if I can see you, then doing right now, if I can see you, then I'm watching your behavior. And then I'm watching your behavior. And then I'm watching your behavior. And then behavior dominates. Behavior though is behavior dominates. Behavior though is behavior dominates. Behavior though is tricky. I'm watching you, right? You tricky. I'm watching you, right? You tricky. I'm watching you, right? You could have two people kissing. They could have two people kissing. They could have two people kissing. They seem, you know, delightfully in love, seem, you know, delightfully in love, seem, you know, delightfully in love, right? They seem just so nice together. right? They seem just so nice together. right? They seem just so nice together. And you can you can make one set of And you can you can make one set of And you can you can make one set of inferences when you see that inferences when you see that inferences when you see that happening based on that. You can infer happening based on that. You can infer happening based on that. You can infer what's going on behind that based on what's going on behind that based on what's going on behind that based on what you're seeing. And when we can see what you're seeing. And when we can see what you're seeing. And when we can see the behavior in front of us, that's then the behavior in front of us, that's then the behavior in front of us, that's then what we're paying most attention to. But what we're paying most attention to. But what we're paying most attention to. But each of these different mechanisms, each of these different mechanisms, each of these different mechanisms, egocentrism, stereotyping, and behaviorism, we might think of and behaviorism, we might think of and behaviorism, we might think of working backwards from your behavior, working backwards from your behavior, working backwards from your behavior, they all gain give us some accuracy, but they all gain give us some accuracy, but they all gain give us some accuracy, but they also create some error. they also create some error. they also create some error. Egocentrism creates egocentric biases. I Egocentrism creates egocentric biases. I Egocentrism creates egocentric biases. I assume that you think more like I do assume that you think more like I do assume that you think more like I do than you actually do. than you actually do. than you actually do. Stereotyping tends to create uh a Stereotyping tends to create uh a Stereotyping tends to create uh a different set of mistakes. I tend to different set of mistakes. I tend to different set of mistakes. I tend to think that groups are more distinct and think that groups are more distinct and think that groups are more distinct and different from each other than they different from each other than they different from each other than they actually are because stereotypes are actually are because stereotypes are actually are because stereotypes are about the defining features of groups, about the defining features of groups, about the defining features of groups, which tends to exaggerate the which tends to exaggerate the which tends to exaggerate the differences between groups. And when it differences between groups. And when it differences between groups. And when it comes to behavior, I tend to assume a comes to behavior, I tend to assume a comes to behavior, I tend to assume a simpler, more simplistic simpler, more simplistic simpler, more simplistic uh mind behind that behavior than uh mind behind that behavior than uh mind behind that behavior than exactly actually exists. Psychologists exactly actually exists. Psychologists exactly actually exists. Psychologists refer to this as the correspondence refer to this as the correspondence refer to this as the correspondence bias. I tend to infer an intention or bias. I tend to infer an intention or bias. I tend to infer an intention or set of beliefs or attitudes that set of beliefs or attitudes that set of beliefs or attitudes that corresponds with your behavior as I see corresponds with your behavior as I see corresponds with your behavior as I see it. So, if I see you hit somebody, I it. So, if I see you hit somebody, I it. So, if I see you hit somebody, I might assume you are an aggressive might assume you are an aggressive might assume you are an aggressive person. That's how I interpret right person. That's how I interpret right person. That's how I interpret right away. Had I known it was in away. Had I known it was in away. Had I known it was in self-defense, then I would interpret it self-defense, then I would interpret it self-defense, then I would interpret it very differently, right? But we tend to very differently, right? But we tend to very differently, right? But we tend to leap to mental states or intentions from leap to mental states or intentions from leap to mental states or intentions from behavior. Sometimes that can get us into behavior. Sometimes that can get us into behavior. Sometimes that can get us into trouble when the relationship between trouble when the relationship between trouble when the relationship between intentions or thoughts and behavior is a intentions or thoughts and behavior is a intentions or thoughts and behavior is a little complicated. So, each of those little complicated. So, each of those little complicated. So, each of those gets us some accuracy, gets us some accuracy, gets us some accuracy, but each of them also creates some but each of them also creates some but each of them also creates some error. If you are willing, I'd like to return If you are willing, I'd like to return If you are willing, I'd like to return to the example you gave at the beginning to the example you gave at the beginning to the example you gave at the beginning of a ball rolling on a table and of a ball rolling on a table and of a ball rolling on a table and another ball striking it or not. You another ball striking it or not. You another ball striking it or not. You know, in the second example you gave, know, in the second example you gave, know, in the second example you gave, the ball simply takes off on a the ball simply takes off on a the ball simply takes off on a different trajectory and you said that different trajectory and you said that different trajectory and you said that we're going to make some assumption that we're going to make some assumption that we're going to make some assumption that the ball has something like a mind, the ball has something like a mind, the ball has something like a mind, something controlling its decisions. something controlling its decisions. something controlling its decisions. What I'm about to say reflects a What I'm about to say reflects a What I'm about to say reflects a strong bias, which is that I've long strong bias, which is that I've long strong bias, which is that I've long been interested in the visual system of been interested in the visual system of been interested in the visual system of non-human and human primates because we non-human and human primates because we non-human and human primates because we are so visual. And the eyes are two are so visual. And the eyes are two are so visual. And the eyes are two pieces of the brain. Are they the only pieces of the brain. Are they the only pieces of the brain. Are they the only pieces of the brain in healthy pieces of the brain in healthy pieces of the brain in healthy individuals that are outside the cranial individuals that are outside the cranial individuals that are outside the cranial vault and they give us a lot of vault and they give us a lot of vault and they give us a lot of information and I think people know that information and I think people know that information and I think people know that but I don't think they appreciate just but I don't think they appreciate just but I don't think they appreciate just how much information they give us how much information they give us how much information they give us not just pupil size and whether or not just pupil size and whether or not just pupil size and whether or not our gaze is locked with theirs all our gaze is locked with theirs all our gaze is locked with theirs all that's true too but if I could just that's true too but if I could just that's true too but if I could just alter your experiment for a second let's alter your experiment for a second let's alter your experiment for a second let's say that first ball had eyes. Oh yeah. say that first ball had eyes. Oh yeah. say that first ball had eyes. Oh yeah. And it's rolling forward but then the And it's rolling forward but then the And it's rolling forward but then the eyes shift to the left and then the ball eyes shift to the left and then the ball eyes shift to the left and then the ball goes to the left now I have additional goes to the left now I have additional goes to the left now I have additional information I have a window literally information I have a window literally information I have a window literally into the brain where I can say what's into the brain where I can say what's into the brain where I can say what's over there that might have motivated over there that might have motivated over there that might have motivated that decision and I think with humans we that decision and I think with humans we that decision and I think with humans we do this right like if somebody's going do this right like if somebody's going do this right like if somebody's going down the street just swinging their arms down the street just swinging their arms down the street just swinging their arms wildly and hitting people we think this wildly and hitting people we think this wildly and hitting people we think this person's out of control they're crazy person's out of control they're crazy person's out of control they're crazy whereas if they see somebody then they whereas if they see somebody then they whereas if they see somebody then they orient their gaze toward them now orient their gaze toward them now orient their gaze toward them now we start making all sorts of we start making all sorts of we start making all sorts of assumptions about the operations of that assumptions about the operations of that assumptions about the operations of that mind. &gt;&gt; Yes. And in my worldview no pun intended &gt;&gt; Yes. And in my worldview no pun intended &gt;&gt; Yes. And in my worldview no pun intended the eyes are the best source of the eyes are the best source of the eyes are the best source of information about intent about goals information about intent about goals information about intent about goals etc. So limiting the conversation to etc. So limiting the conversation to etc. So limiting the conversation to conditions where we can see the other conditions where we can see the other conditions where we can see the other person and what they see person and what they see person and what they see are there any examples of our judgments are there any examples of our judgments are there any examples of our judgments about other people's thoughts and about other people's thoughts and about other people's thoughts and behavior and etc. behavior and etc. behavior and etc. improving by virtue of improving by virtue of improving by virtue of &gt;&gt; Oh for sure yeah I mean so So the &gt;&gt; Oh for sure yeah I mean so So the &gt;&gt; Oh for sure yeah I mean so So the eyes are do provide valid information eyes are do provide valid information eyes are do provide valid information &gt;&gt; the voice also contains an awful lot so &gt;&gt; the voice also contains an awful lot so &gt;&gt; the voice also contains an awful lot so that's the other thing we spend a lot of that's the other thing we spend a lot of that's the other thing we spend a lot of time studying but time studying but time studying but we are the most socially we are the most socially we are the most socially sophisticated primate species on the sophisticated primate species on the sophisticated primate species on the planet we have a brain uniquely equipped planet we have a brain uniquely equipped planet we have a brain uniquely equipped for connecting with the minds of others for connecting with the minds of others for connecting with the minds of others and that means that we are and that means that we are and that means that we are hypersensitive to certain things the hypersensitive to certain things the hypersensitive to certain things the eyes are one of them there's this great eyes are one of them there's this great eyes are one of them there's this great paper in 2008 on the cultural paper in 2008 on the cultural paper in 2008 on the cultural intelligence hypothesis it's a science intelligence hypothesis it's a science intelligence hypothesis it's a science paper where they compared you know they paper where they compared you know they paper where they compared you know they tried to assess what is it that tried to assess what is it that tried to assess what is it that makes humans sort of unique on this makes humans sort of unique on this makes humans sort of unique on this planet. Um and they compared little over 100 and they compared little over 100 and they compared little over 100 2-year-old toddlers, right? Imagine 2-year-old toddlers, right? Imagine 2-year-old toddlers, right? Imagine running this experiment if you would. A running this experiment if you would. A running this experiment if you would. A little over 100 2-year-old toddlers. little over 100 2-year-old toddlers. little over 100 2-year-old toddlers. This was done at the Max Planck This was done at the Max Planck This was done at the Max Planck Institute in Germany, one of the Max Institute in Germany, one of the Max Institute in Germany, one of the Max Plancks. Uh over 100 chimpanzees and Plancks. Uh over 100 chimpanzees and Plancks. Uh over 100 chimpanzees and then just for good measure, another 36 then just for good measure, another 36 then just for good measure, another 36 orangutans who apparently had nothing orangutans who apparently had nothing orangutans who apparently had nothing better to do. Honestly, aren't they better to do. Honestly, aren't they better to do. Honestly, aren't they crazy? Yeah, it's crazy. crazy? Yeah, it's crazy. crazy? Yeah, it's crazy. &gt;&gt; exhausting, but &gt;&gt; exhausting, but &gt;&gt; exhausting, but &gt;&gt; Exactly. Man, I can't Yeah, I would &gt;&gt; Exactly. Man, I can't Yeah, I would &gt;&gt; Exactly. Man, I can't Yeah, I would like to know the background of like to know the background of like to know the background of details of this. How it was actually details of this. How it was actually details of this. How it was actually done and how long it took. But what they done and how long it took. But what they done and how long it took. But what they did essentially is ran each of these did essentially is ran each of these did essentially is ran each of these groups through two different kinds of IQ groups through two different kinds of IQ groups through two different kinds of IQ tests, you might think of them as. One tests, you might think of them as. One tests, you might think of them as. One was an IQ test involving physical was an IQ test involving physical was an IQ test involving physical objects, right? So, things like, objects, right? So, things like, objects, right? So, things like, [snorts] you know, tracking where a [snorts] you know, tracking where a [snorts] you know, tracking where a reward was placed under a shell game or reward was placed under a shell game or reward was placed under a shell game or using a tool to solve some kind of using a tool to solve some kind of using a tool to solve some kind of problem. Ja- Jane Goodall once, you problem. Ja- Jane Goodall once, you problem. Ja- Jane Goodall once, you know, psychologists once believed, biologists psychologists once believed, biologists psychologists once believed, biologists once believed that tool use was made once believed that tool use was made once believed that tool use was made humans unique until Jane Goodall watched humans unique until Jane Goodall watched humans unique until Jane Goodall watched the chimpanzees using twigs to get the chimpanzees using twigs to get the chimpanzees using twigs to get termites out of a termite mound, right? termites out of a termite mound, right? termites out of a termite mound, right? On the physical IQ test problems, On the physical IQ test problems, On the physical IQ test problems, the human toddlers, the adult chimps, the human toddlers, the adult chimps, the human toddlers, the adult chimps, and the orangutans performed equally and the orangutans performed equally and the orangutans performed equally well. There wasn't a difference. It's well. There wasn't a difference. It's well. There wasn't a difference. It's not reasoning about physical things in not reasoning about physical things in not reasoning about physical things in space that make us unique. space that make us unique. space that make us unique. The other group of IQ problems were The other group of IQ problems were The other group of IQ problems were social problems, where it required social problems, where it required social problems, where it required reasoning about the mind of another reasoning about the mind of another reasoning about the mind of another person. And this involved doing things person. And this involved doing things person. And this involved doing things like tracking where someone's eyes are like tracking where someone's eyes are like tracking where someone's eyes are looking in order to monitor what someone is in order to monitor what someone is in order to monitor what someone is thinking. Because we tend to look at thinking. Because we tend to look at thinking. Because we tend to look at things we're thinking about and things we're thinking about and things we're thinking about and think about things we're looking at. If think about things we're looking at. If think about things we're looking at. If I want to know what's on your mind, I want to know what's on your mind, I want to know what's on your mind, what's governing your attention, I want what's governing your attention, I want what's governing your attention, I want to be really good at tracking your eyes. to be really good at tracking your eyes. to be really good at tracking your eyes. And we are amazing at this as human And we are amazing at this as human And we are amazing at this as human beings. I can tell whether you're beings. I can tell whether you're beings. I can tell whether you're looking at me right now or looking at my looking at me right now or looking at my looking at me right now or looking at my right ear from this far without any right ear from this far without any right ear from this far without any trouble. I can tell from 50 ft away trouble. I can tell from 50 ft away trouble. I can tell from 50 ft away whether you're looking at me or looking whether you're looking at me or looking whether you're looking at me or looking at, you know, 10 ft above me. We're at, you know, 10 ft above me. We're at, you know, 10 ft above me. We're amazingly good at this. Super sensitive. amazingly good at this. Super sensitive. amazingly good at this. Super sensitive. I couldn't calculate the angle on a roof I couldn't calculate the angle on a roof I couldn't calculate the angle on a roof if you gave me a month and an armload of if you gave me a month and an armload of if you gave me a month and an armload of protractors to do it, but I can detect protractors to do it, but I can detect protractors to do it, but I can detect the angle in your eyes in an instant. the angle in your eyes in an instant. the angle in your eyes in an instant. Also involved things like Also involved things like Also involved things like being able to understand somebody's being able to understand somebody's being able to understand somebody's intentions from their actions, right? intentions from their actions, right? intentions from their actions, right? So, if I reach out to for this glass of So, if I reach out to for this glass of So, if I reach out to for this glass of water and I miss it, water and I miss it, water and I miss it, you can infer I'm thirsty and I want to you can infer I'm thirsty and I want to you can infer I'm thirsty and I want to drink. You could Oh, you could hand me drink. You could Oh, you could hand me drink. You could Oh, you could hand me the glass, Nick, right? If if I wanted the glass, Nick, right? If if I wanted the glass, Nick, right? If if I wanted to drink. And because that's you to drink. And because that's you to drink. And because that's you couldn't read my mind, essentially. You couldn't read my mind, essentially. You couldn't read my mind, essentially. You could infer my thoughts. When they could infer my thoughts. When they could infer my thoughts. When they tested the 2-year-old toddlers, the tested the 2-year-old toddlers, the tested the 2-year-old toddlers, the chimps, and the orangutans on in these chimps, and the orangutans on in these chimps, and the orangutans on in these social IQ tests, social IQ tests, social IQ tests, that's where the 2-year-old toddlers that's where the 2-year-old toddlers that's where the 2-year-old toddlers were shining. That's where we were shining. That's where we were shining. That's where we were crushing the competition on those social crushing the competition on those social crushing the competition on those social IQ problems. IQ problems. IQ problems. You can do this, you know, in front of a You can do this, you know, in front of a You can do this, you know, in front of a chimpanzee all day long and they will do chimpanzee all day long and they will do chimpanzee all day long and they will do nothing for you, right? Nothing for you. nothing for you, right? Nothing for you. nothing for you, right? Nothing for you. I do that in front of you and you can I do that in front of you and you can I do that in front of you and you can hand me the glass of water super easily. hand me the glass of water super easily. hand me the glass of water super easily. So, yes, the eyes give us a lot and we So, yes, the eyes give us a lot and we So, yes, the eyes give us a lot and we are extremely sensitive to all of those are extremely sensitive to all of those are extremely sensitive to all of those social cues that convey might convey social cues that convey might convey social cues that convey might convey what's on the mind of another person cuz what's on the mind of another person cuz what's on the mind of another person cuz it allows me to anticipate what you're it allows me to anticipate what you're it allows me to anticipate what you're doing before you do it. doing before you do it. doing before you do it. In today's financial landscape of In today's financial landscape of In today's financial landscape of constant market shifts and chaotic news, constant market shifts and chaotic news, constant market shifts and chaotic news, it's easy to feel uncertain about how to it's easy to feel uncertain about how to it's easy to feel uncertain about how to save and invest your money. Wealthfront save and invest your money. Wealthfront save and invest your money. Wealthfront is the solution that helps you take is the solution that helps you take is the solution that helps you take control of your money while managing control of your money while managing control of your money while managing risk. For nearly a decade, I've trusted risk. For nearly a decade, I've trusted risk. For nearly a decade, I've trusted Wealthfront to navigate this volatility. Wealthfront to navigate this volatility. Wealthfront to navigate this volatility. With the Wealthfront cash account, I can With the Wealthfront cash account, I can With the Wealthfront cash account, I can earn 3.3% annual percentage yield or APY earn 3.3% annual percentage yield or APY earn 3.3% annual percentage yield or APY on my cash from program banks, and I on my cash from program banks, and I on my cash from program banks, and I know my money is growing until I'm ready know my money is growing until I'm ready know my money is growing until I'm ready to spend it or invest it. One of the to spend it or invest it. One of the to spend it or invest it. One of the features I love about Wealthfront is features I love about Wealthfront is features I love about Wealthfront is that I have access to instant no-fee that I have access to instant no-fee that I have access to instant no-fee withdrawals to eligible accounts 24/7. withdrawals to eligible accounts 24/7. withdrawals to eligible accounts 24/7. That means I can move my money where I That means I can move my money where I That means I can move my money where I need it without waiting. And when I'm need it without waiting. And when I'm need it without waiting. And when I'm ready to transition from saving to ready to transition from saving to ready to transition from saving to investing, Wealthfront lets me investing, Wealthfront lets me investing, Wealthfront lets me seamlessly transfer my funds into one of seamlessly transfer my funds into one of seamlessly transfer my funds into one of their expert-built portfolios. For a their expert-built portfolios. For a their expert-built portfolios. For a limited time, Wealthfront is offering limited time, Wealthfront is offering limited time, Wealthfront is offering the Huberman Lab audience an exclusive the Huberman Lab audience an exclusive the Huberman Lab audience an exclusive 0.75% APY boost over the base rate for 3 0.75% APY boost over the base rate for 3 0.75% APY boost over the base rate for 3 months, meaning you can get up to 4.05% months, meaning you can get up to 4.05% months, meaning you can get up to 4.05% variable APY on up to $150,000 variable APY on up to $150,000 variable APY on up to $150,000 in deposits. Over 1 million people in deposits. Over 1 million people in deposits. Over 1 million people already trust Wealthfront to save more, already trust Wealthfront to save more, already trust Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth earn more, and build long-term wealth earn more, and build long-term wealth with confidence. If you'd like to try with confidence. If you'd like to try with confidence. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, you can go to Wealthfront, you can go to Wealthfront, you can go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive the boost offer and start to receive the boost offer and start to receive the boost offer and start earning 4.05% variable APY today. That's earning 4.05% variable APY today. That's earning 4.05% variable APY today. That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started. This is a paid to get started. This is a paid to get started. This is a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Client testimonial of Wealthfront. Client testimonial of Wealthfront. Client experiences will vary. Wealthfront experiences will vary. Wealthfront experiences will vary. Wealthfront brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is as of January 30th, 2026, and subject to as of January 30th, 2026, and subject to as of January 30th, 2026, and subject to change. For more information, please see change. For more information, please see change. For more information, please see the episode description. Today's episode the episode description. Today's episode the episode description. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight Sleep automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 5 years now, and it has cover for nearly 5 years now, and it has cover for nearly 5 years now, and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on, and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on, and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on, and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called Autopilot, which is an AI feature called Autopilot, which is an AI feature called Autopilot, which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring, and it makes head if you're snoring, and it makes head if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to eight sleep.com/huberman eight sleep.com/huberman eight sleep.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight sleep.com/huberman Again, that's eight sleep.com/huberman Again, that's eight sleep.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. And you mentioned voice. Um I'm going to And you mentioned voice. Um I'm going to And you mentioned voice. Um I'm going to make an assumption. I'm sure it's wrong. make an assumption. I'm sure it's wrong. make an assumption. I'm sure it's wrong. Um or at least partially wrong. That Um or at least partially wrong. That Um or at least partially wrong. That voice offers a lot of information about voice offers a lot of information about voice offers a lot of information about autonomic tone, how stressed or how autonomic tone, how stressed or how autonomic tone, how stressed or how relaxed somebody is. relaxed somebody is. relaxed somebody is. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh and I'd be curious to know &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh and I'd be curious to know &gt;&gt; Mhm. Uh and I'd be curious to know A if that's true, what else it conveys, A if that's true, what else it conveys, A if that's true, what else it conveys, and also how much prior exposure to voice also how much prior exposure to voice also how much prior exposure to voice matters. Today's the first time I've met matters. Today's the first time I've met matters. Today's the first time I've met you. I don't know what your voice you. I don't know what your voice you. I don't know what your voice normally sounds like in this context. So normally sounds like in this context. So normally sounds like in this context. So I'm just operating off what I've got. I'm just operating off what I've got. I'm just operating off what I've got. Yeah. So what's in voice? What's not in Yeah. So what's in voice? What's not in Yeah. So what's in voice? What's not in voice? And and what are we aware voice? And and what are we aware voice? And and what are we aware of? What are we not aware? Yeah. So of? What are we not aware? Yeah. So of? What are we not aware? Yeah. So there are lots of things contained in there are lots of things contained in there are lots of things contained in the voice because it is very closely the voice because it is very closely the voice because it is very closely connected to your mind. You notice that connected to your mind. You notice that connected to your mind. You notice that your eyes are, right? Your eyes are your eyes are, right? Your eyes are your eyes are, right? Your eyes are closed. But your voice is also very closed. But your voice is also very closed. But your voice is also very closely connected to your online closely connected to your online closely connected to your online conscious experience. You are speaking conscious experience. You are speaking conscious experience. You are speaking while you are thinking. And as you're while you are thinking. And as you're while you are thinking. And as you're having thoughts, your voice can reflect having thoughts, your voice can reflect having thoughts, your voice can reflect authentically what's going on in your authentically what's going on in your authentically what's going on in your mind. So when I speed up, you can tell mind. So when I speed up, you can tell mind. So when I speed up, you can tell I'm kind of excited about something. I'm kind of excited about something. I'm kind of excited about something. When my voice varies in pitch, you can When my voice varies in pitch, you can When my voice varies in pitch, you can tell if I'm enthusiastic or not or kind tell if I'm enthusiastic or not or kind tell if I'm enthusiastic or not or kind of sad about something. You can pick up of sad about something. You can pick up of sad about something. You can pick up a lot about what's actually going on in a lot about what's actually going on in a lot about what's actually going on in the mind by listening to a person's the mind by listening to a person's the mind by listening to a person's voice. And there are a couple of things voice. And there are a couple of things voice. And there are a couple of things that we've studied in our research. that we've studied in our research. that we've studied in our research. One is voice just contains a lot of One is voice just contains a lot of One is voice just contains a lot of information that allows us to understand information that allows us to understand information that allows us to understand other people better. Right? So if you other people better. Right? So if you other people better. Right? So if you compare typing to somebody versus compare typing to somebody versus compare typing to somebody versus talking to them, the voice allows you to talking to them, the voice allows you to talking to them, the voice allows you to determine things like intentionality, to determine things like intentionality, to determine things like intentionality, to differentiate when you're telling to differentiate when you're telling to differentiate when you're telling a joke or being sarcastic than when a joke or being sarcastic than when a joke or being sarcastic than when you're not, right? What type does he you're not, right? What type does he you're not, right? What type does he mean? &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; This is so funny, right? We think when &gt;&gt; This is so funny, right? We think when &gt;&gt; This is so funny, right? We think when we're sending off an email to somebody. we're sending off an email to somebody. we're sending off an email to somebody. It seems funny to us cuz we know this is It seems funny to us cuz we know this is It seems funny to us cuz we know this is meant to be a joke. Person on the other meant to be a joke. Person on the other meant to be a joke. Person on the other end doesn't realize the comment about end doesn't realize the comment about end doesn't realize the comment about this person's aunt or brother or this person's aunt or brother or this person's aunt or brother or whatever was meant to be a joke and whatever was meant to be a joke and whatever was meant to be a joke and they're all offended, right? But if you they're all offended, right? But if you they're all offended, right? But if you say this in your voice, sarcasm is say this in your voice, sarcasm is say this in your voice, sarcasm is crystal clear. Interestingly, what we crystal clear. Interestingly, what we crystal clear. Interestingly, what we find, and this is because of egocentrism find, and this is because of egocentrism find, and this is because of egocentrism in part, we're not always so sensitive in part, we're not always so sensitive in part, we're not always so sensitive to how our own communication is to how our own communication is to how our own communication is interpreted by another person because we interpreted by another person because we interpreted by another person because we know what we're thinking when we're know what we're thinking when we're know what we're thinking when we're conveying something, we tend to think conveying something, we tend to think conveying something, we tend to think we'll be understood equally well whether we'll be understood equally well whether we'll be understood equally well whether we're typing or talking, but of course we're typing or talking, but of course we're typing or talking, but of course on the receiving end it varies a lot. on the receiving end it varies a lot. on the receiving end it varies a lot. So, voice contains a lot of information So, voice contains a lot of information So, voice contains a lot of information that allows us to understand what that allows us to understand what that allows us to understand what somebody's saying better. somebody's saying better. somebody's saying better. But, what we also find, which I think But, what we also find, which I think But, what we also find, which I think is, at least from my perspective, also is, at least from my perspective, also is, at least from my perspective, also interesting, is that the voice also interesting, is that the voice also interesting, is that the voice also conveys the presence of mind. conveys the presence of mind. conveys the presence of mind. I don't have access to your thinking, to I don't have access to your thinking, to I don't have access to your thinking, to your reasoning, to what's going on your reasoning, to what's going on your reasoning, to what's going on between your ears. I can only watch from between your ears. I can only watch from between your ears. I can only watch from the outside, right? And I get cues. I the outside, right? And I get cues. I the outside, right? And I get cues. I can see your visual gaze, but I can also can see your visual gaze, but I can also can see your visual gaze, but I can also hear you. The voice contains a lot of hear you. The voice contains a lot of hear you. The voice contains a lot of cues to the presence of mind. cues to the presence of mind. cues to the presence of mind. When you're really thinking hard about When you're really thinking hard about When you're really thinking hard about something, your voice slows down and you something, your voice slows down and you something, your voice slows down and you deliberate. And that variability in the deliberate. And that variability in the deliberate. And that variability in the pace of your voice kind of tells me that pace of your voice kind of tells me that pace of your voice kind of tells me that your mind is alive. Just like I can tell your mind is alive. Just like I can tell your mind is alive. Just like I can tell that you're biologically alive because that you're biologically alive because that you're biologically alive because you're moving, you're moving, you're moving, your voice also moves and it tells me your voice also moves and it tells me your voice also moves and it tells me you got a lively mind. It conveys the you got a lively mind. It conveys the you got a lively mind. It conveys the presence of emotion. It can prevent presence of emotion. It can prevent presence of emotion. It can prevent convey the presence of thinking. So, convey the presence of thinking. So, convey the presence of thinking. So, when we have partisans, for instance, when we have partisans, for instance, when we have partisans, for instance, we did this This is with Juliana we did this This is with Juliana we did this This is with Juliana Schroeder, who is one of my amazing PhD Schroeder, who is one of my amazing PhD Schroeder, who is one of my amazing PhD students from years ago. She's now on students from years ago. She's now on students from years ago. She's now on the faculty at Berkeley at Haas. We the faculty at Berkeley at Haas. We the faculty at Berkeley at Haas. We had people This was on the eve of the had people This was on the eve of the had people This was on the eve of the 2016 election between Donald Trump and 2016 election between Donald Trump and 2016 election between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. Hillary Clinton. Hillary Clinton. We had We had We had people who were voting for Trump or people who were voting for Trump or people who were voting for Trump or Clinton say why they were voting for the say why they were voting for the say why they were voting for the candidate they were voting for. candidate they were voting for. candidate they were voting for. And they gave a verbal pitch. And we And they gave a verbal pitch. And we And they gave a verbal pitch. And we could get a few different cues from could get a few different cues from could get a few different cues from this. We could get an audio recorded this. We could get an audio recorded this. We could get an audio recorded clip, so we could see and hear the clip, so we could see and hear the clip, so we could see and hear the person. We could just get their voice. person. We could just get their voice. person. We could just get their voice. And we could also strip out their voice And we could also strip out their voice And we could also strip out their voice and just see the content of their text, and just see the content of their text, and just see the content of their text, right? To see the words they were right? To see the words they were right? To see the words they were saying. They also wrote a pitch about an saying. They also wrote a pitch about an saying. They also wrote a pitch about an explanation for why they were voting for explanation for why they were voting for explanation for why they were voting for this particular candidate, okay? this particular candidate, okay? this particular candidate, okay? What we then did was we had people What we then did was we had people What we then did was we had people watch and listen, read the watch and listen, read the watch and listen, read the transcript, or read the transcript, or read the transcript, or read the written explanation, the written explanation, the written explanation, and say and say and say essentially, how mindful is this person? essentially, how mindful is this person? essentially, how mindful is this person? How thoughtful are they? How thoughtful, How thoughtful are they? How thoughtful, How thoughtful are they? How thoughtful, how intelligent, how rational, how intelligent, how rational, how intelligent, how rational, how capable of experiencing emotions are how capable of experiencing emotions are how capable of experiencing emotions are they? Essentially, they're asking, are they? Essentially, they're asking, are they? Essentially, they're asking, are you a mindful, intelligent person, or you a mindful, intelligent person, or you a mindful, intelligent person, or are you kind of just like a mindless are you kind of just like a mindless are you kind of just like a mindless idiot? Are you human-like, or are you idiot? Are you human-like, or are you idiot? Are you human-like, or are you kind of not human-like, like a more like kind of not human-like, like a more like kind of not human-like, like a more like a rock? a rock? a rock? And what we found was that when people And what we found was that when people And what we found was that when people could hear could hear could hear what the person had to say, either while what the person had to say, either while what the person had to say, either while also seeing them, or just with their also seeing them, or just with their also seeing them, or just with their voice, they rated the person, voice, they rated the person, voice, they rated the person, particularly when they disagreed with particularly when they disagreed with particularly when they disagreed with them, when there was person on the other them, when there was person on the other them, when there was person on the other side, as more thoughtful, more intelligent, as more thoughtful, more intelligent, as more thoughtful, more intelligent, more rational. This tendency to more rational. This tendency to more rational. This tendency to dehumanize the other side, to think of dehumanize the other side, to think of dehumanize the other side, to think of them as mindless idiots, was them as mindless idiots, was them as mindless idiots, was dramatically reduced when you actually dramatically reduced when you actually dramatically reduced when you actually heard what the other person has to say. heard what the other person has to say. heard what the other person has to say. So, I think the voice, along with the So, I think the voice, along with the So, I think the voice, along with the eyes, along with eyes gaze I gaze, but eyes, along with eyes gaze I gaze, but eyes, along with eyes gaze I gaze, but the voice allows us, gives us a lot of the voice allows us, gives us a lot of the voice allows us, gives us a lot of information, allows us to understand information, allows us to understand information, allows us to understand what's on somebody's mind, and it also what's on somebody's mind, and it also what's on somebody's mind, and it also allows us something deeper, allows me to allows us something deeper, allows me to allows us something deeper, allows me to tell you that you've got a mind, that tell you that you've got a mind, that tell you that you've got a mind, that you have one. you have one. you have one. Very interesting. I the vision piece I'm Very interesting. I the vision piece I'm Very interesting. I the vision piece I'm familiar with for reasons I stated familiar with for reasons I stated familiar with for reasons I stated before. The physical behavior piece before. The physical behavior piece before. The physical behavior piece makes a lot of sense. The the voice makes a lot of sense. The the voice makes a lot of sense. The the voice piece as a reflection of an active mind piece as a reflection of an active mind piece as a reflection of an active mind is something I really haven't is something I really haven't is something I really haven't considered. You know, we'll hear considered. You know, we'll hear considered. You know, we'll hear sometimes that the content of people's sometimes that the content of people's sometimes that the content of people's words is less informative than, you words is less informative than, you words is less informative than, you know, the timbre of their voice or know, the timbre of their voice or know, the timbre of their voice or something like that. I don't know that something like that. I don't know that something like that. I don't know that I completely believe that. I think I completely believe that. I think I completely believe that. I think that that's a I think that's a 90s that that's a I think that's a 90s that that's a I think that's a 90s That's like an 80s 90s pop psychology That's like an 80s 90s pop psychology That's like an 80s 90s pop psychology ism. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. That is a highly stylized &gt;&gt; Absolutely. That is a highly stylized &gt;&gt; Absolutely. That is a highly stylized experimental result. Mhm. All right. So, experimental result. Mhm. All right. So, experimental result. Mhm. All right. So, you will sometimes hear in this pop you will sometimes hear in this pop you will sometimes hear in this pop psych world that 80% of what's psych world that 80% of what's psych world that 80% of what's communicated is communicated through communicated is communicated through communicated is communicated through paralinguistic. That obviously is not paralinguistic. That obviously is not paralinguistic. That obviously is not true. You're not going to I'm not going true. You're not going to I'm not going true. You're not going to I'm not going to be able to tell you about my book to be able to tell you about my book to be able to tell you about my book just by using the tone of my voice. just by using the tone of my voice. just by using the tone of my voice. Right. So that is that certainly Right. So that is that certainly Right. So that is that certainly &gt;&gt; Words matter. &gt;&gt; Words matter. &gt;&gt; Words matter. &gt;&gt; The words certainly do matter. But above &gt;&gt; The words certainly do matter. But above &gt;&gt; The words certainly do matter. But above and beyond that, there are other things and beyond that, there are other things and beyond that, there are other things that matter in a person's voice that at that matter in a person's voice that at that matter in a person's voice that at least we find people aren't so sensitive least we find people aren't so sensitive least we find people aren't so sensitive to. So when we ask for instance to. So when we ask for instance to. So when we ask for instance when we ask our MBA students when we ask our MBA students when we ask our MBA students to give an elevator pitch as Juliana and to give an elevator pitch as Juliana and to give an elevator pitch as Juliana and I did in one of our one of our I did in one of our one of our I did in one of our one of our experiments. Give an elevator pitch for experiments. Give an elevator pitch for experiments. Give an elevator pitch for their desired job, the job their desired job, the job their desired job, the job they want most, right? Why should this they want most, right? Why should this they want most, right? Why should this company hire you? company hire you? company hire you? They can give it with their voice, so we They can give it with their voice, so we They can give it with their voice, so we do the audio and visual. do the audio and visual. do the audio and visual. Uh we do just the audio. We pull out the Uh we do just the audio. We pull out the Uh we do just the audio. We pull out the transcript, just get the words. Or they transcript, just get the words. Or they transcript, just get the words. Or they type their pitch. We then have people type their pitch. We then have people type their pitch. We then have people watch and listen, or read these watch and listen, or read these watch and listen, or read these pitches and say, "How intelligent does pitches and say, "How intelligent does pitches and say, "How intelligent does this person seem to be? this person seem to be? this person seem to be? How hirable does this person seem to How hirable does this person seem to How hirable does this person seem to be?" And we've done this both with be?" And we've done this both with be?" And we've done this both with people who imagine working for companies people who imagine working for companies people who imagine working for companies and also with Fortune 500 recruiters, and also with Fortune 500 recruiters, and also with Fortune 500 recruiters, too. The person seems more intelligent, more The person seems more intelligent, more The person seems more intelligent, more rational, more thoughtful, more hirable rational, more thoughtful, more hirable rational, more thoughtful, more hirable when you hear what they have to say. when you hear what they have to say. when you hear what they have to say. And yet the MBA students themselves And yet the MBA students themselves And yet the MBA students themselves think they'll be judged equally on those think they'll be judged equally on those think they'll be judged equally on those two. They're not. two. They're not. two. They're not. And when we asked like a separate And when we asked like a separate And when we asked like a separate group of people, "If you wanted separate group of people, "If you wanted separate group of people, "If you wanted to communicate with somebody in a way to communicate with somebody in a way to communicate with somebody in a way that would make you seem most that would make you seem most that would make you seem most intelligent overwhelmingly people say overwhelmingly people say overwhelmingly people say I'd rather write." Hm. And the thinking I'd rather write." Hm. And the thinking I'd rather write." Hm. And the thinking behind that I think is that people think behind that I think is that people think behind that I think is that people think they can edit and such. But what they're they can edit and such. But what they're they can edit and such. But what they're missing is that the sound of your voice conveys is that the sound of your voice conveys is that the sound of your voice conveys a lot more. It conveys the fact that you a lot more. It conveys the fact that you a lot more. It conveys the fact that you have a mind. have a mind. have a mind. Cuz I can't see it and I can't read it Cuz I can't see it and I can't read it Cuz I can't see it and I can't read it in your dead text, right? Your dead text in your dead text, right? Your dead text in your dead text, right? Your dead text [snorts] has none of the paralinguistic [snorts] has none of the paralinguistic [snorts] has none of the paralinguistic cues or features. Really talented cues or features. Really talented cues or features. Really talented writers, novelists can do this. writers, novelists can do this. writers, novelists can do this. But mostly your text is dead. It doesn't But mostly your text is dead. It doesn't But mostly your text is dead. It doesn't have intonation. have intonation. have intonation. It doesn't change its pitch. It doesn't It doesn't change its pitch. It doesn't It doesn't change its pitch. It doesn't show me thinking while it's actually show me thinking while it's actually show me thinking while it's actually happening. And people don't seem to realize that. And people don't seem to realize that. And people don't seem to realize that. What does this reveal to us about AI? What does this reveal to us about AI? What does this reveal to us about AI? Um because people are spending more and because people are spending more and because people are spending more and more time with AI, on AI. more time with AI, on AI. more time with AI, on AI. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And what comes back is text. I &gt;&gt; Yeah. And what comes back is text. I &gt;&gt; Yeah. And what comes back is text. I mean, there are versions of it and soon mean, there are versions of it and soon mean, there are versions of it and soon I imagine there will be elaborated I imagine there will be elaborated I imagine there will be elaborated versions of it with um avatars or even versions of it with um avatars or even versions of it with um avatars or even uh video Yeah, for sure. AI. Are you uh video Yeah, for sure. AI. Are you uh video Yeah, for sure. AI. Are you generally enthusiastic about what that generally enthusiastic about what that generally enthusiastic about what that could bring in terms of could bring in terms of could bring in terms of better understanding other humans? Cuz I better understanding other humans? Cuz I better understanding other humans? Cuz I could imagine a world where, you know, I could imagine a world where, you know, I could imagine a world where, you know, I can't reach you, but I could go on AI can't reach you, but I could go on AI can't reach you, but I could go on AI and say, "Hey Nick, and say, "Hey Nick, and say, "Hey Nick, I would just do it directly. Hey Nick, I would just do it directly. Hey Nick, I would just do it directly. Hey Nick, uh I'm really curious. I'm going to the uh I'm really curious. I'm going to the uh I'm really curious. I'm going to the Midwest where you're from and I'm super Midwest where you're from and I'm super Midwest where you're from and I'm super interested in like culturally, what's interested in like culturally, what's interested in like culturally, what's the best way that I could connect with the best way that I could connect with the best way that I could connect with someone around this, and this, someone around this, and this, someone around this, and this, given the content on the internet? The given the content on the internet? The given the content on the internet? The uh LLM should be able to have a video of uh LLM should be able to have a video of uh LLM should be able to have a video of you delivered to me uh what you would you delivered to me uh what you would you delivered to me uh what you would say, or pretty close to it. Is that say, or pretty close to it. Is that say, or pretty close to it. Is that can be better than a bullet point can be better than a bullet point can be better than a bullet point list? It will, yeah. So, people will list? It will, yeah. So, people will list? It will, yeah. So, people will find it more believable, I think, right? find it more believable, I think, right? find it more believable, I think, right? But a lot of the things that people turn But a lot of the things that people turn But a lot of the things that people turn to AI for now are for facts, right? For to AI for now are for facts, right? For to AI for now are for facts, right? For actual information, for text. But actual information, for text. But actual information, for text. But I do think increasingly it's going to be I do think increasingly it's going to be I do think increasingly it's going to be used for social stuff. Yeah. used for social stuff. Yeah. used for social stuff. Yeah. &gt;&gt; People feel lonely, disconnected, they &gt;&gt; People feel lonely, disconnected, they &gt;&gt; People feel lonely, disconnected, they need a friend. I'm friends with Liz Dunn need a friend. I'm friends with Liz Dunn need a friend. I'm friends with Liz Dunn who's a fabulous psychologist at who's a fabulous psychologist at who's a fabulous psychologist at University of British Columbia. And she University of British Columbia. And she University of British Columbia. And she told me told me told me that they're starting to do research that they're starting to do research that they're starting to do research about allowing people to practice about allowing people to practice about allowing people to practice having conversations with AI before they having conversations with AI before they having conversations with AI before they actually have a conversation with actually have a conversation with actually have a conversation with another person, like a conflict. another person, like a conflict. another person, like a conflict. &gt;&gt; Mhm. I can see ways in which AI could be &gt;&gt; Mhm. I can see ways in which AI could be &gt;&gt; Mhm. I can see ways in which AI could be used to do lots of things. I can also used to do lots of things. I can also used to do lots of things. I can also see obvious problems with it. If I'm see obvious problems with it. If I'm see obvious problems with it. If I'm connecting with the AI and I'm not connecting with the AI and I'm not connecting with the AI and I'm not connecting with other humans, I can see connecting with other humans, I can see connecting with other humans, I can see problems with it. But I think in terms problems with it. But I think in terms problems with it. But I think in terms of the presence versus absence of a of the presence versus absence of a of the presence versus absence of a voice, um voice, um voice, um I do think voice will allow us to the I do think voice will allow us to the I do think voice will allow us to the extent that it's good and perfect, extent that it's good and perfect, extent that it's good and perfect, right? Sounds like a human voice. right? Sounds like a human voice. right? Sounds like a human voice. Our predict My prediction would be that Our predict My prediction would be that Our predict My prediction would be that you can trust it more when you hear what you can trust it more when you hear what you can trust it more when you hear what it has to say. As long as it mimics it has to say. As long as it mimics it has to say. As long as it mimics really well a human voice. really well a human voice. really well a human voice. Cuz you'd anthropomorphize it just like Cuz you'd anthropomorphize it just like Cuz you'd anthropomorphize it just like you do another person. I don't want to you do another person. I don't want to you do another person. I don't want to spend too much time on politics, but I spend too much time on politics, but I spend too much time on politics, but I can't help but ask this next question. can't help but ask this next question. can't help but ask this next question. Um way back when uh way back when uh way back when uh Bush was president, second one, um I Bush was president, second one, um I Bush was president, second one, um I recall there was a lot of discussion recall there was a lot of discussion recall there was a lot of discussion around um around um around um people who voted for him saying, "He's people who voted for him saying, "He's people who voted for him saying, "He's the kind of guy you'd want to have a the kind of guy you'd want to have a the kind of guy you'd want to have a beer with." beer with." beer with." &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which I interpreted as &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which I interpreted as &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which I interpreted as there's something about his style of there's something about his style of there's something about his style of speech which was very everyday. speech which was very everyday. speech which was very everyday. &gt;&gt; Yes. And we don't have to talk about &gt;&gt; Yes. And we don't have to talk about &gt;&gt; Yes. And we don't have to talk about current candidates and politicians, not current candidates and politicians, not current candidates and politicians, not to avoid it. I don't have to answer on to avoid it. I don't have to answer on to avoid it. I don't have to answer on anything these days. But I think it anything these days. But I think it anything these days. But I think it nowadays we have a lot of access to nowadays we have a lot of access to nowadays we have a lot of access to people talking on video. They you know, people talking on video. They you know, people talking on video. They you know, when you and I were growing up, I think when you and I were growing up, I think when you and I were growing up, I think we're more or less the same age. You we're more or less the same age. You we're more or less the same age. You know, there would be a pre- presidential know, there would be a pre- presidential know, there would be a pre- presidential address or there'd be a campaign and you address or there'd be a campaign and you address or there'd be a campaign and you hear from people, but it was it was very hear from people, but it was it was very hear from people, but it was it was very limited. You didn't get so much exposure limited. You didn't get so much exposure limited. You didn't get so much exposure to people. So now we have more and more to people. So now we have more and more to people. So now we have more and more information about voice, about behavior, information about voice, about behavior, information about voice, about behavior, about decision-making um depending on about decision-making um depending on about decision-making um depending on the resolution where their eyes are the resolution where their eyes are the resolution where their eyes are going. Um going. Um going. Um do you think that we're getting do you think that we're getting do you think that we're getting better at assessing better at assessing better at assessing public figures or are we getting worse public figures or are we getting worse public figures or are we getting worse at assessing public figures? at assessing public figures? at assessing public figures? &gt;&gt; question. &gt;&gt; question. &gt;&gt; question. I think uh that'll take me too far out I think uh that'll take me too far out I think uh that'll take me too far out on a limb. I don't I don't know. I don't on a limb. I don't I don't know. I don't on a limb. I don't I don't know. I don't know the answer to that. I mean, there's know the answer to that. I mean, there's know the answer to that. I mean, there's so much information that we have now. Um so much information that we have now. Um so much information that we have now. Um but the other thing too is that the way but the other thing too is that the way but the other thing too is that the way we evaluate other people, and this is we evaluate other people, and this is we evaluate other people, and this is this is central to a lot of our this is central to a lot of our this is central to a lot of our research, other people are ambiguous, research, other people are ambiguous, research, other people are ambiguous, right? They're not crystal clear. That right? They're not crystal clear. That right? They're not crystal clear. That same thing that I say to you that I mean same thing that I say to you that I mean same thing that I say to you that I mean to be a joke can sound really hostile or to be a joke can sound really hostile or to be a joke can sound really hostile or violent to another person, right? Can violent to another person, right? Can violent to another person, right? Can sound really awful and be taken as sound really awful and be taken as sound really awful and be taken as offensive. So I think that that's what offensive. So I think that that's what offensive. So I think that that's what make my makes my work as a psychologist make my makes my work as a psychologist make my makes my work as a psychologist so interesting. so interesting. so interesting. In the early 1900s, psychologist, you In the early 1900s, psychologist, you In the early 1900s, psychologist, you know, when social psychology, my field, know, when social psychology, my field, know, when social psychology, my field, and cognitive psychology started, it and cognitive psychology started, it and cognitive psychology started, it came out of, you know, basically biology came out of, you know, basically biology came out of, you know, basically biology and vision sciences and basic and vision sciences and basic and vision sciences and basic sensory perception, thinking that we sensory perception, thinking that we sensory perception, thinking that we could understand human thinking and could understand human thinking and could understand human thinking and measure it, measure our judgments about measure it, measure our judgments about measure it, measure our judgments about each other in the same way that we each other in the same way that we each other in the same way that we measure how people evaluate hot and cold measure how people evaluate hot and cold measure how people evaluate hot and cold and stuff like that. But it turns out and stuff like that. But it turns out and stuff like that. But it turns out that other people are very ambiguous. that other people are very ambiguous. that other people are very ambiguous. It's not always so crystal clear. And It's not always so crystal clear. And It's not always so crystal clear. And so, two people with a different set of so, two people with a different set of so, two people with a different set of beliefs or attitudes or perspectives on beliefs or attitudes or perspectives on beliefs or attitudes or perspectives on the situation can look at the very same the situation can look at the very same the situation can look at the very same stimulus and see totally different things, right? and see totally different things, right? and see totally different things, right? A lot of our judgment is not happening A lot of our judgment is not happening A lot of our judgment is not happening out there, coming to us. It's happening out there, coming to us. It's happening out there, coming to us. It's happening in here, interpreting what we're seeing. in here, interpreting what we're seeing. in here, interpreting what we're seeing. And in the world of politics, everyone And in the world of politics, everyone And in the world of politics, everyone who's listening to this podcast knows who's listening to this podcast knows who's listening to this podcast knows just how ambiguous things are. Somebody just how ambiguous things are. Somebody just how ambiguous things are. Somebody says something and the right will, you says something and the right will, you says something and the right will, you know, think interpret it this way, the know, think interpret it this way, the know, think interpret it this way, the left will interpret it that way. It's left will interpret it that way. It's left will interpret it that way. It's known as my side bias. Even the very known as my side bias. Even the very known as my side bias. Even the very same stimulus, right? So, there is this same stimulus, right? So, there is this same stimulus, right? So, there is this sense that if we get more and more and sense that if we get more and more and sense that if we get more and more and more information, more information, more information, then we'll understand people better, then we'll understand people better, then we'll understand people better, better. better, better. better, better. That's not necessarily true if we come That's not necessarily true if we come That's not necessarily true if we come into these perceptions, into these into these perceptions, into these into these perceptions, into these viewing these things with very different viewing these things with very different viewing these things with very different starting points, a very different starting points, a very different starting points, a very different perspectives to begin with. You've perspectives to begin with. You've perspectives to begin with. You've worked a lot on this notion of under worked a lot on this notion of under worked a lot on this notion of under socialization. &gt;&gt; Mhm. If I may, I'd like to invert it for &gt;&gt; Mhm. If I may, I'd like to invert it for &gt;&gt; Mhm. If I may, I'd like to invert it for today's conversation and uh today's conversation and uh today's conversation and uh talk a little bit less through the lens talk a little bit less through the lens talk a little bit less through the lens of how bad it is if we're under of how bad it is if we're under of how bad it is if we're under socialized and um explore instead how socialized and um explore instead how socialized and um explore instead how good it is if we do socialize. good it is if we do socialize. good it is if we do socialize. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um not because I have to make &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um not because I have to make &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um not because I have to make things positive, but because ultimately things positive, but because ultimately things positive, but because ultimately I think actions to socialize more are I think actions to socialize more are I think actions to socialize more are going to be useful. And going to be useful. And going to be useful. And &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um I'm tempted to set this up as an I'm tempted to set this up as an I'm tempted to set this up as an experiment. Uh-huh. So, as with the experiment. Uh-huh. So, as with the experiment. Uh-huh. So, as with the example of balls you gave before, in the example of balls you gave before, in the example of balls you gave before, in the most deprived condition, a human is in most deprived condition, a human is in most deprived condition, a human is in total isolation. total isolation. total isolation. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. Okay, so, um Okay, so, um Okay, so, um another condition is they can, let's another condition is they can, let's another condition is they can, let's just say, text with somebody else, but just say, text with somebody else, but just say, text with somebody else, but they can't see them and they they've they can't see them and they they've they can't see them and they they've never seen them. never seen them. never seen them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then we can ratchet that up, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then we can ratchet that up, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then we can ratchet that up, right? They've seen them before, they right? They've seen them before, they right? They've seen them before, they can make a phone call, they can do video can make a phone call, they can do video can make a phone call, they can do video chat, they're in person. I can see a chat, they're in person. I can see a chat, they're in person. I can see a million excellent arguments for while million excellent arguments for while million excellent arguments for while why in-person interaction is good. But why in-person interaction is good. But why in-person interaction is good. But what is the evidence that the other what is the evidence that the other what is the evidence that the other forms of social interaction are good forms of social interaction are good forms of social interaction are good also? We hear so much about how they're also? We hear so much about how they're also? We hear so much about how they're bad, but we also hear about the bad, but we also hear about the bad, but we also hear about the isolation crisis. Yeah. And so we've isolation crisis. Yeah. And so we've isolation crisis. Yeah. And so we've sort of I've lumped sort of I've lumped sort of I've lumped the more deprived versions of the more deprived versions of the more deprived versions of socialization in with isolation, and I'm socialization in with isolation, and I'm socialization in with isolation, and I'm not sure that I accept that. I'm not sure that I accept that. I'm not sure that I accept that. I'm not trying to counter your work. I don't trying to counter your work. I don't trying to counter your work. I don't know enough about to do it. I'm not know enough about to do it. I'm not know enough about to do it. I'm not qualified to anyway. But is texting with qualified to anyway. But is texting with qualified to anyway. But is texting with a friend healthy as opposed to spending a friend healthy as opposed to spending a friend healthy as opposed to spending time alone? For sure. Okay. In person time alone? For sure. Okay. In person time alone? For sure. Okay. In person time clearly being the best. time clearly being the best. time clearly being the best. &gt;&gt; It's a little better. Although going &gt;&gt; It's a little better. Although going &gt;&gt; It's a little better. Although going from no contact to some contact is the from no contact to some contact is the from no contact to some contact is the big leap. Tell me more. So, being big leap. Tell me more. So, being big leap. Tell me more. So, being isolated is a spending a day alone is isolated is a spending a day alone is isolated is a spending a day alone is pretty is pretty miserable. So, when pretty is pretty miserable. So, when pretty is pretty miserable. So, when psychologists look at this comes psychologists look at this comes psychologists look at this comes from a from a famous from a from a famous from a from a famous paper by Danny Kahneman and Angus paper by Danny Kahneman and Angus paper by Danny Kahneman and Angus Deaton, both Nobel Prize winners in Deaton, both Nobel Prize winners in Deaton, both Nobel Prize winners in economics, neither of them economists, economics, neither of them economists, economics, neither of them economists, that looked at the Gallup daily that looked at the Gallup daily that looked at the Gallup daily well-being poll, right? And the call well-being poll, right? And the call well-being poll, right? And the call they call people up every day and they call people up every day and they call people up every day and they ask them how you're feeling today they ask them how you're feeling today they ask them how you're feeling today in a number of different ways. We in a number of different ways. We in a number of different ways. We they actually ask you about the day they actually ask you about the day they actually ask you about the day before. Yesterday did you enjoy before. Yesterday did you enjoy before. Yesterday did you enjoy yesterday? Did you feel enjoyment yesterday? Did you feel enjoyment yesterday? Did you feel enjoyment yesterday? Were did you smile yesterday? Were did you smile yesterday? Were did you smile yesterday? Did you experience sadness yesterday? Did you experience sadness yesterday? Did you experience sadness yesterday? Right? Did you experience stress Right? Did you experience stress Right? Did you experience stress yesterday? And they So, they ask yesterday? And they So, they ask yesterday? And they So, they ask about these different measures of about these different measures of about these different measures of well-being. They also ask about all kinds of other They also ask about all kinds of other They also ask about all kinds of other things like how much money you're things like how much money you're things like how much money you're making, are you religious or not, making, are you religious or not, making, are you religious or not, they know how much insurance you have, they know how much insurance you have, they know how much insurance you have, whether you're surveyed on a weekend or whether you're surveyed on a weekend or whether you're surveyed on a weekend or a weekday. They also ask you, a weekday. They also ask you, a weekday. They also ask you, did you spend yesterday entirely alone did you spend yesterday entirely alone did you spend yesterday entirely alone or not? And when they do that, you can or not? And when they do that, you can or not? And when they do that, you can compare the effects of things like compare the effects of things like compare the effects of things like social isolation, you know, being alone social isolation, you know, being alone social isolation, you know, being alone versus not against these other things. versus not against these other things. versus not against these other things. It turns out the difference between It turns out the difference between It turns out the difference between spending yesterday alone versus somebody spending yesterday alone versus somebody spending yesterday alone versus somebody else, the difference in your well-being else, the difference in your well-being else, the difference in your well-being on these other measures is about seven on these other measures is about seven on these other measures is about seven times bigger than being relatively high times bigger than being relatively high times bigger than being relatively high or low on their income measure, which is or low on their income measure, which is or low on their income measure, which is about a $60,000 difference between these about a $60,000 difference between these about a $60,000 difference between these two groups. That being alone is bad. two groups. That being alone is bad. two groups. That being alone is bad. That's a bad day. Okay? And having That's a bad day. Okay? And having That's a bad day. Okay? And having connections with other people improves connections with other people improves connections with other people improves it pretty dramatically. Above and beyond it pretty dramatically. Above and beyond it pretty dramatically. Above and beyond that, you know, it does matter. It that, you know, it does matter. It that, you know, it does matter. It can be it's it is better those can be it's it is better those can be it's it is better those interactions, but now you're interactions, but now you're interactions, but now you're adding good things to what was you're adding good things to what was you're adding good things to what was already somewhat a good thing. Plus, already somewhat a good thing. Plus, already somewhat a good thing. Plus, we also need to we also need to we also need to we need to unpack a little bit what we need to unpack a little bit what we need to unpack a little bit what these different media do. They're good these different media do. They're good these different media do. They're good for different things. And we don't for different things. And we don't for different things. And we don't always use them for in the ways that are always use them for in the ways that are always use them for in the ways that are right, but I think, you know, in many right, but I think, you know, in many right, but I think, you know, in many ways we do. Like, if I ways we do. Like, if I ways we do. Like, if I send you a text or I send my wife a send you a text or I send my wife a send you a text or I send my wife a text, right? She's she's back in text, right? She's she's back in text, right? She's she's back in Illinois today. We've been married for Illinois today. We've been married for Illinois today. We've been married for nearly 30 It'll be 30 years in August nearly 30 It'll be 30 years in August nearly 30 It'll be 30 years in August this year. We know a ton about each this year. We know a ton about each this year. We know a ton about each other. I can send her, you know, a heart other. I can send her, you know, a heart other. I can send her, you know, a heart when I'm feeling, you know, love and I when I'm feeling, you know, love and I when I'm feeling, you know, love and I want to send her let her know that. And want to send her let her know that. And want to send her let her know that. And she's going to feel that's going to lift she's going to feel that's going to lift she's going to feel that's going to lift her up a little bit. That's going to her up a little bit. That's going to her up a little bit. That's going to feel good. We already have a feel good. We already have a feel good. We already have a relationship that's establishing just relationship that's establishing just relationship that's establishing just some contact. Texting is great for some contact. Texting is great for some contact. Texting is great for that. It can allow us to stay in contact that. It can allow us to stay in contact that. It can allow us to stay in contact with somebody. with somebody. with somebody. It is not good for building a It is not good for building a It is not good for building a relationship necessarily over time. relationship necessarily over time. relationship necessarily over time. Like, if we're going to spend a half Like, if we're going to spend a half Like, if we're going to spend a half hour typing to each other, it's not a hour typing to each other, it's not a hour typing to each other, it's not a good way to spend that half hour. I'd be good way to spend that half hour. I'd be good way to spend that half hour. I'd be much better at picking up the phone and much better at picking up the phone and much better at picking up the phone and talking to you to help establish that talking to you to help establish that talking to you to help establish that relationship. But absolutely, the relationship. But absolutely, the relationship. But absolutely, the ability to reach out and connect with ability to reach out and connect with ability to reach out and connect with other people other people other people frequently, as texting is used out in frequently, as texting is used out in frequently, as texting is used out in the world, can allow us to stay the world, can allow us to stay the world, can allow us to stay connected. Now, if that's the only thing connected. Now, if that's the only thing connected. Now, if that's the only thing we're doing, if we're not actually we're doing, if we're not actually we're doing, if we're not actually spending time developing more meaningful spending time developing more meaningful spending time developing more meaningful relationships with people, relationships with people, relationships with people, that's not going to be as good as it as that's not going to be as good as it as that's not going to be as good as it as it could be. But you started this by it could be. But you started this by it could be. But you started this by asking about sociality more generally. asking about sociality more generally. asking about sociality more generally. And why is being social good for us? The And why is being social good for us? The And why is being social good for us? The fact of the matter is, even with our fact of the matter is, even with our fact of the matter is, even with our imperfections in thinking about the imperfections in thinking about the imperfections in thinking about the minds of others, we are highly social. minds of others, we are highly social. minds of others, we are highly social. Just the ability to think in the level Just the ability to think in the level Just the ability to think in the level of sophistication that we do about the of sophistication that we do about the of sophistication that we do about the minds of other people shows how minds of other people shows how minds of other people shows how important the sociality is for us. And important the sociality is for us. And important the sociality is for us. And you see the importance of sociality just you see the importance of sociality just you see the importance of sociality just almost everywhere you look, the way our almost everywhere you look, the way our almost everywhere you look, the way our brain is organized, right? So, our brain is organized, right? So, our brain is organized, right? So, our neocortex is massive relative to the neocortex is massive relative to the neocortex is massive relative to the rest of our brain compared to our rest of our brain compared to our rest of our brain compared to our nearest primate relatives, the nearest primate relatives, the nearest primate relatives, the chimpanzees. A lot of that stuff is good chimpanzees. A lot of that stuff is good chimpanzees. A lot of that stuff is good for social stuff, right? For theory of for social stuff, right? For theory of for social stuff, right? For theory of mind use, for keeping track of who knows mind use, for keeping track of who knows mind use, for keeping track of who knows what and who you should trust and who what and who you should trust and who what and who you should trust and who you should avoid. Living in large social you should avoid. Living in large social you should avoid. Living in large social groups is complicated, right? And the groups is complicated, right? And the groups is complicated, right? And the size of our brain reflects a size of our brain reflects a size of our brain reflects a complication. If you look across primate complication. If you look across primate complication. If you look across primate species, the size of the neocortex species, the size of the neocortex species, the size of the neocortex relative to the rest of the brain is relative to the rest of the brain is relative to the rest of the brain is correlated with this is this is correlated with this is this is correlated with this is this is uh this is work on the social brain uh this is work on the social brain uh this is work on the social brain hypothesis, right? The size of the hypothesis, right? The size of the hypothesis, right? The size of the neocortex relative to the rest of the neocortex relative to the rest of the neocortex relative to the rest of the brain is correlated with the social brain is correlated with the social brain is correlated with the social complexity of the group the primate complexity of the group the primate complexity of the group the primate species lives in. species lives in. species lives in. Our brains are built to be social. Also, Our brains are built to be social. Also, Our brains are built to be social. Also, for most of human history, being alone for most of human history, being alone for most of human history, being alone and isolated is a death sentence, right? and isolated is a death sentence, right? and isolated is a death sentence, right? You can't live on your own. We depend You can't live on your own. We depend You can't live on your own. We depend on each other for survival. That also on each other for survival. That also on each other for survival. That also means that we have a neural architecture means that we have a neural architecture means that we have a neural architecture that is desperately trying to keep us that is desperately trying to keep us that is desperately trying to keep us connected with other people. And so, connected with other people. And so, connected with other people. And so, when you spend a day alone, the reason when you spend a day alone, the reason when you spend a day alone, the reason why it feels like crap as my uh as my why it feels like crap as my uh as my why it feels like crap as my uh as my late colleague and friend John Cacioppo, late colleague and friend John Cacioppo, late colleague and friend John Cacioppo, who was at the uh University of Chicago, who was at the uh University of Chicago, who was at the uh University of Chicago, studied loneliness, really is the world studied loneliness, really is the world studied loneliness, really is the world was the world's expert on loneliness, was the world's expert on loneliness, was the world's expert on loneliness, noted that your neural architecture noted that your neural architecture noted that your neural architecture is screaming at you when you are feeling is screaming at you when you are feeling is screaming at you when you are feeling when you are alone to reach out and when you are alone to reach out and when you are alone to reach out and connect with other people. That's why connect with other people. That's why connect with other people. That's why loneliness feels bad, right? And that's loneliness feels bad, right? And that's loneliness feels bad, right? And that's why the opposite of loneliness feels so why the opposite of loneliness feels so why the opposite of loneliness feels so good, like getting like getting a hug, good, like getting like getting a hug, good, like getting like getting a hug, that feels good. Your brain is trying to that feels good. Your brain is trying to that feels good. Your brain is trying to tell you get out there and connect with tell you get out there and connect with tell you get out there and connect with other people. So, when you're lonely, other people. So, when you're lonely, other people. So, when you're lonely, you get spikes in cortisol in your you get spikes in cortisol in your you get spikes in cortisol in your bloodstream that compromises your bloodstream that compromises your bloodstream that compromises your cardiovascular functioning, that cardiovascular functioning, that cardiovascular functioning, that compromises your immune system. That's compromises your immune system. That's compromises your immune system. That's why being lonely can make you sick and why being lonely can make you sick and why being lonely can make you sick and why it can shorten your life, right? You why it can shorten your life, right? You why it can shorten your life, right? You also see that the opposite of also see that the opposite of also see that the opposite of loneliness, connecting with other loneliness, connecting with other loneliness, connecting with other people, just feels darn good, right? people, just feels darn good, right? people, just feels darn good, right? That's your brain telling you that's That's your brain telling you that's That's your brain telling you that's your body telling you, "Yeah, do this a your body telling you, "Yeah, do this a your body telling you, "Yeah, do this a little more often. This is really good." little more often. This is really good." little more often. This is really good." Right? So, when you have that little Right? So, when you have that little Right? So, when you have that little conversation with the with a stranger conversation with the with a stranger conversation with the with a stranger like I did coming you know coming in, I like I did coming you know coming in, I like I did coming you know coming in, I had this amazing conversation. It was had this amazing conversation. It was had this amazing conversation. It was actually a very deep, hard conversation actually a very deep, hard conversation actually a very deep, hard conversation with my Uber driver who was Iranian, with my Uber driver who was Iranian, with my Uber driver who was Iranian, uh had lost a son in a protest. Shot in uh had lost a son in a protest. Shot in uh had lost a son in a protest. Shot in the neck years ago. In Iran. In Iran, the neck years ago. In Iran. In Iran, the neck years ago. In Iran. In Iran, yeah. Very painful, but also very yeah. Very painful, but also very yeah. Very painful, but also very meaningful. Connected us to each other. meaningful. Connected us to each other. meaningful. Connected us to each other. Felt a very strong bond with each other Felt a very strong bond with each other Felt a very strong bond with each other in that moment. That's your brain in that moment. That's your brain in that moment. That's your brain telling you, that's the kind of thing telling you, that's the kind of thing telling you, that's the kind of thing that we're built for, right? Because that we're built for, right? Because that we're built for, right? Because living alone for most of human history living alone for most of human history living alone for most of human history was a bad thing. So, we are was a bad thing. So, we are was a bad thing. So, we are hyper-social agents interested in hyper-social agents interested in hyper-social agents interested in connecting with other people. It doesn't connecting with other people. It doesn't connecting with other people. It doesn't always mean we know exactly how to do it always mean we know exactly how to do it always mean we know exactly how to do it or that we get it right, but going or that we get it right, but going or that we get it right, but going from nothing to something is a huge leap from nothing to something is a huge leap from nothing to something is a huge leap for us. And texting can sometimes help for us. And texting can sometimes help for us. And texting can sometimes help us do that. One comment, one question. us do that. One comment, one question. us do that. One comment, one question. Um sometimes I like a day alone. Yeah, Um sometimes I like a day alone. Yeah, Um sometimes I like a day alone. Yeah, for everybody else it's but that's for everybody else it's but that's for everybody else it's but that's because I don't spend time around lots because I don't spend time around lots because I don't spend time around lots of people, but I spend a lot of time of people, but I spend a lot of time of people, but I spend a lot of time around certain set of people. I adore around certain set of people. I adore around certain set of people. I adore them, but you know, sometimes it's nice them, but you know, sometimes it's nice them, but you know, sometimes it's nice to get that space. But one thing that to get that space. But one thing that to get that space. But one thing that I've noticed that because when I was a I've noticed that because when I was a I've noticed that because when I was a graduate student I'd run these graduate student I'd run these graduate student I'd run these experiments often during the holidays experiments often during the holidays experiments often during the holidays because I worked on developmental because I worked on developmental because I worked on developmental neurobiology. I didn't have a choice. neurobiology. I didn't have a choice. neurobiology. I didn't have a choice. If that you know, if my experimental If that you know, if my experimental If that you know, if my experimental subjects were a certain postnatal age, I subjects were a certain postnatal age, I subjects were a certain postnatal age, I was working that day. It was my after was working that day. It was my after was working that day. It was my after all. And there's this kind of all. And there's this kind of all. And there's this kind of interesting idea that I'm not sure I subscribe to, idea that I'm not sure I subscribe to, idea that I'm not sure I subscribe to, but well, that I do subscribe to. Forgive well, that I do subscribe to. Forgive well, that I do subscribe to. Forgive me. That me. That me. That there's something about us as humans there's something about us as humans there's something about us as humans that we really like to create action at that we really like to create action at that we really like to create action at a distance, you know, and I don't know a distance, you know, and I don't know a distance, you know, and I don't know if there's a sex difference here, but I if there's a sex difference here, but I if there's a sex difference here, but I think it's like you know, young boys think it's like you know, young boys think it's like you know, young boys like to create like a rocket or a remote like to create like a rocket or a remote like to create like a rocket or a remote control car, you know, you have boys, control car, you know, you have boys, control car, you know, you have boys, you know. Or you see something happen you know. Or you see something happen you know. Or you see something happen over there um that you controlled in over there um that you controlled in over there um that you controlled in a in a meaningful way. And it doesn't a in a meaningful way. And it doesn't a in a meaningful way. And it doesn't have to be violent, right? It we did have to be violent, right? It we did have to be violent, right? It we did rockets and guns, but it could have rockets and guns, but it could have rockets and guns, but it could have could be something else, but could be something else, but could be something else, but this is somewhat philosophical more than this is somewhat philosophical more than this is somewhat philosophical more than it's scientific, but could it be that if it's scientific, but could it be that if it's scientific, but could it be that if we spend too much time alone, we got all we spend too much time alone, we got all we spend too much time alone, we got all this stuff in our mind and it's very this stuff in our mind and it's very this stuff in our mind and it's very hard to create some sort of hard to create some sort of hard to create some sort of reverberation or action at a reverberation or action at a reverberation or action at a distance that we know reflects us. And I distance that we know reflects us. And I distance that we know reflects us. And I wonder if our unconscious mind actually wonder if our unconscious mind actually wonder if our unconscious mind actually gets to the question like, do I even gets to the question like, do I even gets to the question like, do I even exist? Now, of course, we know we exist. exist? Now, of course, we know we exist. exist? Now, of course, we know we exist. We can touch our limbs and but the We can touch our limbs and but the We can touch our limbs and but the social isolation fear, you know, if I've social isolation fear, you know, if I've social isolation fear, you know, if I've got fridge full of food and I've got fridge full of food and I've got fridge full of food and I've got music and I've got audiobooks. That's music and I've got audiobooks. That's music and I've got audiobooks. That's all incoming, but at some point you do all incoming, but at some point you do all incoming, but at some point you do get a little I know cuz I've spent days get a little I know cuz I've spent days get a little I know cuz I've spent days upon days during experiments back when upon days during experiments back when upon days during experiments back when by myself, but you get a little by myself, but you get a little by myself, but you get a little weird. Yeah. weird. Yeah. weird. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Your thoughts get a little distorted and &gt;&gt; Your thoughts get a little distorted and &gt;&gt; Your thoughts get a little distorted and it's almost like you know there's and it's almost like you know there's and it's almost like you know there's stuff out there, but if you spend enough stuff out there, but if you spend enough stuff out there, but if you spend enough time away from it, it kind of messes time away from it, it kind of messes time away from it, it kind of messes with your head a little bit. with your head a little bit. with your head a little bit. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then of course we think of &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then of course we think of &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then of course we think of like the Ted Kaczynski types and these like the Ted Kaczynski types and these like the Ted Kaczynski types and these extremes of people that have gone into extremes of people that have gone into extremes of people that have gone into isolation. There's that movie about the isolation. There's that movie about the isolation. There's that movie about the true story that um the true story that um the true story that um uh guy that goes into the wilderness. uh guy that goes into the wilderness. uh guy that goes into the wilderness. Oh, yeah. Right. Um Oh, yeah. Right. Um Oh, yeah. Right. Um Yeah, Eddie Vedder wrote the soundtrack Yeah, Eddie Vedder wrote the soundtrack Yeah, Eddie Vedder wrote the soundtrack to that movie. to that movie. to that movie. &gt;&gt; Right. And and I love that. &gt;&gt; Right. And and I love that. &gt;&gt; Right. And and I love that. &gt;&gt; Into the Into the Wild. &gt;&gt; Into the Into the Wild. &gt;&gt; Into the Into the Wild. &gt;&gt; That's right. And um McCandless, right? &gt;&gt; That's right. And um McCandless, right? &gt;&gt; That's right. And um McCandless, right? McCandless. Yeah. And I think he McCandless. Yeah. And I think he McCandless. Yeah. And I think he wrote at the end, you know, the wrote at the end, you know, the wrote at the end, you know, the connection with people is the thing. You connection with people is the thing. You connection with people is the thing. You know, he had this romantic view of going know, he had this romantic view of going know, he had this romantic view of going out into the wilderness by himself or we out into the wilderness by himself or we out into the wilderness by himself or we think of, you know, Walden Pond and you think of, you know, Walden Pond and you think of, you know, Walden Pond and you know, we romanticize this thing about know, we romanticize this thing about know, we romanticize this thing about being alone for long extended amounts of being alone for long extended amounts of being alone for long extended amounts of time. But I think it raises real questions But I think it raises real questions But I think it raises real questions about whether or not we're about whether or not we're about whether or not we're even there. It's sort of the even there. It's sort of the even there. It's sort of the most existential version of like, if the most existential version of like, if the most existential version of like, if a tree falls in the woods that you know, a tree falls in the woods that you know, a tree falls in the woods that you know, no one's there, did it make a sound? no one's there, did it make a sound? no one's there, did it make a sound? It's sort of like if we have thoughts It's sort of like if we have thoughts It's sort of like if we have thoughts and emotions and experiences and there's and emotions and experiences and there's and emotions and experiences and there's no one else around no one else around no one else around &gt;&gt; Yeah. to reflect those &gt;&gt; Yeah. to reflect those &gt;&gt; Yeah. to reflect those for them to have impact on like, do we for them to have impact on like, do we for them to have impact on like, do we even exist? even exist? even exist? &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. &gt;&gt; And then this might be some hardwiring. &gt;&gt; And then this might be some hardwiring. &gt;&gt; And then this might be some hardwiring. Here I'm getting like almost Freudian, Here I'm getting like almost Freudian, Here I'm getting like almost Freudian, and so forgive me, I'm not a and so forgive me, I'm not a and so forgive me, I'm not a psychologist. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I Yeah. But I'm curious what &gt;&gt; Yeah. I Yeah. But I'm curious what &gt;&gt; Yeah. I Yeah. But I'm curious what your thoughts are about the what your thoughts are about the what your thoughts are about the relationship between the fear of relationship between the fear of relationship between the fear of isolation, our need for our thoughts isolation, our need for our thoughts isolation, our need for our thoughts and desires and behaviors to have and desires and behaviors to have and desires and behaviors to have some sort of reverberation &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. out there. Some responsiveness to &gt;&gt; Mhm. out there. Some responsiveness to &gt;&gt; Mhm. out there. Some responsiveness to us or something. us or something. us or something. &gt;&gt; confirmation that we're actually here. I &gt;&gt; confirmation that we're actually here. I &gt;&gt; confirmation that we're actually here. I think the closest research to this, to think the closest research to this, to think the closest research to this, to the extent that there is research on the extent that there is research on the extent that there is research on this, is what happens to people, this, is what happens to people, this, is what happens to people, prisoners who are put in solitary prisoners who are put in solitary prisoners who are put in solitary confinement. And it's not good for their confinement. And it's not good for their confinement. And it's not good for their mental health. It's not good for their mental health. It's not good for their mental health. It's not good for their sense of selves, for who they are. They sense of selves, for who they are. They sense of selves, for who they are. They do lose a sense of themselves. There's do lose a sense of themselves. There's do lose a sense of themselves. There's not great research on this cuz you can't not great research on this cuz you can't not great research on this cuz you can't randomly assign people to be isolated randomly assign people to be isolated randomly assign people to be isolated for long periods of time, right? for long periods of time, right? for long periods of time, right? &gt;&gt; Thank goodness. Thank goodness. Yes, &gt;&gt; Thank goodness. Thank goodness. Yes, &gt;&gt; Thank goodness. Thank goodness. Yes, that that's why we have IRBs, right? But that that's why we have IRBs, right? But that that's why we have IRBs, right? But that experience I think is very real. that experience I think is very real. that experience I think is very real. What when you were talking about this, What when you were talking about this, What when you were talking about this, it made me think of it made me think of it made me think of research in the early 1900s, theories research in the early 1900s, theories research in the early 1900s, theories from sociologists from sociologists from sociologists that the way we understand ourselves is that the way we understand ourselves is that the way we understand ourselves is through other people. through other people. through other people. The way I know who I am, what I'm like The way I know who I am, what I'm like The way I know who I am, what I'm like as a person, who Nick is, is from as a person, who Nick is, is from as a person, who Nick is, is from talking with you, Andrew. And when we talking with you, Andrew. And when we talking with you, Andrew. And when we are in conversation, that's when I'm are in conversation, that's when I'm are in conversation, that's when I'm learning about myself. You're telling me learning about myself. You're telling me learning about myself. You're telling me about myself, I'm having thoughts that about myself, I'm having thoughts that about myself, I'm having thoughts that I'm sharing with you, and that's what I'm sharing with you, and that's what I'm sharing with you, and that's what gives me a sense of self, this looking gives me a sense of self, this looking gives me a sense of self, this looking glass self. And our sense of glass self. And our sense of glass self. And our sense of self-esteem, in fact, is highly self-esteem, in fact, is highly self-esteem, in fact, is highly tied, am I a valuable person, is highly tied, am I a valuable person, is highly tied, am I a valuable person, is highly tied to how well we're getting along tied to how well we're getting along tied to how well we're getting along with other people. Psychologists with other people. Psychologists with other people. Psychologists believe that it is a monitor, in fact, believe that it is a monitor, in fact, believe that it is a monitor, in fact, for how well you're getting along with for how well you're getting along with for how well you're getting along with people. Your very sense of self-worth. people. Your very sense of self-worth. people. Your very sense of self-worth. And so when there is nobody out there, And so when there is nobody out there, And so when there is nobody out there, I think you're absolutely right. That's I think you're absolutely right. That's I think you're absolutely right. That's a that you can you can lose your sense a that you can you can lose your sense a that you can you can lose your sense of who you are. And people who go out of who you are. And people who go out of who you are. And people who go out to the woods, I remember when I was a to the woods, I remember when I was a to the woods, I remember when I was a when I was a kid, um I actually wrote when I was a kid, um I actually wrote when I was a kid, um I actually wrote this up I won an early career award this up I won an early career award this up I won an early career award from APA, which is a great honor for me. from APA, which is a great honor for me. from APA, which is a great honor for me. But in the in the bio that they asked But in the in the bio that they asked But in the in the bio that they asked you to write, I wrote in that uh you to write, I wrote in that uh you to write, I wrote in that uh about my childhood dream, my childhood about my childhood dream, my childhood about my childhood dream, my childhood before I was 9 years old. I believed I before I was 9 years old. I believed I before I was 9 years old. I believed I was going to be a mountain man. Like I was going to be a mountain man. Like I was going to be a mountain man. Like I grew up in the woods in Iowa, hunting grew up in the woods in Iowa, hunting grew up in the woods in Iowa, hunting and fishing, being outdoors. All my and fishing, being outdoors. All my and fishing, being outdoors. All my extended family were farmers. Watching extended family were farmers. Watching extended family were farmers. Watching Grizzly Adams on TV. Like I thought that Grizzly Adams on TV. Like I thought that Grizzly Adams on TV. Like I thought that was a legit job. Like you could I could was a legit job. Like you could I could was a legit job. Like you could I could actually go do this, right? And I was actually go do this, right? And I was actually go do this, right? And I was about 9 years old when I don't remember about 9 years old when I don't remember about 9 years old when I don't remember quite how this happened, but I learned quite how this happened, but I learned quite how this happened, but I learned that this was not a real job. Like it that this was not a real job. Like it that this was not a real job. Like it was it was not a legit thing that I was it was not a legit thing that I was it was not a legit thing that I could do, right? But yes, I had could do, right? But yes, I had could do, right? But yes, I had romanticized it as well that this is romanticized it as well that this is romanticized it as well that this is going to be a wonderful thing to be able going to be a wonderful thing to be able going to be a wonderful thing to be able to do. But when people actually go out to do. But when people actually go out to do. But when people actually go out and do that, they mostly go insane and do that, they mostly go insane and do that, they mostly go insane within a very, you know, while. within a very, you know, while. within a very, you know, while. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I had a podcast, and I've been before I had a podcast, and I've been before I had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. AG1 is to my taking it every day since. AG1 is to my taking it every day since. AG1 is to my knowledge the highest quality and most knowledge the highest quality and most knowledge the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to drink into a single scoop that's easy to drink into a single scoop that's easy to drink and taste great. It's designed to and taste great. It's designed to and taste great. It's designed to support things like gut health, immune support things like gut health, immune support things like gut health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does health, and overall energy. And it does health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps that you so by helping to fill any gaps that you so by helping to fill any gaps that you might have in your daily nutrition. And might have in your daily nutrition. And might have in your daily nutrition. And of course, we should all eat of course, we should all eat of course, we should all eat high-quality whole foods, but most of us high-quality whole foods, but most of us high-quality whole foods, but most of us are probably not getting enough are probably not getting enough are probably not getting enough prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. I get asked all the time by people if I get asked all the time by people if I get asked all the time by people if they were to take just one supplement, they were to take just one supplement, they were to take just one supplement, what would my recommendation for that what would my recommendation for that what would my recommendation for that supplement be? And my answer is always supplement be? And my answer is always supplement be? And my answer is always AG1, because it's just been so critical AG1, because it's just been so critical AG1, because it's just been so critical for supporting all aspects of my for supporting all aspects of my for supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, and physical health, mental health, and physical health, mental health, and performance by covering those performance by covering those performance by covering those nutritional, what we call foundational nutritional, what we call foundational nutritional, what we call foundational bases. And I know from my own experience bases. And I know from my own experience bases. And I know from my own experience and from everyone I've heard that I and from everyone I've heard that I and from everyone I've heard that I recommended it to that they simply feel recommended it to that they simply feel recommended it to that they simply feel much better in a number of different much better in a number of different much better in a number of different ways when they take it regularly. If ways when they take it regularly. If ways when they take it regularly. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a week supply time, AG1 is giving away a week supply time, AG1 is giving away a week supply of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2 with and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2 with and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. AGZ is something that your subscription. AGZ is something that your subscription. AGZ is something that I helped design. It tastes great, and I helped design. It tastes great, and I helped design. It tastes great, and it's the only sleep supplement I take. it's the only sleep supplement I take. it's the only sleep supplement I take. It has a collection of different things It has a collection of different things It has a collection of different things in it that has dramatically improved my in it that has dramatically improved my in it that has dramatically improved my sleep, both my slow-wave deep sleep and sleep, both my slow-wave deep sleep and sleep, both my slow-wave deep sleep and my rapid eye movement sleep, and I my rapid eye movement sleep, and I my rapid eye movement sleep, and I absolutely love it. Again, that's absolutely love it. Again, that's absolutely love it. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman to get a week's supply of AGZ and a to get a week's supply of AGZ and a to get a week's supply of AGZ and a bottle of D3K2 with your subscription. bottle of D3K2 with your subscription. bottle of D3K2 with your subscription. Social media, which I spend a decent Social media, which I spend a decent Social media, which I spend a decent amount of time on cuz I teach there and amount of time on cuz I teach there and amount of time on cuz I teach there and I learn there, um you know, we know has I learn there, um you know, we know has I learn there, um you know, we know has healthy aspects and unhealthy aspects. healthy aspects and unhealthy aspects. healthy aspects and unhealthy aspects. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. A bunch of variables there, age, what A bunch of variables there, age, what A bunch of variables there, age, what people are looking at, etc. How much people are looking at, etc. How much people are looking at, etc. How much time they're spending on it. time they're spending on it. time they're spending on it. &gt;&gt; Yeah, but social media offered people &gt;&gt; Yeah, but social media offered people &gt;&gt; Yeah, but social media offered people this opportunity to get out of aloneness this opportunity to get out of aloneness this opportunity to get out of aloneness through a different form of connection. through a different form of connection. through a different form of connection. And so, if we just kind of And so, if we just kind of And so, if we just kind of hypothesize that having our words or our hypothesize that having our words or our hypothesize that having our words or our thoughts have an a visible thoughts have an a visible thoughts have an a visible a known impact on somebody else's words a known impact on somebody else's words a known impact on somebody else's words or thoughts provides some sort of or thoughts provides some sort of or thoughts provides some sort of confirmation that we're there. It confirmation that we're there. It confirmation that we're there. It &gt;&gt; Mhm. kind of explains why, you know, &gt;&gt; Mhm. kind of explains why, you know, &gt;&gt; Mhm. kind of explains why, you know, taking the most aggressive or taking the most aggressive or taking the most aggressive or uh or outrageous thought and putting a uh or outrageous thought and putting a uh or outrageous thought and putting a comment, and then somebody responds or comment, and then somebody responds or comment, and then somebody responds or other people dogpile or they respond. other people dogpile or they respond. other people dogpile or they respond. &gt;&gt; And then you're like, I'm having an &gt;&gt; And then you're like, I'm having an &gt;&gt; And then you're like, I'm having an effect out there, also safely behind a effect out there, also safely behind a effect out there, also safely behind a wall, right? There's no um I think we're wall, right? There's no um I think we're wall, right? There's no um I think we're critical of that safely behind a wall critical of that safely behind a wall critical of that safely behind a wall piece. You know, that they the piece. You know, that they the piece. You know, that they the stereotype that you hear online is like, stereotype that you hear online is like, stereotype that you hear online is like, you know, you know, you know, you know, Apple 7689 in his mom's you know, Apple 7689 in his mom's you know, Apple 7689 in his mom's basement, like, you know, trolling basement, like, you know, trolling basement, like, you know, trolling people, you know, and you but then we people, you know, and you but then we people, you know, and you but then we forget, like, that person's alone in forget, like, that person's alone in forget, like, that person's alone in their basement. Why are they doing it? their basement. Why are they doing it? their basement. Why are they doing it? Like, why is [clears throat] it so Like, why is [clears throat] it so Like, why is [clears throat] it so satisfying to them? I don't actually satisfying to them? I don't actually satisfying to them? I don't actually believe that Yeah. most of these people believe that Yeah. most of these people believe that Yeah. most of these people are evil. Some of them might be, but I are evil. Some of them might be, but I are evil. Some of them might be, but I probably they want to see their words probably they want to see their words probably they want to see their words and thoughts have an effect. And the and thoughts have an effect. And the and thoughts have an effect. And the &gt;&gt; That's right. to do that is to poke or &gt;&gt; That's right. to do that is to poke or &gt;&gt; That's right. to do that is to poke or to say something outrageous. And so, I'm to say something outrageous. And so, I'm to say something outrageous. And so, I'm hoping that whoever runs these platforms hoping that whoever runs these platforms hoping that whoever runs these platforms will try to create incentives for um will try to create incentives for um will try to create incentives for um more positive interactions, because I more positive interactions, because I more positive interactions, because I think what ultimately what most people think what ultimately what most people think what ultimately what most people want is the interaction, to feel that want is the interaction, to feel that want is the interaction, to feel that their thoughts and their feelings matter their thoughts and their feelings matter their thoughts and their feelings matter out there. So, if we can go to something out there. So, if we can go to something out there. So, if we can go to something even a little more concrete, if we just even a little more concrete, if we just even a little more concrete, if we just think about conversation, right? The the think about conversation, right? The the think about conversation, right? The the and forth. Why is the conversation is and forth. Why is the conversation is and forth. Why is the conversation is often such a pleasant thing? It is often such a pleasant thing? It is often such a pleasant thing? It is because there is back and forth because there is back and forth because there is back and forth responsiveness in the conversation that responsiveness in the conversation that responsiveness in the conversation that allows me to detect that you're paying allows me to detect that you're paying allows me to detect that you're paying attention to me. Right now, you're attention to me. Right now, you're attention to me. Right now, you're looking at me, right? You're nodding at looking at me, right? You're nodding at looking at me, right? You're nodding at me as I'm speaking and you'll give a mhm me as I'm speaking and you'll give a mhm me as I'm speaking and you'll give a mhm or right or yes I'm going along and that or right or yes I'm going along and that or right or yes I'm going along and that allows me to recognize my thoughts are allows me to recognize my thoughts are allows me to recognize my thoughts are having an effect on you in a way that's having an effect on you in a way that's having an effect on you in a way that's having a positive effect having a positive effect having a positive effect in return on me. And so I think very in return on me. And so I think very in return on me. And so I think very much the that action at a much the that action at a much the that action at a distance as you put it, psychologist distance as you put it, psychologist distance as you put it, psychologist talk about that as responsiveness or talk about that as responsiveness or talk about that as responsiveness or being in synchrony with another person being in synchrony with another person being in synchrony with another person is part of what makes conversation feel is part of what makes conversation feel is part of what makes conversation feel so good. I have some friends who are so good. I have some friends who are so good. I have some friends who are recording artists and the only reason recording artists and the only reason recording artists and the only reason they still tour they still tour they still tour Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; it is it's not for the money. Believe me &gt;&gt; it is it's not for the money. Believe me &gt;&gt; it is it's not for the money. Believe me the money's in some cases is good but the money's in some cases is good but the money's in some cases is good but it's not as good as money they can make it's not as good as money they can make it's not as good as money they can make doing other things. doing other things. doing other things. It's a huge hassle. Yeah. Um takes them It's a huge hassle. Yeah. Um takes them It's a huge hassle. Yeah. Um takes them away from families or security issues. away from families or security issues. away from families or security issues. There's all this stuff but they get to There's all this stuff but they get to There's all this stuff but they get to experience the apex of experience the apex of experience the apex of collective human action at a distance collective human action at a distance collective human action at a distance based on their based on their based on their &gt;&gt; They're doing their inflections, their &gt;&gt; They're doing their inflections, their &gt;&gt; They're doing their inflections, their &gt;&gt; Yes. things you mentioned Eddie Vedder, &gt;&gt; Yes. things you mentioned Eddie Vedder, &gt;&gt; Yes. things you mentioned Eddie Vedder, right? There's and then there stories of right? There's and then there stories of right? There's and then there stories of him or whatever you like scaled the him or whatever you like scaled the him or whatever you like scaled the at some concert Eddie scaled up and at some concert Eddie scaled up and at some concert Eddie scaled up and like grabbed the microphone got Oh, like grabbed the microphone got Oh, like grabbed the microphone got Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; and then he and then he [laughter] &gt;&gt; and then he and then he [laughter] &gt;&gt; and then he and then he [laughter] actually watched it was actually watched it was actually watched it was pretty dangerous and then he and then he pretty dangerous and then he and then he pretty dangerous and then he and then he actually repelled down on the microphone actually repelled down on the microphone actually repelled down on the microphone wire. Yeah, this was all spontaneous. So wire. Yeah, this was all spontaneous. So wire. Yeah, this was all spontaneous. So he's doing these things. I don't know he's doing these things. I don't know he's doing these things. I don't know how much he's conscious of the fact that how much he's conscious of the fact that how much he's conscious of the fact that he's, you know, exciting people and you he's, you know, exciting people and you he's, you know, exciting people and you know, but recording artists love to know, but recording artists love to know, but recording artists love to do this. They don't just love to sing. do this. They don't just love to sing. do this. They don't just love to sing. They love to see the response of the They love to see the response of the They love to see the response of the people they sing to. And people go to people they sing to. And people go to people they sing to. And people go to concerts &gt;&gt; Right. I believe because &gt;&gt; Right. I believe because &gt;&gt; Right. I believe because whether they understand it or not, whether they understand it or not, whether they understand it or not, they're having an impact on what's they're having an impact on what's they're having an impact on what's happening up on stage. And they're very happening up on stage. And they're very happening up on stage. And they're very aware of that. aware of that. aware of that. &gt;&gt; that reciprocity. So I think we're just &gt;&gt; that reciprocity. So I think we're just &gt;&gt; that reciprocity. So I think we're just driven to do this. I have to believe driven to do this. I have to believe driven to do this. I have to believe that this is that this is that this is part of our core wiring. When when we're part of our core wiring. When when we're part of our core wiring. When when we're kids and we round up in preschool like when and we round up in preschool like when and we round up in preschool like when they all everyone round up and they all everyone round up and they all everyone round up and they everyone tries to sit still and the everyone tries to sit still and the everyone tries to sit still and the girls generally can and the boys girls generally can and the boys girls generally can and the boys generally can't for a little while. You generally can't for a little while. You generally can't for a little while. You know, like until a later age. There's a know, like until a later age. There's a know, like until a later age. There's a lot of learning to let others speak, to lot of learning to let others speak, to lot of learning to let others speak, to kind of like hold things in. So, as a kind of like hold things in. So, as a kind of like hold things in. So, as a human psychologist, if you were to play human psychologist, if you were to play human psychologist, if you were to play primatologist for a moment and we are a primatologist for a moment and we are a primatologist for a moment and we are a human old world primates, what are the human old world primates, what are the human old world primates, what are the sort of core components that sort of core components that sort of core components that social connection are built on? You social connection are built on? You social connection are built on? You know, what we talked about dialogue, we know, what we talked about dialogue, we know, what we talked about dialogue, we talked about vision, we talked about talked about vision, we talked about talked about vision, we talked about sharing. Is it You know, but sharing. Is it You know, but sharing. Is it You know, but we don't get a whole lot of training in we don't get a whole lot of training in we don't get a whole lot of training in this if you really think about it. We we this if you really think about it. We we this if you really think about it. We we just kind of go through school, we learn just kind of go through school, we learn just kind of go through school, we learn to sit, we learn to listen. You're not to sit, we learn to listen. You're not to sit, we learn to listen. You're not supposed to hit people, you're not supposed to hit people, you're not supposed to hit people, you're not supposed to yell at people. You you supposed to yell at people. You you supposed to yell at people. You you know, you run around at recess and know, you run around at recess and know, you run around at recess and so on and you do what other people and so on and you do what other people and so on and you do what other people do. But like what is the socialization do. But like what is the socialization do. But like what is the socialization in human primates? What are the core in human primates? What are the core in human primates? What are the core features that make somebody able to features that make somebody able to features that make somebody able to function really well socially or not? I function really well socially or not? I function really well socially or not? I think the thing to keep in mind at least think the thing to keep in mind at least think the thing to keep in mind at least is the reason why we think social is the reason why we think social is the reason why we think social connection matters so much, why it's so connection matters so much, why it's so connection matters so much, why it's so important is that it allows us to important is that it allows us to important is that it allows us to coordinate with other people. coordinate with other people. coordinate with other people. And if I can coordinate with you, then And if I can coordinate with you, then And if I can coordinate with you, then you and I are better able to survive and you and I are better able to survive and you and I are better able to survive and to exist and pass along our genes than to exist and pass along our genes than to exist and pass along our genes than if we can't coordinate with each other. if we can't coordinate with each other. if we can't coordinate with each other. And that groups that are able to And that groups that are able to And that groups that are able to coordinate with each other, collectively coordinate with each other, collectively coordinate with each other, collectively cooperate with each other in ways that cooperate with each other in ways that cooperate with each other in ways that are that are good for the common good, are that are good for the common good, are that are good for the common good, those groups outperform groups where those groups outperform groups where those groups outperform groups where people are just at each other's throat, people are just at each other's throat, people are just at each other's throat, nobody's cooperating, right? This is why nobody's cooperating, right? This is why nobody's cooperating, right? This is why corporations function effectively. You get a function effectively. You get a function effectively. You get a collection of individuals all operating collection of individuals all operating collection of individuals all operating as a single unit, all oriented towards as a single unit, all oriented towards as a single unit, all oriented towards one common goal and you can get a one common goal and you can get a one common goal and you can get a collection of people, of individuals collection of people, of individuals collection of people, of individuals then doing things that are way more then doing things that are way more then doing things that are way more advanced and way bigger than any advanced and way bigger than any advanced and way bigger than any individual would do on their own. This individual would do on their own. This individual would do on their own. This is why the East Indian Trading Company is why the East Indian Trading Company is why the East Indian Trading Company was able to send ships all around the was able to send ships all around the was able to send ships all around the world cuz they had resources tied up in world cuz they had resources tied up in world cuz they had resources tied up in corporations so that they could send corporations so that they could send corporations so that they could send ships out in the world and if one went ships out in the world and if one went ships out in the world and if one went down, you wouldn't lose all of your all down, you wouldn't lose all of your all down, you wouldn't lose all of your all of your resources. You wouldn't lose all of your resources. You wouldn't lose all of your resources. You wouldn't lose all your riches as an investor. So, all of your riches as an investor. So, all of your riches as an investor. So, all of social connection, at least social connection, at least social connection, at least evolutionarily speaking, this is the evolutionarily speaking, this is the evolutionarily speaking, this is the idea, is pushing us toward cooperation idea, is pushing us toward cooperation idea, is pushing us toward cooperation and coordination particularly with and coordination particularly with and coordination particularly with non-kin. That's what makes us truly social on That's what makes us truly social on That's what makes us truly social on this planet is our ability to cooperate this planet is our ability to cooperate this planet is our ability to cooperate and to care for non-kin. You don't need and to care for non-kin. You don't need and to care for non-kin. You don't need coordination with family members. Uh you coordination with family members. Uh you coordination with family members. Uh you know, you don't need any special know, you don't need any special know, you don't need any special evolutionary mechanism to get evolutionary mechanism to get evolutionary mechanism to get coordination with family members. They coordination with family members. They coordination with family members. They have your They have your genes, right? have your They have your genes, right? have your They have your genes, right? They have your genes. So, that makes They have your genes. So, that makes They have your genes. So, that makes perfect sense. You're leaving genetic perfect sense. You're leaving genetic perfect sense. You're leaving genetic offspring. But, you need something else offspring. But, you need something else offspring. But, you need something else to explain why I'm so friendly with you. to explain why I'm so friendly with you. to explain why I'm so friendly with you. And why we coordinate so well out there And why we coordinate so well out there And why we coordinate so well out there in the world. We drive on the right side in the world. We drive on the right side in the world. We drive on the right side of the road. We're We befriend people uh of the road. We're We befriend people uh of the road. We're We befriend people uh who we're not related to. And that's who we're not related to. And that's who we're not related to. And that's where I think all of this That's what where I think all of this That's what where I think all of this That's what all That's what social connection is all That's what social connection is all That's what social connection is ultimately trying to serve is that ultimately trying to serve is that ultimately trying to serve is that coordination function. Do you think coordination function. Do you think coordination function. Do you think there are hardwired mechanisms that set there are hardwired mechanisms that set there are hardwired mechanisms that set us up for cooperation with our genetic us up for cooperation with our genetic us up for cooperation with our genetic offspring and siblings and so forth more offspring and siblings and so forth more offspring and siblings and so forth more so than with non-genetic uh I know you so than with non-genetic uh I know you so than with non-genetic uh I know you have adopted kids. Uh we have adopted have adopted kids. Uh we have adopted have adopted kids. Uh we have adopted kids in our family as well. And I and kids in our family as well. And I and kids in our family as well. And I and it's sort of weird to say this cuz it's sort of weird to say this cuz it's sort of weird to say this cuz it's kind of a duh, but for people that don't kind of a duh, but for people that don't kind of a duh, but for people that don't have adopted family members, like the have adopted family members, like the have adopted family members, like the notion that they're not like notion that they're not like notion that they're not like really part of your family is insane. really part of your family is insane. really part of your family is insane. Like you know, I can I for privacy Like you know, I can I for privacy Like you know, I can I for privacy reasons I don't want to disclose who reasons I don't want to disclose who reasons I don't want to disclose who these people are, but I can tell you these people are, but I can tell you these people are, but I can tell you that um I have a younger family member that um I have a younger family member that um I have a younger family member who was adopted. And who was adopted. And who was adopted. And I never ever think for a moment that never ever think for a moment that never ever think for a moment that she's not part of our family. Right? I'd she's not part of our family. Right? I'd she's not part of our family. Right? I'd lay down in traffic for her the same way lay down in traffic for her the same way lay down in traffic for her the same way I would for any other member of my I would for any other member of my I would for any other member of my family. And I wasn't the one that raised family. And I wasn't the one that raised family. And I wasn't the one that raised her. Do you think there's something her. Do you think there's something her. Do you think there's something hardwired about hardwired about hardwired about our genetic offspring than and the other our genetic offspring than and the other our genetic offspring than and the other stuff fortunately develops? Adopted children, fortunately develops? Adopted children, fortunately develops? Adopted children, close friends, um community members. close friends, um community members. close friends, um community members. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know the answer to that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know the answer to that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know the answer to that exactly. That's not what I study per se. exactly. That's not what I study per se. exactly. That's not what I study per se. What I what I can tell you though as a What I what I can tell you though as a What I what I can tell you though as a social psychologist is that what we social psychologist is that what we social psychologist is that what we study is the power of context and roles study is the power of context and roles study is the power of context and roles to drive behavior and the thing that you to drive behavior and the thing that you to drive behavior and the thing that you are speaking to and the thing that we are speaking to and the thing that we are speaking to and the thing that we have experienced as parents, we have experienced as parents, we have experienced as parents, we have three adopted children. three adopted children. three adopted children. What really matters is the role you What really matters is the role you What really matters is the role you play, right? And that is magical. When play, right? And that is magical. When play, right? And that is magical. When we adopted our first two we adopted our first two we adopted our first two children um from Ethiopia from Ethiopia from Ethiopia we made a decision to do this and we made a decision to do this and we made a decision to do this and when you adopt you there there's a point when you adopt you there there's a point when you adopt you there there's a point where you move from this being where you move from this being where you move from this being hypothetical to being this being real. hypothetical to being this being real. hypothetical to being this being real. Okay? And the way this worked for us was Okay? And the way this worked for us was Okay? And the way this worked for us was that we were shown pictures of these that we were shown pictures of these that we were shown pictures of these children who we could adopt and of children who we could adopt and of children who we could adopt and of course once you're once you're in on it course once you're once you're in on it course once you're once you're in on it like you're all in, you're not really like you're all in, you're not really like you're all in, you're not really making a choice. I'm not sure. As I said making a choice. I'm not sure. As I said making a choice. I'm not sure. As I said you know, we called we called up the you know, we called we called up the you know, we called we called up the agency. We said we were ready to go. And agency. We said we were ready to go. And agency. We said we were ready to go. And and they said how about these? and they said how about these? and they said how about these? And they put a picture up for us. And they put a picture up for us. And they put a picture up for us. And when we first making this decision, And when we first making this decision, And when we first making this decision, it was hypothetical. it was hypothetical. it was hypothetical. And the pictures looked different to us. And the pictures looked different to us. And the pictures looked different to us. These kids have come from our kids have These kids have come from our kids have These kids have come from our kids have come from very hard places in life. come from very hard places in life. come from very hard places in life. You don't end up in an orphanage another You don't end up in an orphanage another You don't end up in an orphanage another part of the world unless you've come part of the world unless you've come part of the world unless you've come through hard places. They had come through hard places. They had come through hard places. They had come through very hard places. They were in through very hard places. They were in through very hard places. They were in the second and third percentile in the second and third percentile in the second and third percentile in the WHO height and uh weight charts. WHO height and uh weight charts. WHO height and uh weight charts. They were in tough shape. They were in tough shape. They were in tough shape. As soon as Jen and I said As soon as Jen and I said As soon as Jen and I said yeah, we can do this. I don't I'm I so yeah, we can do this. I don't I'm I so yeah, we can do this. I don't I'm I so vividly remember this. vividly remember this. vividly remember this. They just looked They just looked They just looked better. They just they looked more you just felt They just they looked more you just felt They just they looked more you just felt more love they looked different. The more love they looked different. The more love they looked different. The second we decided yes, this is it. Here second we decided yes, this is it. Here second we decided yes, this is it. Here we go. We have committed. And then once we go. We have committed. And then once we go. We have committed. And then once you bring people into your family, you bring people into your family, you bring people into your family, anybody who's done this knows the huge anybody who's done this knows the huge anybody who's done this knows the huge effect is you're dad or your mom. And effect is you're dad or your mom. And effect is you're dad or your mom. And that's what matters. We will sometimes, that's what matters. We will sometimes, that's what matters. We will sometimes, I don't know if your family has done I don't know if your family has done I don't know if your family has done this, but I will sometimes very gently this, but I will sometimes very gently this, but I will sometimes very gently note to people, they will sometimes talk note to people, they will sometimes talk note to people, they will sometimes talk to me as a as another father of my to me as a as another father of my to me as a as another father of my kids and not my kids, right? As if the kids and not my kids, right? As if the kids and not my kids, right? As if the biological and adopted children are biological and adopted children are biological and adopted children are different. And I very different. And I very different. And I very try to gently say, they are all our try to gently say, they are all our try to gently say, they are all our children. And you don't you don't feel children. And you don't you don't feel children. And you don't you don't feel differently. So, I think what's differently. So, I think what's differently. So, I think what's interesting, not as if there is there interesting, not as if there is there interesting, not as if there is there any subtle difference that's left is how any subtle difference that's left is how any subtle difference that's left is how almost completely imperceptible or almost completely imperceptible or almost completely imperceptible or completely imperceptible it actually is. completely imperceptible it actually is. completely imperceptible it actually is. That's what makes us remarkable as human That's what makes us remarkable as human That's what makes us remarkable as human beings, that we can do that. There is no beings, that we can do that. There is no beings, that we can do that. There is no other species we know of that does that other species we know of that does that other species we know of that does that kind of thing, that loves beyond their kind of thing, that loves beyond their kind of thing, that loves beyond their kin in the way that we can. In fact, kin in the way that we can. In fact, kin in the way that we can. In fact, it's led to a total reshaping in many it's led to a total reshaping in many it's led to a total reshaping in many ways of the field of economics even. ways of the field of economics even. ways of the field of economics even. Economists believe that humans are Economists believe that humans are Economists believe that humans are fundamentally self-interested. They only fundamentally self-interested. They only fundamentally self-interested. They only care about themselves. The only rub is care about themselves. The only rub is care about themselves. The only rub is when you actually look at the data, when you actually look at the data, when you actually look at the data, people are just a lot nicer to each people are just a lot nicer to each people are just a lot nicer to each other than standard models of economics other than standard models of economics other than standard models of economics would predict. We give money away to would predict. We give money away to would predict. We give money away to charity. We give away kidneys to random charity. We give away kidneys to random charity. We give away kidneys to random strangers. We care. Like if I give strangers. We care. Like if I give strangers. We care. Like if I give you $10 in an experiment and tell you $10 in an experiment and tell you $10 in an experiment and tell you can divide it with another person you can divide it with another person you can divide it with another person however you want, you can keep all of however you want, you can keep all of however you want, you can keep all of it, give you know, give none of it, or it, give you know, give none of it, or it, give you know, give none of it, or give it all away. give it all away. give it all away. The standard prediction from economic The standard prediction from economic The standard prediction from economic theory is you'll be purely theory is you'll be purely theory is you'll be purely self-interested. You won't care anything self-interested. You won't care anything self-interested. You won't care anything about this person you know nothing about this person you know nothing about this person you know nothing about. You'll give them nothing. about. You'll give them nothing. about. You'll give them nothing. That's not what real people do. That's not what real people do. That's not what real people do. They give something. 30%, 50%, typically They give something. 30%, 50%, typically They give something. 30%, 50%, typically depending on the context that you're in. depending on the context that you're in. depending on the context that you're in. And that's the thing that I think is And that's the thing that I think is And that's the thing that I think is remarkable in this particular case. Not remarkable in this particular case. Not remarkable in this particular case. Not as there any bit left of the this as there any bit left of the this as there any bit left of the this biological hardwiring, but how much this biological hardwiring, but how much this biological hardwiring, but how much of it is about the role that you play. of it is about the role that you play. of it is about the role that you play. And how much our love for another, our And how much our love for another, our And how much our love for another, our ability to connect with another person ability to connect with another person ability to connect with another person is a function of the role that we play is a function of the role that we play is a function of the role that we play in their lives. in their lives. in their lives. Incredible example that the moment you Incredible example that the moment you Incredible example that the moment you made the decision, you and your wife made the decision, you and your wife made the decision, you and your wife made the decision that these were the made the decision that these were the made the decision that these were the children you were going to adopt, that children you were going to adopt, that children you were going to adopt, that they your visual perception of them they your visual perception of them they your visual perception of them changed. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's almost like two circuits &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's almost like two circuits &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's almost like two circuits emerged in that moment and I emerged in that moment and I emerged in that moment and I can attest from a parallel experience I can attest from a parallel experience I can attest from a parallel experience um although I'm not the parent of this although I'm not the parent of this although I'm not the parent of this family member that it you never go family member that it you never go family member that it you never go there's it's a it's an instant and you there's it's a it's an instant and you there's it's a it's an instant and you never go back. There's never a never go back. There's never a never go back. There's never a reconsideration that you know And I reconsideration that you know And I reconsideration that you know And I think some people assume that like well think some people assume that like well think some people assume that like well in especially hard times, you know, it's in especially hard times, you know, it's in especially hard times, you know, it's actually it kind of just leaves the room. The it kind of just leaves the room. The it kind of just leaves the room. The like the question of it's like the question of it's like the question of it's immaterial. It's a fascinating and immaterial. It's a fascinating and immaterial. It's a fascinating and reassuring aspect of our brain reassuring aspect of our brain reassuring aspect of our brain wiring. &gt;&gt; Other people might imagine that you &gt;&gt; Other people might imagine that you &gt;&gt; Other people might imagine that you think this it just doesn't. You just think this it just doesn't. You just think this it just doesn't. You just you're just parent. That's it. you're just parent. That's it. you're just parent. That's it. Wild. And very cool. It is very cool and I and And very cool. It is very cool and I and And very cool. It is very cool and I and I think an underappreciated and I think an underappreciated and I think an underappreciated aspect of our sociality is how much we aspect of our sociality is how much we aspect of our sociality is how much we and we often we kind of take it for and we often we kind of take it for and we often we kind of take it for granted, you know, people are mean to granted, you know, people are mean to granted, you know, people are mean to each other and so yeah, people can each other and so yeah, people can each other and so yeah, people can be mean to each other, but we also love be mean to each other, but we also love be mean to each other, but we also love each other each other each other way beyond what we should in some way beyond what we should in some way beyond what we should in some way based on just pure, you know, kinship based on just pure, you know, kinship based on just pure, you know, kinship relationships and biological offspring relationships and biological offspring relationships and biological offspring would predict we would. And that's would predict we would. And that's would predict we would. And that's because we're highly social. We got to cooperate we're highly social. We got to cooperate we're highly social. We got to cooperate with each other in order to get along with each other in order to get along with each other in order to get along successfully in life. And so we've got successfully in life. And so we've got successfully in life. And so we've got these really hard uh hardwired kind of these really hard uh hardwired kind of these really hard uh hardwired kind of circuitry to care and love and connect circuitry to care and love and connect circuitry to care and love and connect with each with each other when we try. with each with each other when we try. with each with each other when we try. What I'm about to describe might be What I'm about to describe might be What I'm about to describe might be different now um but a good portion of different now um but a good portion of different now um but a good portion of my family's in South America and I'll my family's in South America and I'll my family's in South America and I'll never forget when I was in my really never forget when I was in my really never forget when I was in my really like late teens, early 20s, I went down there late teens, early 20s, I went down there late teens, early 20s, I went down there and I went out with my cousins to a and I went out with my cousins to a and I went out with my cousins to a bar. It was like a club right there um bar. It was like a club right there um bar. It was like a club right there um and it was so interesting because and it was so interesting because and it was so interesting because they spoke to their friends. We met up with spoke to their friends. We met up with spoke to their friends. We met up with their friends there. People danced, their friends there. People danced, their friends there. People danced, people drank, did all the things that we people drank, did all the things that we people drank, did all the things that we were also doing back in [clears throat] were also doing back in [clears throat] were also doing back in [clears throat] California. But there was no But there was no But there was no communication with other people at this communication with other people at this communication with other people at this club or this bar that they didn't club or this bar that they didn't club or this bar that they didn't already know. Oh. This may have changed. already know. Oh. This may have changed. already know. Oh. This may have changed. How? But that then and there that the How? But that then and there that the How? But that then and there that the culture was one where you go out with culture was one where you go out with culture was one where you go out with the people you already know and you have the people you already know and you have the people you already know and you have a really good time. But people weren't a really good time. But people weren't a really good time. But people weren't exchanging numbers, hitting on people, exchanging numbers, hitting on people, exchanging numbers, hitting on people, looking at other people cross It was looking at other people cross It was looking at other people cross It was It's that there were these little It's that there were these little It's that there were these little pockets across the room. So it wasn't pockets across the room. So it wasn't pockets across the room. So it wasn't this idea that oh when you go out in this idea that oh when you go out in this idea that oh when you go out in public, you go to a club or you drink or public, you go to a club or you drink or public, you go to a club or you drink or something, you might meet somebody something, you might meet somebody something, you might meet somebody else. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Interesting. There wasn't a fear &gt;&gt; Yeah. Interesting. There wasn't a fear &gt;&gt; Yeah. Interesting. There wasn't a fear of other people. That wasn't the reason of other people. That wasn't the reason of other people. That wasn't the reason you go out. You go out to see your you go out. You go out to see your you go out. You go out to see your friends. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the interesting thing also was &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the interesting thing also was &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the interesting thing also was that many of these friendships had been that many of these friendships had been that many of these friendships had been lifelong friendships. Oh, yeah. So in lifelong friendships. Oh, yeah. So in lifelong friendships. Oh, yeah. So in some sense, I wonder is this one version some sense, I wonder is this one version some sense, I wonder is this one version of how humans evolved cuz we always of how humans evolved cuz we always of how humans evolved cuz we always think about this village of like a think about this village of like a think about this village of like a hundred people, you know, you um hundred people, you know, you um hundred people, you know, you um you know, Bob Sapolsky talks about this you know, Bob Sapolsky talks about this you know, Bob Sapolsky talks about this and you know, we evolved in these and you know, we evolved in these and you know, we evolved in these culture of a hundred or two hundred culture of a hundred or two hundred culture of a hundred or two hundred folks and you knew everyone and folks and you knew everyone and folks and you knew everyone and everyone's in each other's business and everyone's in each other's business and everyone's in each other's business and that that's how our species evolved. that that's how our species evolved. that that's how our species evolved. At the same time what we have At the same time what we have At the same time what we have different examples of sociality. different examples of sociality. different examples of sociality. &gt;&gt; And that strangers weren't around as &gt;&gt; And that strangers weren't around as &gt;&gt; And that strangers weren't around as much Yeah. much Yeah. much Yeah. &gt;&gt; was the idea. Yeah. Yeah, it's hard &gt;&gt; was the idea. Yeah. Yeah, it's hard &gt;&gt; was the idea. Yeah. Yeah, it's hard to say. I don't know. Certainly today, to say. I don't know. Certainly today, to say. I don't know. Certainly today, if you look around the world, there is if you look around the world, there is if you look around the world, there is and always has been some anxiety about and always has been some anxiety about and always has been some anxiety about connecting with strangers and it can connecting with strangers and it can connecting with strangers and it can vary depending on where you There's some vary depending on where you There's some vary depending on where you There's some places where there's more sociability places where there's more sociability places where there's more sociability than in others, but there's always been than in others, but there's always been than in others, but there's always been some anxiety about the other. The one some anxiety about the other. The one some anxiety about the other. The one you don't know, right? Cuz you don't you don't know, right? Cuz you don't you don't know, right? Cuz you don't know necessarily if I can trust you or know necessarily if I can trust you or know necessarily if I can trust you or not in this moment, whether that comes not in this moment, whether that comes not in this moment, whether that comes from our evolutionary heritage or not or from our evolutionary heritage or not or from our evolutionary heritage or not or just unfamiliarity with anything, right? just unfamiliarity with anything, right? just unfamiliarity with anything, right? So if you know, if you give me something So if you know, if you give me something So if you know, if you give me something to drink here, I don't know what's in to drink here, I don't know what's in to drink here, I don't know what's in it. I'm going to be a little nervous. I it. I'm going to be a little nervous. I it. I'm going to be a little nervous. I want to find out before I drink it. If I want to find out before I drink it. If I want to find out before I drink it. If I trust you, I'll drink it, but if I trust you, I'll drink it, but if I trust you, I'll drink it, but if I don't, you know, I'm not so sure. I'm don't, you know, I'm not so sure. I'm don't, you know, I'm not so sure. I'm going to want to see what's in there going to want to see what's in there going to want to see what's in there first. There's always some anxiety about first. There's always some anxiety about first. There's always some anxiety about the unknown or uncertainty and it could the unknown or uncertainty and it could the unknown or uncertainty and it could be a lot of stuff about strangers, a be a lot of stuff about strangers, a be a lot of stuff about strangers, a reluctance to connect with other people, reluctance to connect with other people, reluctance to connect with other people, a desire to keep with the folks we a desire to keep with the folks we a desire to keep with the folks we already know, come simply from that, already know, come simply from that, already know, come simply from that, right? Which also would apply to right? Which also would apply to right? Which also would apply to non-human interactions, too, or non-human interactions, too, or non-human interactions, too, or non-human objects, as well. We just like non-human objects, as well. We just like non-human objects, as well. We just like what's familiar cuz we know it and what's familiar cuz we know it and what's familiar cuz we know it and we trust it and we're comfortable with we trust it and we're comfortable with we trust it and we're comfortable with it as a result. Everything else, by it as a result. Everything else, by it as a result. Everything else, by comparison, is a little bit riskier. I comparison, is a little bit riskier. I comparison, is a little bit riskier. I can't say I'm particularly outgoing or can't say I'm particularly outgoing or can't say I'm particularly outgoing or not, but I was taught manners not, but I was taught manners not, but I was taught manners that had me ask how people's day was that had me ask how people's day was that had me ask how people's day was going. Like if I'm checking out at the going. Like if I'm checking out at the going. Like if I'm checking out at the grocery store, it's like, "How's your grocery store, it's like, "How's your grocery store, it's like, "How's your day going?" And I'm interested. Like day going?" And I'm interested. Like day going?" And I'm interested. Like it's not just an icebreaker or some it's not just an icebreaker or some it's not just an icebreaker or some like, "How's your day going?" And you like, "How's your day going?" And you like, "How's your day going?" And you hold the door for people, you say please hold the door for people, you say please hold the door for people, you say please and thank you. I think a lot of people and thank you. I think a lot of people and thank you. I think a lot of people assume that manners equates to small assume that manners equates to small assume that manners equates to small talk, equates to superficial, talk, equates to superficial, talk, equates to superficial, and that it's all a bunch of fluff, that and that it's all a bunch of fluff, that and that it's all a bunch of fluff, that it's not about deep connection. But when it's not about deep connection. But when it's not about deep connection. But when I'm moving through the, you know, the I'm moving through the, you know, the I'm moving through the, you know, the checkout line at Whole Foods, checkout line at Whole Foods, checkout line at Whole Foods, I don't have a lot of options. I don't have a lot of options. I don't have a lot of options. &gt;&gt; Yep. If I say nothing, okay, these days &gt;&gt; Yep. If I say nothing, okay, these days &gt;&gt; Yep. If I say nothing, okay, these days no one would Yeah. notice. Yeah. They no one would Yeah. notice. Yeah. They no one would Yeah. notice. Yeah. They could be on their phone. It would No one could be on their phone. It would No one could be on their phone. It would No one would No one would call that abnormal. would No one would call that abnormal. would No one would call that abnormal. If I say, "How's your day going?" and If I say, "How's your day going?" and If I say, "How's your day going?" and they go, "Pretty good." Uh if I say, they go, "Pretty good." Uh if I say, they go, "Pretty good." Uh if I say, "What did you do before you got here?" "What did you do before you got here?" "What did you do before you got here?" That's getting a little bit That's getting a little bit That's getting a little bit further down the line, right? Um if I further down the line, right? Um if I further down the line, right? Um if I say like, "What's the hardest thing that say like, "What's the hardest thing that say like, "What's the hardest thing that ever happened to you?" they're going to ever happened to you?" they're going to ever happened to you?" they're going to look at me like I'm crazy, right? So, look at me like I'm crazy, right? So, look at me like I'm crazy, right? So, what I wonder is when we talk about what I wonder is when we talk about what I wonder is when we talk about manners and etiquette, which I believe manners and etiquette, which I believe manners and etiquette, which I believe there's been a real kind of erosion of there's been a real kind of erosion of there's been a real kind of erosion of at the level of kind of what is at the level of kind of what is at the level of kind of what is standard, right? Um for whatever reason. standard, right? Um for whatever reason. standard, right? Um for whatever reason. We just don't have a an etiquette We just don't have a an etiquette We just don't have a an etiquette everyone follows. All It used to be all everyone follows. All It used to be all everyone follows. All It used to be all men wore jackets and ties or at least men wore jackets and ties or at least men wore jackets and ties or at least ties to work. I mean, now you show up in ties to work. I mean, now you show up in ties to work. I mean, now you show up in whatever, you're right? I do think that whatever, you're right? I do think that whatever, you're right? I do think that as manners have as manners have as manners have become less common or common manner become less common or common manner become less common or common manner manners have become less common, that manners have become less common, that manners have become less common, that the opportunities for casual, low-level the opportunities for casual, low-level the opportunities for casual, low-level exchange have evaporated. Yeah. And so exchange have evaporated. Yeah. And so exchange have evaporated. Yeah. And so there's less of a stepping stone to there's less of a stepping stone to there's less of a stepping stone to deeper exchange. deeper exchange. deeper exchange. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I would think about manners &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I would think about manners &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I would think about manners kind of as habits, right? That's kind of kind of as habits, right? That's kind of kind of as habits, right? That's kind of what they are. And the And some what they are. And the And some what they are. And the And some sensibilities about other people sensibilities about other people sensibilities about other people being kind and decent to other people. being kind and decent to other people. being kind and decent to other people. But, understanding how those manners But, understanding how those manners But, understanding how those manners might be affecting day-to-day behaviors might be affecting day-to-day behaviors might be affecting day-to-day behaviors is a little bit tricky. So, one of the is a little bit tricky. So, one of the is a little bit tricky. So, one of the things, for instance, we find like in things, for instance, we find like in things, for instance, we find like in a lot of public spaces, people are a lot of public spaces, people are a lot of public spaces, people are reluctant to engage with other people reluctant to engage with other people reluctant to engage with other people because they don't want to interrupt. because they don't want to interrupt. because they don't want to interrupt. They don't want to be impolite. There's They don't want to be impolite. There's They don't want to be impolite. There's a version of that is about manners, a version of that is about manners, a version of that is about manners, right? And we have right? And we have right? And we have some Sometimes we're getting signals of some Sometimes we're getting signals of some Sometimes we're getting signals of that. Tech gives us signals that that. Tech gives us signals that that. Tech gives us signals that somebody doesn't want to be bothered, somebody doesn't want to be bothered, somebody doesn't want to be bothered, perhaps. Like we put earbuds in or we perhaps. Like we put earbuds in or we perhaps. Like we put earbuds in or we look at our phone, right? And so, some look at our phone, right? And so, some look at our phone, right? And so, some of that could be coming from what you of that could be coming from what you of that could be coming from what you might think of as manners. In the UK, might think of as manners. In the UK, might think of as manners. In the UK, for instance, one of the reasons we for instance, one of the reasons we for instance, one of the reasons we find just Well, just this true in the find just Well, just this true in the find just Well, just this true in the US, too, but even a little more so in US, too, but even a little more so in US, too, but even a little more so in the UK, there's this normal politeness the UK, there's this normal politeness the UK, there's this normal politeness that I It's not okay for me to get into that I It's not okay for me to get into that I It's not okay for me to get into your business. In Japan, it's even your business. In Japan, it's even your business. In Japan, it's even stronger, right? I don't want to And stronger, right? I don't want to And stronger, right? I don't want to And that's seen as being polite, right? In that's seen as being polite, right? In that's seen as being polite, right? In those contexts. those contexts. those contexts. I'm with you, though, that this general I'm with you, though, that this general I'm with you, though, that this general norm of saying hello or hi to people has norm of saying hello or hi to people has norm of saying hello or hi to people has gotten diminished a little bit, in part gotten diminished a little bit, in part gotten diminished a little bit, in part because people I think are getting out because people I think are getting out because people I think are getting out of the habit because you got these of the habit because you got these of the habit because you got these You've got these got these phones on you You've got these got these phones on you You've got these got these phones on you all the time. But, I think I think it's all the time. But, I think I think it's all the time. But, I think I think it's a little trickier. It's a little harder a little trickier. It's a little harder a little trickier. It's a little harder to say, maybe, that manners have eroded to say, maybe, that manners have eroded to say, maybe, that manners have eroded because they're complicated out in the because they're complicated out in the because they're complicated out in the world. Stuff that looks like could be a world. Stuff that looks like could be a world. Stuff that looks like could be a lack of manners in one context could, in lack of manners in one context could, in lack of manners in one context could, in people's own minds, be No, I'm being people's own minds, be No, I'm being people's own minds, be No, I'm being polite to you. By not interrupting. It's polite to you. By not interrupting. It's polite to you. By not interrupting. It's tricky. Yeah, I mean, I hear from a lot tricky. Yeah, I mean, I hear from a lot tricky. Yeah, I mean, I hear from a lot of podcast listeners that the of podcast listeners that the of podcast listeners that the challenge is with, you know, finding a challenge is with, you know, finding a challenge is with, you know, finding a romantic partner nowadays center largely romantic partner nowadays center largely romantic partner nowadays center largely around people not wanting to be seen as around people not wanting to be seen as around people not wanting to be seen as creepy, but also people not wanting creepy, but also people not wanting creepy, but also people not wanting strangers to talk to them. So, there's a strangers to talk to them. So, there's a strangers to talk to them. So, there's a little We're in a little bit of an impasse We're in a little bit of an impasse We're in a little bit of an impasse right now. I also hear from people who right now. I also hear from people who right now. I also hear from people who wonder why wonder why wonder why guys aren't asking them out just kind of guys aren't asking them out just kind of guys aren't asking them out just kind of randomly or asking them for a coffee or randomly or asking them for a coffee or randomly or asking them for a coffee or for a number or something like that. I for a number or something like that. I for a number or something like that. I think there's a lot of fear right now, think there's a lot of fear right now, think there's a lot of fear right now, is what I hear. Yes. And that fear is what I hear. Yes. And that fear is what I hear. Yes. And that fear is probably well, it certainly is on both probably well, it certainly is on both probably well, it certainly is on both sides. Yeah. You know, you said you had sides. Yeah. You know, you said you had sides. Yeah. You know, you said you had a in-depth conversation with your Uber a in-depth conversation with your Uber a in-depth conversation with your Uber driver on the way over here. driver on the way over here. driver on the way over here. &gt;&gt; mean, I used to be that I would get into &gt;&gt; mean, I used to be that I would get into &gt;&gt; mean, I used to be that I would get into deep conversations on airplanes. It deep conversations on airplanes. It deep conversations on airplanes. It seems like we're stuck in this I seems like we're stuck in this I seems like we're stuck in this I know cab situation. know cab situation. know cab situation. &gt;&gt; out I did last night coming out to &gt;&gt; out I did last night coming out to &gt;&gt; out I did last night coming out to talk &gt;&gt; The only downside being sometimes if &gt;&gt; The only downside being sometimes if &gt;&gt; The only downside being sometimes if your neck is turned to one side, you can your neck is turned to one side, you can your neck is turned to one side, you can get off that plane with a with a stiff get off that plane with a with a stiff get off that plane with a with a stiff neck. But in all seriousness, so are you neck. But in all seriousness, so are you neck. But in all seriousness, so are you one to just open up conversation with one to just open up conversation with one to just open up conversation with people at random? Yeah. In part because people at random? Yeah. In part because people at random? Yeah. In part because we got to we could go back a long way to we got to we could go back a long way to we got to we could go back a long way to start but I'll start at the beginning of start but I'll start at the beginning of start but I'll start at the beginning of our research but I'll keep this simple. our research but I'll keep this simple. our research but I'll keep this simple. I've interpreted reaching out and I've interpreted reaching out and I've interpreted reaching out and connecting with other people connecting with other people connecting with other people differently. We find in our work that differently. We find in our work that differently. We find in our work that people underestimate how interested people underestimate how interested people underestimate how interested others are in engaging with them. So others are in engaging with them. So others are in engaging with them. So you're sitting next to somebody on a you're sitting next to somebody on a you're sitting next to somebody on a plane or on a train and people if you're plane or on a train and people if you're plane or on a train and people if you're not already talking, you assume this not already talking, you assume this not already talking, you assume this person doesn't want to talk to you but person doesn't want to talk to you but person doesn't want to talk to you but that person is more likely to say that person is more likely to say that person is more likely to say they're interested in talking to you they're interested in talking to you they're interested in talking to you than you would guess. But if you got two than you would guess. But if you got two than you would guess. But if you got two people that aren't talking to each people that aren't talking to each people that aren't talking to each other, this gets back to our earlier other, this gets back to our earlier other, this gets back to our earlier conversation, how I can use as conversation, how I can use as conversation, how I can use as somebody's behavior as a guide to their somebody's behavior as a guide to their somebody's behavior as a guide to their thoughts. In this case, making a thoughts. In this case, making a thoughts. In this case, making a mistake, I can infer you're not mistake, I can infer you're not mistake, I can infer you're not interested in talking to me. If you're interested in talking to me. If you're interested in talking to me. If you're not, and you could be thinking, well, not, and you could be thinking, well, not, and you could be thinking, well, Nick's not talking to me. He's not Nick's not talking to me. He's not Nick's not talking to me. He's not interested in it either. We can both interested in it either. We can both interested in it either. We can both then sit there, both be interested in then sit there, both be interested in then sit there, both be interested in talking to each other but nobody's talking to each other but nobody's talking to each other but nobody's saying a word cuz we misunderstand what saying a word cuz we misunderstand what saying a word cuz we misunderstand what silence is like. Right? Or we assume silence is like. Right? Or we assume silence is like. Right? Or we assume that people don't want to have that people don't want to have that people don't want to have meaningful conversations when in fact meaningful conversations when in fact meaningful conversations when in fact most people say that's actually what most people say that's actually what most people say that's actually what they want. So I've adopted a different they want. So I've adopted a different they want. So I've adopted a different way to think about manners here in a way to think about manners here in a way to think about manners here in a way that I think attends more to both my own that I think attends more to both my own that I think attends more to both my own well-being and the person who I'm well-being and the person who I'm well-being and the person who I'm connecting with. I think about social connecting with. I think about social connecting with. I think about social connection as an opportunity or an connection as an opportunity or an connection as an opportunity or an invitation to connect with somebody. And invitation to connect with somebody. And invitation to connect with somebody. And to your point about fear, we find over to your point about fear, we find over to your point about fear, we find over and over again people are overly and over again people are overly and over again people are overly pessimistic, overly afraid about how pessimistic, overly afraid about how pessimistic, overly afraid about how positively other people will respond to positively other people will respond to positively other people will respond to them when you reach out to them in a them when you reach out to them in a them when you reach out to them in a positive way. So, like with the Uber positive way. So, like with the Uber positive way. So, like with the Uber driver on the way here today, driver on the way here today, driver on the way here today, I just he was Iranian. I just he was Iranian. I just he was Iranian. I asked him, "How do you feel about the I asked him, "How do you feel about the I asked him, "How do you feel about the war? Can you Can you tell me about it?" war? Can you Can you tell me about it?" war? Can you Can you tell me about it?" And it was clear that I was not wanting And it was clear that I was not wanting And it was clear that I was not wanting some superficial some superficial some superficial response. I cared. I was taking an response. I cared. I was taking an response. I cared. I was taking an interest in him. interest in him. interest in him. And he recognized I was taking an And he recognized I was taking an And he recognized I was taking an interest in him. interest in him. interest in him. And he responded by taking an interest And he responded by taking an interest And he responded by taking an interest then in me and feeling comfortable then in me and feeling comfortable then in me and feeling comfortable sharing. And he I mean, he shared that sharing. And he I mean, he shared that sharing. And he I mean, he shared that his son died in a protest in Iran and that son died in a protest in Iran and that son died in a protest in Iran and that he had been imprisoned in Iran. And he had been imprisoned in Iran. And he had been imprisoned in Iran. And I mean, it was we were crying but I mean, it was we were crying but I mean, it was we were crying but together at the end of that at the end together at the end of that at the end together at the end of that at the end of that ride. It was 23 minutes to get of that ride. It was 23 minutes to get of that ride. It was 23 minutes to get here. The fact that you're able to here. The fact that you're able to here. The fact that you're able to connect for a short while, I'm assuming connect for a short while, I'm assuming connect for a short while, I'm assuming you didn't exchange numbers. You're not you didn't exchange numbers. You're not you didn't exchange numbers. You're not going to be in touch. Yeah. So, so the going to be in touch. Yeah. So, so the going to be in touch. Yeah. So, so the point is not to create a lasting point is not to create a lasting point is not to create a lasting relationship. The point is to connect. relationship. The point is to connect. relationship. The point is to connect. &gt;&gt; that moment better. Yeah. I mean, and I &gt;&gt; that moment better. Yeah. I mean, and I &gt;&gt; that moment better. Yeah. I mean, and I think actually this is a really think actually this is a really think actually this is a really important way to rethink how you think important way to rethink how you think important way to rethink how you think about well-being. about well-being. about well-being. Well-being is not just about the Well-being is not just about the Well-being is not just about the intense, you know, the really intense, you know, the really intense, you know, the really impactful moments in your life. impactful moments in your life. impactful moments in your life. Happiness and well-being is a little Happiness and well-being is a little Happiness and well-being is a little more like a leaky tire. Like you just more like a leaky tire. Like you just more like a leaky tire. Like you just got to keep pumping it up cuz you adapt got to keep pumping it up cuz you adapt got to keep pumping it up cuz you adapt to things, right? You do go on this to things, right? You do go on this to things, right? You do go on this amazing trip, you know, to out into the amazing trip, you know, to out into the amazing trip, you know, to out into the beautiful Sonoran Desert or something, beautiful Sonoran Desert or something, beautiful Sonoran Desert or something, right? And that's great. You come back right? And that's great. You come back right? And that's great. You come back the next day and then you got traffic the next day and then you got traffic the next day and then you got traffic coming to work and that sucks, right? coming to work and that sucks, right? coming to work and that sucks, right? You're right back to where you were You're right back to where you were You're right back to where you were before. It doesn't last. I mean, nothing before. It doesn't last. I mean, nothing before. It doesn't last. I mean, nothing really lasts for that long. Well, really lasts for that long. Well, really lasts for that long. Well, obviously relationships can last, but obviously relationships can last, but obviously relationships can last, but moments come and go, right? And what but moments come and go, right? And what but moments come and go, right? And what that means, I think for our well-being, that means, I think for our well-being, that means, I think for our well-being, is that we want to start paying is that we want to start paying is that we want to start paying attention to creating good moments, attention to creating good moments, attention to creating good moments, right? Positive moments that can lift us right? Positive moments that can lift us right? Positive moments that can lift us up and the people around us as well. And up and the people around us as well. And up and the people around us as well. And you can take I could have gone 23 you can take I could have gone 23 you can take I could have gone 23 minutes here minutes here minutes here to talk with you today and had a to talk with you today and had a to talk with you today and had a perfectly boring ride. Or I could have perfectly boring ride. Or I could have perfectly boring ride. Or I could have heard one of the most amazing stories heard one of the most amazing stories heard one of the most amazing stories about somebody's life where he opens his about somebody's life where he opens his about somebody's life where he opens his heart up to me in this car ride in 23 heart up to me in this car ride in 23 heart up to me in this car ride in 23 minutes and made that 23 minutes way minutes and made that 23 minutes way minutes and made that 23 minutes way better and connect with another human better and connect with another human better and connect with another human being more deeply than you might imagine more deeply than you might imagine more deeply than you might imagine would be possible in that short time. would be possible in that short time. would be possible in that short time. And make that moment better. My day is And make that moment better. My day is And make that moment better. My day is better because that moment was better. better because that moment was better. better because that moment was better. And if you start thinking about And if you start thinking about And if you start thinking about happiness and connection in terms of happiness and connection in terms of happiness and connection in terms of moments rather than some sort of moments rather than some sort of moments rather than some sort of illusion of some lasting long-term illusion of some lasting long-term illusion of some lasting long-term impact, well, then you start seeing impact, well, then you start seeing impact, well, then you start seeing opportunities to connect all over the opportunities to connect all over the opportunities to connect all over the place, right? On my plane flight in last place, right? On my plane flight in last place, right? On my plane flight in last night, did that, right? In the grocery night, did that, right? In the grocery night, did that, right? In the grocery store, I'll start checking out. And you store, I'll start checking out. And you store, I'll start checking out. And you got an opportunity, you know, I now keep got an opportunity, you know, I now keep got an opportunity, you know, I now keep an eye out. I try I just pay attention. an eye out. I try I just pay attention. an eye out. I try I just pay attention. I take an interest in other people. I take an interest in other people. I take an interest in other people. The research that I've done here on The research that I've done here on The research that I've done here on social connections fundamentally changed social connections fundamentally changed social connections fundamentally changed the way that I live my life. I take an the way that I live my life. I take an the way that I live my life. I take an interest in other people, so I notice interest in other people, so I notice interest in other people, so I notice stuff that I didn't used to notice. I'll stuff that I didn't used to notice. I'll stuff that I didn't used to notice. I'll throw out compliments, any kind thought throw out compliments, any kind thought throw out compliments, any kind thought I will share with somebody. I will share with somebody. I will share with somebody. I just don't have anxiety about that. I just don't have anxiety about that. I just don't have anxiety about that. Keep moving on, all right? If I'm Keep moving on, all right? If I'm Keep moving on, all right? If I'm passing, I'll shout out. Like this passing, I'll shout out. Like this passing, I'll shout out. Like this morning, I got breakfast at the hotel I morning, I got breakfast at the hotel I morning, I got breakfast at the hotel I was at. was at. was at. Guys wearing a killer hat, and I'm Guys wearing a killer hat, and I'm Guys wearing a killer hat, and I'm walking by. Hey man, I love your hat. walking by. Hey man, I love your hat. walking by. Hey man, I love your hat. That's awesome, right? And walk by. He That's awesome, right? And walk by. He That's awesome, right? And walk by. He says, I love it, too, right? And I just says, I love it, too, right? And I just says, I love it, too, right? And I just kept going, but that moment was a little kept going, but that moment was a little kept going, but that moment was a little brighter, right? And what's a good day brighter, right? And what's a good day brighter, right? And what's a good day if not to string along a few good if not to string along a few good if not to string along a few good moments? And what's a good week if not moments? And what's a good week if not moments? And what's a good week if not to string along a few days that have to string along a few days that have to string along a few days that have some good moments in them? And what's a some good moments in them? And what's a some good moments in them? And what's a good month? A good year? A good life. good month? A good year? A good life. good month? A good year? A good life. It's about those moments. And we got It's about those moments. And we got It's about those moments. And we got lots of those moments. And if we start lots of those moments. And if we start lots of those moments. And if we start thinking about them in terms of thinking about them in terms of thinking about them in terms of opportunities to connect, to be decent opportunities to connect, to be decent opportunities to connect, to be decent to another person in a way that'll to another person in a way that'll to another person in a way that'll really use the skill we have to connect really use the skill we have to connect really use the skill we have to connect with other people instead of being held with other people instead of being held with other people instead of being held back by misplaced fear, changes the way back by misplaced fear, changes the way back by misplaced fear, changes the way you live your life. you live your life. you live your life. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives you insights into your heart health, you insights into your heart health, you insights into your heart health, your hormone health, autoimmune your hormone health, autoimmune your hormone health, autoimmune function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, it also analyzes these mental health, it also analyzes these mental health, it also analyzes these results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with Function, I learned that some of my Function, I learned that some of my Function, I learned that some of my blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start supplementing with nattokinase, which supplementing with nattokinase, which supplementing with nattokinase, which can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back exactly where I want them. Comprehensive exactly where I want them. Comprehensive exactly where I want them. Comprehensive lab testing of the sort that Function lab testing of the sort that Function lab testing of the sort that Function offers is just so important for health. offers is just so important for health. offers is just so important for health. I mean, how else are you going to know I mean, how else are you going to know I mean, how else are you going to know what's going on under the hood? And what's going on under the hood? And what's going on under the hood? And while I've been doing blood work for while I've been doing blood work for while I've been doing blood work for years, it used to be time-consuming, years, it used to be time-consuming, years, it used to be time-consuming, complicated, and expensive. In fact, I complicated, and expensive. In fact, I complicated, and expensive. In fact, I used to spend thousands of dollars per used to spend thousands of dollars per used to spend thousands of dollars per year trying to get this kind of data, year trying to get this kind of data, year trying to get this kind of data, and the data, frankly, were not all that and the data, frankly, were not all that and the data, frankly, were not all that good. But now with Function, it's good. But now with Function, it's good. But now with Function, it's extremely easy and affordable. A extremely easy and affordable. A extremely easy and affordable. A Function membership is only a dollar a Function membership is only a dollar a Function membership is only a dollar a day, $365 a year. And if you think about day, $365 a year. And if you think about day, $365 a year. And if you think about the information it provides, and the information it provides, and the information it provides, and the health challenges it helps you avoid, health challenges it helps you avoid, health challenges it helps you avoid, and the proactive things that it can do and the proactive things that it can do and the proactive things that it can do for you to enhance your health, I truly for you to enhance your health, I truly for you to enhance your health, I truly look at it as a savings. To learn more, look at it as a savings. To learn more, look at it as a savings. To learn more, visit functionhealth.com/huberman visit functionhealth.com/huberman visit functionhealth.com/huberman and use the code Huberman for a $50 and use the code Huberman for a $50 and use the code Huberman for a $50 credit towards your membership. Again, credit towards your membership. Again, credit towards your membership. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman. Yeah, I'm listening to you and I'm Yeah, I'm listening to you and I'm Yeah, I'm listening to you and I'm thinking uh thinking uh thinking uh some of the best moments of my life, and some of the best moments of my life, and some of the best moments of my life, and I've had many, are really at this I've had many, are really at this I've had many, are really at this kind of level of in passing. Mhm. You kind of level of in passing. Mhm. You kind of level of in passing. Mhm. You know, you mentioned that like, in my know, you mentioned that like, in my know, you mentioned that like, in my mind I was saying like, never mind I was saying like, never mind I was saying like, never underestimate the good feeling that underestimate the good feeling that underestimate the good feeling that comes from like a good fist bump with comes from like a good fist bump with comes from like a good fist bump with someone that you exchange no words with. someone that you exchange no words with. someone that you exchange no words with. &gt;&gt; You bet. &gt;&gt; You bet. &gt;&gt; You bet. &gt;&gt; And I live in a very crowded area, and &gt;&gt; And I live in a very crowded area, and &gt;&gt; And I live in a very crowded area, and so I don't go out much, but when I do, so I don't go out much, but when I do, so I don't go out much, but when I do, occasionally you just pass someone on occasionally you just pass someone on occasionally you just pass someone on the sidewalk, and you just like put out the sidewalk, and you just like put out the sidewalk, and you just like put out a fist and like, and you feel a kinship. a fist and like, and you feel a kinship. a fist and like, and you feel a kinship. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um the other day also um I have a very &gt;&gt; Um the other day also um I have a very &gt;&gt; Um the other day also um I have a very niche but uh very deep relationship to a niche but uh very deep relationship to a niche but uh very deep relationship to a certain genre music. So, this is like certain genre music. So, this is like certain genre music. So, this is like walking down the [laughter] the walking down the [laughter] the walking down the [laughter] the boardwalk and someone goes someone like boardwalk and someone goes someone like boardwalk and someone goes someone like shouted out. I was wearing a minor shouted out. I was wearing a minor shouted out. I was wearing a minor threat shirt. I'm a big Ian MacKaye fan threat shirt. I'm a big Ian MacKaye fan threat shirt. I'm a big Ian MacKaye fan minor threat Fugazi and someone goes minor threat Fugazi and someone goes minor threat Fugazi and someone goes minor threat and I go minor threat. I minor threat and I go minor threat. I minor threat and I go minor threat. I don't even know where they were. You don't even know where they were. You don't even know where they were. You know, and so like and like they I mean know, and so like and like they I mean know, and so like and like they I mean you know, it's a you know, I'm dating you know, it's a you know, I'm dating you know, it's a you know, I'm dating myself here by saying that but I myself here by saying that but I myself here by saying that but I still amazing band right no matter how still amazing band right no matter how still amazing band right no matter how old you are check it out. old you are check it out. old you are check it out. But you know, you feel a kinship to other you know, you feel a kinship to other you know, you feel a kinship to other members of your species that way. I members of your species that way. I members of your species that way. I don't know who these people are. It's don't know who these people are. It's don't know who these people are. It's interesting. It is a whole other level interesting. It is a whole other level interesting. It is a whole other level of human connection that I hadn't of human connection that I hadn't of human connection that I hadn't thought of and as with manners and thought of and as with manners and thought of and as with manners and etiquette and that kind of superficial etiquette and that kind of superficial etiquette and that kind of superficial small talk piece. I kind of assumed that small talk piece. I kind of assumed that small talk piece. I kind of assumed that this stuff didn't matter that it that this stuff didn't matter that it that this stuff didn't matter that it was kind of like well, okay, that's like was kind of like well, okay, that's like was kind of like well, okay, that's like that's not nourishment. That's not a that's not nourishment. That's not a that's not nourishment. That's not a that's not a nice like elk steak or that's not a nice like elk steak or that's not a nice like elk steak or beautiful vegetable spread. That's the beautiful vegetable spread. That's the beautiful vegetable spread. That's the that's like a that's like a cracker. that's like a that's like a cracker. that's like a that's like a cracker. Yeah. You know, but the comparison isn't Yeah. You know, but the comparison isn't Yeah. You know, but the comparison isn't fair because ultimately like you said fair because ultimately like you said fair because ultimately like you said our life is a series of moments and the our life is a series of moments and the our life is a series of moments and the feeling that our species has a kinship feeling that our species has a kinship feeling that our species has a kinship that isn't based on anything else. There that isn't based on anything else. There that isn't based on anything else. There was no exchange of money or was no exchange of money or was no exchange of money or opportunities or any of that is opportunities or any of that is opportunities or any of that is pretty awesome. pretty awesome. pretty awesome. &gt;&gt; that we're connected. We're in this &gt;&gt; that we're connected. We're in this &gt;&gt; that we're connected. We're in this together in some way. There's a there's together in some way. There's a there's together in some way. There's a there's a hypothesis that many of my PhD a hypothesis that many of my PhD a hypothesis that many of my PhD students and postdocs over the years students and postdocs over the years students and postdocs over the years have suggested that we've talked about have suggested that we've talked about have suggested that we've talked about but we have never figured out a way to but we have never figured out a way to but we have never figured out a way to actually test it but some sense that actually test it but some sense that actually test it but some sense that when you interact with when you interact with when you interact with a stranger a member of a group of with a stranger a member of a group of with a stranger a member of a group of some kind some kind some kind but a stranger is a good example. It but a stranger is a good example. It but a stranger is a good example. It doesn't just make you feel connected to doesn't just make you feel connected to doesn't just make you feel connected to that person. It kind of changes your that person. It kind of changes your that person. It kind of changes your sense of connection to like the entire sense of connection to like the entire sense of connection to like the entire group. Like you just feel a little group. Like you just feel a little group. Like you just feel a little better about humanity when you see that better about humanity when you see that better about humanity when you see that moment. Like you deliver a compliment to moment. Like you deliver a compliment to moment. Like you deliver a compliment to somebody. I was walking down the somebody. I was walking down the somebody. I was walking down the sidewalk um, just a little bit ago on my way to um, just a little bit ago on my way to um, just a little bit ago on my way to the train, there was a woman standing the train, there was a woman standing the train, there was a woman standing next to a car, and she just had these next to a car, and she just had these next to a car, and she just had these awesome red glasses on. They just looked awesome red glasses on. They just looked awesome red glasses on. They just looked fabulous. And I said to her, when we're fabulous. And I said to her, when we're fabulous. And I said to her, when we're going by, going by, going by, "I love those glasses. You are killing "I love those glasses. You are killing "I love those glasses. You are killing it today." it today." it today." And she took them off. And she took them off. And she took them off. Almost it I it didn't she wasn't going Almost it I it didn't she wasn't going Almost it I it didn't she wasn't going to cry, but she stopped and she to cry, but she stopped and she to cry, but she stopped and she said, "Thank you so much for telling me said, "Thank you so much for telling me said, "Thank you so much for telling me that. I really needed that today." Mhm. that. I really needed that today." Mhm. that. I really needed that today." Mhm. Right? I had met her in a moment Right? I had met her in a moment Right? I had met her in a moment where she had a bad day. And my sense is where she had a bad day. And my sense is where she had a bad day. And my sense is she just felt uplifted just like by she just felt uplifted just like by she just felt uplifted just like by people in general, by the world, just people in general, by the world, just people in general, by the world, just had a more favorable view of what the had a more favorable view of what the had a more favorable view of what the world was like, a different view of what world was like, a different view of what world was like, a different view of what human nature was like in that moment human nature was like in that moment human nature was like in that moment &gt;&gt; Mhm. than you otherwise would have had. &gt;&gt; Mhm. than you otherwise would have had. &gt;&gt; Mhm. than you otherwise would have had. Yesterday on my train ride into Yesterday on my train ride into Yesterday on my train ride into University of Chicago before I got on a University of Chicago before I got on a University of Chicago before I got on a flight to come here to see you. Sit down flight to come here to see you. Sit down flight to come here to see you. Sit down next to a young man on the train. He's next to a young man on the train. He's next to a young man on the train. He's got his earbuds in, looking at his got his earbuds in, looking at his got his earbuds in, looking at his phone, you know, easy stereotype, young phone, you know, easy stereotype, young phone, you know, easy stereotype, young man disconnected from the world. man disconnected from the world. man disconnected from the world. I sit down. I said I sat right next to I sit down. I said I sat right next to I sit down. I said I sat right next to him. I said I said hi, reached out "I'm him. I said I said hi, reached out "I'm him. I said I said hi, reached out "I'm Nick" to shake a hand. He he came back Nick" to shake a hand. He he came back Nick" to shake a hand. He he came back with a fist bump rather than a with a fist bump rather than a with a fist bump rather than a handshake. But then he took out his handshake. But then he took out his handshake. But then he took out his right earbud. right earbud. right earbud. And I started to talk to him. I said, And I started to talk to him. I said, And I started to talk to him. I said, "You know, what are what are you up to "You know, what are what are you up to "You know, what are what are you up to today? Where are you Where are you Where today? Where are you Where are you Where today? Where are you Where are you Where are you going into town for?" And he are you going into town for?" And he are you going into town for?" And he said, "Well, I'm going to this said, "Well, I'm going to this said, "Well, I'm going to this culinary program culinary program culinary program downtown." And what was so crystal clear downtown." And what was so crystal clear downtown." And what was so crystal clear right away was how proud he was that he right away was how proud he was that he right away was how proud he was that he was doing this. He'd come from LA, was doing this. He'd come from LA, was doing this. He'd come from LA, actually, and he was just start getting actually, and he was just start getting actually, and he was just start getting into this training program, this trade into this training program, this trade into this training program, this trade school to get him into this culinary school to get him into this culinary school to get him into this culinary union where he's going to work as a chef union where he's going to work as a chef union where he's going to work as a chef for maybe for a hotel or a big for maybe for a hotel or a big for maybe for a hotel or a big restaurant. He pulled out his book, uh restaurant. He pulled out his book, uh restaurant. He pulled out his book, uh his little three-ring binder that had his little three-ring binder that had his little three-ring binder that had his lessons for it. I actually took a his lessons for it. I actually took a his lessons for it. I actually took a picture of it. I have a I have a son picture of it. I have a I have a son picture of it. I have a I have a son who's entering a trade program right who's entering a trade program right who's entering a trade program right now. Uh I've never seen him happier in now. Uh I've never seen him happier in now. Uh I've never seen him happier in his life than when he's doing this. And his life than when he's doing this. And his life than when he's doing this. And he was flipping through, showing me what he was flipping through, showing me what he was flipping through, showing me what they were doing today. they were doing today. they were doing today. He was just so proud of what he was He was just so proud of what he was He was just so proud of what he was doing, so ready to talk with me about doing, so ready to talk with me about doing, so ready to talk with me about this. His name was Gustavo. Um this. His name was Gustavo. Um this. His name was Gustavo. Um delightful young man. And I remember delightful young man. And I remember delightful young man. And I remember leaving that conversation just like a leaving that conversation just like a leaving that conversation just like a feeling better about my kids. It's feeling better about my kids. It's feeling better about my kids. It's just about kids in general. Like here's just about kids in general. Like here's just about kids in general. Like here's a kid who's really trying to make it and a kid who's really trying to make it and a kid who's really trying to make it and that felt good. Not just about this that felt good. Not just about this that felt good. Not just about this young man Gustavo who I felt fortunate young man Gustavo who I felt fortunate young man Gustavo who I felt fortunate to spend 30 minutes that made that 30 to spend 30 minutes that made that 30 to spend 30 minutes that made that 30 minutes much better. But kind of minutes much better. But kind of minutes much better. But kind of uplifting about the entire category that uplifting about the entire category that uplifting about the entire category that he was from. he was from. he was from. And what's interesting is how easy it is And what's interesting is how easy it is And what's interesting is how easy it is to your point about manners say to avoid to your point about manners say to avoid to your point about manners say to avoid that out of fear. He doesn't want to that out of fear. He doesn't want to that out of fear. He doesn't want to talk to me. Not that interested in talk to me. Not that interested in talk to me. Not that interested in having a meaningful conversation. He having a meaningful conversation. He having a meaningful conversation. He doesn't want to go there, right? doesn't want to go there, right? doesn't want to go there, right? But in fact, that's the thing we're all But in fact, that's the thing we're all But in fact, that's the thing we're all dying for. It's super interesting. I'd dying for. It's super interesting. I'd dying for. It's super interesting. I'd never thought about this aspect of never thought about this aspect of never thought about this aspect of social dynamics. Um yes, manners. Um social dynamics. Um yes, manners. Um social dynamics. Um yes, manners. Um both my parents are very polite. They both my parents are very polite. They both my parents are very polite. They taught us to be polite. My my girlfriend taught us to be polite. My my girlfriend taught us to be polite. My my girlfriend comes from the south, so she's like very comes from the south, so she's like very comes from the south, so she's like very polite. Like manners are like a big polite. Like manners are like a big polite. Like manners are like a big thing. And she's a genuinely kind person. And she's a genuinely kind person. And she's a genuinely kind person. That's why I think people hear like That's why I think people hear like That's why I think people hear like manners and kindness and they think oh manners and kindness and they think oh manners and kindness and they think oh like it's fake, but it's not. It's like it's fake, but it's not. It's like it's fake, but it's not. It's it's a it's a real it's part of the it's a it's a real it's part of the it's a it's a real it's part of the social fabric, right? Not that I'm the social fabric, right? Not that I'm the social fabric, right? Not that I'm the data point that matters, but I the data point that matters, but I the data point that matters, but I assure anyone who aspires to be a assure anyone who aspires to be a assure anyone who aspires to be a public-facing person, the thing you give public-facing person, the thing you give public-facing person, the thing you give up when you're a public-facing person is up when you're a public-facing person is up when you're a public-facing person is this. Oh, really? this. Oh, really? this. Oh, really? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's interesting. And and it's a &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's interesting. And and it's a &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's interesting. And and it's a And for somebody like me, And for somebody like me, And for somebody like me, it you know, it's compensated for it you know, it's compensated for it you know, it's compensated for by the other things you gain, right? But by the other things you gain, right? But by the other things you gain, right? But but that disappears, right? but that disappears, right? but that disappears, right? Not with everyone, right? But it Not with everyone, right? But it Not with everyone, right? But it disappears. And so I'm as you're saying disappears. And so I'm as you're saying disappears. And so I'm as you're saying this, I actually realize I like have a this, I actually realize I like have a this, I actually realize I like have a little bit of nostalgia about like just little bit of nostalgia about like just little bit of nostalgia about like just being able to like go out and interact being able to like go out and interact being able to like go out and interact with people. And sometimes it happens, with people. And sometimes it happens, with people. And sometimes it happens, but a lot of times it things revert back but a lot of times it things revert back but a lot of times it things revert back to the podcast or things like that, to the podcast or things like that, to the podcast or things like that, which I really love. I love it when which I really love. I love it when which I really love. I love it when people roll up and have questions and people roll up and have questions and people roll up and have questions and everyone knows me that like I'll give a everyone knows me that like I'll give a everyone knows me that like I'll give a podcast right there. If someone has a podcast right there. If someone has a podcast right there. If someone has a question, I'm going to give an answer. question, I'm going to give an answer. question, I'm going to give an answer. &gt;&gt; Sit down for 2 hours, please. &gt;&gt; Sit down for 2 hours, please. &gt;&gt; Sit down for 2 hours, please. &gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to I always I mean, I'm &gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to I always I mean, I'm &gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to I always I mean, I'm genuinely interested in them. I'll be genuinely interested in them. I'll be genuinely interested in them. I'll be like, "Where are you from? What's your like, "Where are you from? What's your like, "Where are you from? What's your name?" I'm genuinely interested. I'm not name?" I'm genuinely interested. I'm not name?" I'm genuinely interested. I'm not asking it like to deflect. I'm really asking it like to deflect. I'm really asking it like to deflect. I'm really interested. Um but the anonymous interested. Um but the anonymous interested. Um but the anonymous brief exchange that reinforces brief exchange that reinforces brief exchange that reinforces our and their understanding. It's not our and their understanding. It's not our and their understanding. It's not like a belief, it's like an like a belief, it's like an like a belief, it's like an understanding, it's a feeling that like understanding, it's a feeling that like understanding, it's a feeling that like we're part of the same species and like we're part of the same species and like we're part of the same species and like you know, that is a an incredibly you know, that is a an incredibly you know, that is a an incredibly powerful and reinforcing thing. I think, powerful and reinforcing thing. I think, powerful and reinforcing thing. I think, I mean especially for me, I'm very I mean especially for me, I'm very I mean especially for me, I'm very affiliative. I can't imagine and I'll affiliative. I can't imagine and I'll affiliative. I can't imagine and I'll just table this possibility that I'll just table this possibility that I'll just table this possibility that there are some people who are not as there are some people who are not as there are some people who are not as affiliative. You know, I know one or affiliative. You know, I know one or affiliative. You know, I know one or two people whose names I won't mention two people whose names I won't mention two people whose names I won't mention who don't really It's not that who don't really It's not that who don't really It's not that people but unless it's their family, people but unless it's their family, people but unless it's their family, they're not really interested in they're not really interested in they're not really interested in other people. They're just not and I other people. They're just not and I other people. They're just not and I can't say that they're unhappy. They can't say that they're unhappy. They can't say that they're unhappy. They like their family, they like their like their family, they like their like their family, they like their books, they like their movies and we books, they like their movies and we books, they like their movies and we could say that they would be better off could say that they would be better off could say that they would be better off if they you know, if they you know, if they you know, were different but they don't seem to were different but they don't seem to were different but they don't seem to really like other people. They don't dislike like other people. They don't dislike like other people. They don't dislike them but they've got their people and them but they've got their people and them but they've got their people and then there's everyone else. then there's everyone else. then there's everyone else. And the idea that like they would And the idea that like they would And the idea that like they would interact with these other people except interact with these other people except interact with these other people except in you know, professional circumstances, in you know, professional circumstances, in you know, professional circumstances, I think to them is kind of foreign but I think to them is kind of foreign but I think to them is kind of foreign but I'm making a lot of assumptions here, I'm making a lot of assumptions here, I'm making a lot of assumptions here, too. So you can find situations where too. So you can find situations where too. So you can find situations where everybody seems to act that way, right? everybody seems to act that way, right? everybody seems to act that way, right? Like on my train coming into Chicago Like on my train coming into Chicago Like on my train coming into Chicago every morning where nobody's talking every morning where nobody's talking every morning where nobody's talking with each other. Looks like nobody cares with each other. Looks like nobody cares with each other. Looks like nobody cares about other people, they don't have any about other people, they don't have any about other people, they don't have any interest in talking to other people. In interest in talking to other people. In interest in talking to other people. In those kinds of situations when you ask those kinds of situations when you ask those kinds of situations when you ask people to connect with somebody else people to connect with somebody else people to connect with somebody else everybody kind of gets lifted up. everybody kind of gets lifted up. everybody kind of gets lifted up. If you look across say introversion and If you look across say introversion and If you look across say introversion and extroversion, a common hypothesis is extroversion, a common hypothesis is extroversion, a common hypothesis is that extroverts get their energy and that extroverts get their energy and that extroverts get their energy and their enjoyment from connecting with their enjoyment from connecting with their enjoyment from connecting with other people whereas folks who are more other people whereas folks who are more other people whereas folks who are more introverted get their energy and introverted get their energy and introverted get their energy and enjoyment from keeping to themselves, enjoyment from keeping to themselves, enjoyment from keeping to themselves, right? That's what they want. The data right? That's what they want. The data right? That's what they want. The data just don't support that. just don't support that. just don't support that. So this we've known for a long time. So this we've known for a long time. So this we've known for a long time. So extroversion is correlated with So extroversion is correlated with So extroversion is correlated with well-being, with happiness. well-being, with happiness. well-being, with happiness. Going back to 1980, one of the very Going back to 1980, one of the very Going back to 1980, one of the very first papers that ever one of the very first papers that ever one of the very first papers that ever one of the very first studies Is ever tested is first studies Is ever tested is first studies Is ever tested is personality related to well-being? An personality related to well-being? An personality related to well-being? An easy hypothesis is no, it's not. It easy hypothesis is no, it's not. It easy hypothesis is no, it's not. It can't be because, right, people get what can't be because, right, people get what can't be because, right, people get what they want out of their lives, right? And they want out of their lives, right? And they want out of their lives, right? And everybody's equally happy because, you everybody's equally happy because, you everybody's equally happy because, you know, extroverts connect with other know, extroverts connect with other know, extroverts connect with other people, they reach out, they care about people, they reach out, they care about people, they reach out, they care about other people. Introverts don't care as other people. Introverts don't care as other people. Introverts don't care as much about other people or they much about other people or they much about other people or they have other preferences, they keep to have other preferences, they keep to have other preferences, they keep to themselves or have deeper, meaningful themselves or have deeper, meaningful themselves or have deeper, meaningful conversations, right? But everybody's conversations, right? But everybody's conversations, right? But everybody's getting what they want. So, getting what they want. So, getting what they want. So, theoretically, there should be no theoretically, there should be no theoretically, there should be no correlation at all between personality correlation at all between personality correlation at all between personality and well-being. And that just isn't and well-being. And that just isn't and well-being. And that just isn't true. Correlation between happiness, positive Correlation between happiness, positive Correlation between happiness, positive affect day-to-day, and extraversion is affect day-to-day, and extraversion is affect day-to-day, and extraversion is .5. That's huge. That is big. That's like That's huge. That is big. That's like That's huge. That is big. That's like the correlation between the heights of the correlation between the heights of the correlation between the heights of fathers and sons. That is a big fathers and sons. That is a big fathers and sons. That is a big correlation, right? It's a little weaker correlation, right? It's a little weaker correlation, right? It's a little weaker with things like satisfaction with life, with things like satisfaction with life, with things like satisfaction with life, it's a little more like .3, but that it's a little more like .3, but that it's a little more like .3, but that correlation is big and it shows up correlation is big and it shows up correlation is big and it shows up around the world, right? around the world, right? around the world, right? In 1996, Ed Diener, one of the founding In 1996, Ed Diener, one of the founding In 1996, Ed Diener, one of the founding figures in the science of happiness figures in the science of happiness figures in the science of happiness or well-being, stated, you know, the or well-being, stated, you know, the or well-being, stated, you know, the foundational result in personality foundational result in personality foundational result in personality science is that extraversion is science is that extraversion is science is that extraversion is correlated with well-being or happiness. correlated with well-being or happiness. correlated with well-being or happiness. The more outgoing and extroverted you The more outgoing and extroverted you The more outgoing and extroverted you are, the more you connect with others, are, the more you connect with others, are, the more you connect with others, the happier you are. the happier you are. the happier you are. Lots of reasons why that could be. Lots of reasons why that could be. Lots of reasons why that could be. There's a third variable. Maybe There's a third variable. Maybe There's a third variable. Maybe extroverts are just happier than extroverts are just happier than extroverts are just happier than introverts to begin with, say. introverts to begin with, say. introverts to begin with, say. But it raises question. Maybe it's But it raises question. Maybe it's But it raises question. Maybe it's something about how they're the choices something about how they're the choices something about how they're the choices they're making, the habits they're making, the habits they're making, the habits they're developing, how they're actually developing, how they're actually developing, how they're actually behaving. And so, that makes it easy behaving. And so, that makes it easy behaving. And so, that makes it easy prediction that, well, prediction that, well, prediction that, well, what happens if we just ask people what happens if we just ask people what happens if we just ask people to reach out and connect more with other to reach out and connect more with other to reach out and connect more with other people, to act a little more people, to act a little more people, to act a little more extroverted? Does it affect their well-being? And Does it affect their well-being? And Does it affect their well-being? And could this be like a well-being could this be like a well-being could this be like a well-being intervention? And it turns out it is. intervention? And it turns out it is. intervention? And it turns out it is. Will Fleeson, a psychologist at Wake Will Fleeson, a psychologist at Wake Will Fleeson, a psychologist at Wake Forest University, was one of the very Forest University, was one of the very Forest University, was one of the very first people to do this. Half-hour lab first people to do this. Half-hour lab first people to do this. Half-hour lab study, asked people to act more study, asked people to act more study, asked people to act more extroverted or more introverted. When extroverted or more introverted. When extroverted or more introverted. When people acted more extroverted, they people acted more extroverted, they people acted more extroverted, they reported feeling more positive in that reported feeling more positive in that reported feeling more positive in that experiment. When you ask people to act experiment. When you ask people to act experiment. When you ask people to act more introverted, they felt less more introverted, they felt less more introverted, they felt less positive, regardless of where they fell positive, regardless of where they fell positive, regardless of where they fell on this personality scale to begin with. on this personality scale to begin with. on this personality scale to begin with. Over the course of a person's day, Over the course of a person's day, Over the course of a person's day, extroverts and introverts report feeling extroverts and introverts report feeling extroverts and introverts report feeling better alike when they're spending time better alike when they're spending time better alike when they're spending time with other people than when they're with other people than when they're with other people than when they're with than when they're alone. You ask both to than when they're alone. You ask both to than when they're alone. You ask both to spend more time connecting with other spend more time connecting with other spend more time connecting with other people being extroverted over the course people being extroverted over the course people being extroverted over the course of a day, a week, or more. Sonia of a day, a week, or more. Sonia of a day, a week, or more. Sonia Lyubomirsky, uh psychology professor at UC Riverside, uh psychology professor at UC Riverside, uh psychology professor at UC Riverside, has done has done some of the best has done has done some of the best has done has done some of the best research on this. Over the course of 2 research on this. Over the course of 2 research on this. Over the course of 2 weeks, you shift the well the positive weeks, you shift the well the positive weeks, you shift the well the positive affect meter up across the entire affect meter up across the entire affect meter up across the entire extroversion scale extroversion scale extroversion scale when people are connecting with others when people are connecting with others when people are connecting with others compared to when they're acting compared to when they're acting compared to when they're acting introverted. I think [snorts] what introverted. I think [snorts] what introverted. I think [snorts] what differs here between the folks you're differs here between the folks you're differs here between the folks you're describing who don't seem to get along describing who don't seem to get along describing who don't seem to get along well with others or like other people or well with others or like other people or well with others or like other people or don't seem to care as much about other don't seem to care as much about other don't seem to care as much about other people and folks who do are the people and folks who do are the people and folks who do are the habits [snorts] that they have habits [snorts] that they have habits [snorts] that they have developed. A little like exercise, I developed. A little like exercise, I developed. A little like exercise, I think is the way to think about it. Some think is the way to think about it. Some think is the way to think about it. Some of us choose to exercise a lot. Uh you of us choose to exercise a lot. Uh you of us choose to exercise a lot. Uh you choose to exercise a lot, clearly. I choose to exercise a lot, clearly. I choose to exercise a lot, clearly. I don't like don't like don't like &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; But you're a former athlete. You played &gt;&gt; But you're a former athlete. You played &gt;&gt; But you're a former athlete. You played you played football and you wrestled. I you played football and you wrestled. I you played football and you wrestled. I played basketball. I played basketball played basketball. I played basketball played basketball. I played basketball and football. Yeah, no, I avoided and football. Yeah, no, I avoided and football. Yeah, no, I avoided wrestling cuz I wanted my ears to keep wrestling cuz I wanted my ears to keep wrestling cuz I wanted my ears to keep looking good. looking good. looking good. &gt;&gt; Um yeah, but you know, I struggle to &gt;&gt; Um yeah, but you know, I struggle to &gt;&gt; Um yeah, but you know, I struggle to find the time for it. So I don't find the time for it. So I don't find the time for it. So I don't choose to exercise as much as I should choose to exercise as much as I should choose to exercise as much as I should now, right? But we all would feel better now, right? But we all would feel better now, right? But we all would feel better if we exercised a little more regardless if we exercised a little more regardless if we exercised a little more regardless of what our habits are. So what the data of what our habits are. So what the data of what our habits are. So what the data on this suggests is that on this suggests is that on this suggests is that yeah, people yeah, people yeah, people open themselves up a little bit more to open themselves up a little bit more to open themselves up a little bit more to other people, try to reach out and other people, try to reach out and other people, try to reach out and connect in positive ways with other connect in positive ways with other connect in positive ways with other people, the porcupines in our lives are people, the porcupines in our lives are people, the porcupines in our lives are not making themselves happier by keeping not making themselves happier by keeping not making themselves happier by keeping their quills out and keeping to their quills out and keeping to their quills out and keeping to themselves. They're not living quite as good a life They're not living quite as good a life They're not living quite as good a life as they as they could live if they chose as they as they could live if they chose as they as they could live if they chose to live a little differently. Now, to live a little differently. Now, to live a little differently. Now, whether they choose to or not, right? whether they choose to or not, right? whether they choose to or not, right? Whether you exercise or not is not like Whether you exercise or not is not like Whether you exercise or not is not like a necessarily a moral virtue. Somebody a necessarily a moral virtue. Somebody a necessarily a moral virtue. Somebody doesn't exercise, you can't say you have doesn't exercise, you can't say you have doesn't exercise, you can't say you have to exercise. But if you wanted to lift to exercise. But if you wanted to lift to exercise. But if you wanted to lift your life up a little bit, your life up a little bit, your life up a little bit, reach out and engage a little more often reach out and engage a little more often reach out and engage a little more often is what the data suggests regardless of is what the data suggests regardless of is what the data suggests regardless of where you are on that spectrum. where you are on that spectrum. where you are on that spectrum. I realize it's not your specific area of I realize it's not your specific area of I realize it's not your specific area of work, but what about for people with work, but what about for people with work, but what about for people with social anxiety? Yeah. I mean, my first social anxiety? Yeah. I mean, my first social anxiety? Yeah. I mean, my first impulse is to say, as long as you have impulse is to say, as long as you have impulse is to say, as long as you have the resources and the time, get a dog. the resources and the time, get a dog. the resources and the time, get a dog. You know, I'm not a big fan of dog parks You know, I'm not a big fan of dog parks You know, I'm not a big fan of dog parks for all sorts of health reasons. And but for all sorts of health reasons. And but for all sorts of health reasons. And but when I lived in San Diego, like I would when I lived in San Diego, like I would when I lived in San Diego, like I would take my bulldog mastiff puppy to dog take my bulldog mastiff puppy to dog take my bulldog mastiff puppy to dog park. I made lots of friends. He made park. I made lots of friends. He made park. I made lots of friends. He made friends. And a dog is better than friends. And a dog is better than friends. And a dog is better than bumming a cigarette, which nobody does bumming a cigarette, which nobody does bumming a cigarette, which nobody does anymore, right? Met tons of people that anymore, right? Met tons of people that anymore, right? Met tons of people that way. So, what's interesting about that way. So, what's interesting about that way. So, what's interesting about that is that creates like an excuse is that creates like an excuse is that creates like an excuse to have a conversation. Right. Like the to have a conversation. Right. Like the to have a conversation. Right. Like the Well, no one I'm not suggesting anyone Well, no one I'm not suggesting anyone Well, no one I'm not suggesting anyone do this, but in the old days, like you do this, but in the old days, like you do this, but in the old days, like you would you would ask for a cigarette. you would you would ask for a cigarette. you would you would ask for a cigarette. You And you would then smoke side Then You And you would then smoke side Then You And you would then smoke side Then you would smoke side by side with you would smoke side by side with you would smoke side by side with somebody and you'd talk. And sometimes somebody and you'd talk. And sometimes somebody and you'd talk. And sometimes there was a romantic interest, there was a romantic interest, there was a romantic interest, sometimes it was just a sometimes it was just a sometimes it was just a friendly interest, but you shared a friendly interest, but you shared a friendly interest, but you shared a brief experience. You brief experience. You brief experience. You &gt;&gt; got some nicotine in your system, which &gt;&gt; got some nicotine in your system, which &gt;&gt; got some nicotine in your system, which no doubt affected no doubt affected no doubt affected &gt;&gt; they gave something to you, right? So, &gt;&gt; they gave something to you, right? So, &gt;&gt; they gave something to you, right? So, they shared resources with you. And they shared resources with you. And they shared resources with you. And so, there's trust that's being Yeah, so, there's trust that's being Yeah, so, there's trust that's being Yeah, that was a very common that was a very common that was a very common mode of exchange um until about People mode of exchange um until about People mode of exchange um until about People really stopped doing that kind of in the really stopped doing that kind of in the really stopped doing that kind of in the mid '90s is when smoking really dropped mid '90s is when smoking really dropped mid '90s is when smoking really dropped off. So, what's interesting about that, off. So, what's interesting about that, off. So, what's interesting about that, I think those tokens, the dog or the I think those tokens, the dog or the I think those tokens, the dog or the cigarette, are serving to work our way cigarette, are serving to work our way cigarette, are serving to work our way around our anxiety a little bit that we around our anxiety a little bit that we around our anxiety a little bit that we have about connecting with other people. have about connecting with other people. have about connecting with other people. I don't think they're necessary. I don't think they're necessary. I don't think they're necessary. Right? They're not necessary, but they Right? They're not necessary, but they Right? They're not necessary, but they do help to get around that anxiety. But do help to get around that anxiety. But do help to get around that anxiety. But to people who have social anxiety, to people who have social anxiety, to people who have social anxiety, it's a it's a painful thing, of it's a it's a painful thing, of it's a it's a painful thing, of course, and it's hard. We all have it to course, and it's hard. We all have it to course, and it's hard. We all have it to some extent. We're nervous about some extent. We're nervous about some extent. We're nervous about reaching out and engaging with other reaching out and engaging with other reaching out and engaging with other people in varying degrees. Some of that people in varying degrees. Some of that people in varying degrees. Some of that just being a function of how often we do just being a function of how often we do just being a function of how often we do it. When I was in graduate school, for it. When I was in graduate school, for it. When I was in graduate school, for instance, I was terrified of public instance, I was terrified of public instance, I was terrified of public speaking. Before my first Before my speaking. Before my first Before my speaking. Before my first Before my first job interview, which is my fourth first job interview, which is my fourth first job interview, which is my fourth year of graduate school at Princeton, I year of graduate school at Princeton, I year of graduate school at Princeton, I got super lucky to get this job got super lucky to get this job got super lucky to get this job interview. I was terrified. Mhm. interview. I was terrified. Mhm. interview. I was terrified. Mhm. Terrified. My job You seem so facile Terrified. My job You seem so facile Terrified. My job You seem so facile with it now. with it now. with it now. &gt;&gt; Now I am. Yeah. Now I am, right? This is &gt;&gt; Now I am. Yeah. Now I am, right? This is &gt;&gt; Now I am. Yeah. Now I am, right? This is 25 years of practice and experience and 25 years of practice and experience and 25 years of practice and experience and exposure. And if you have social anxiety exposure. And if you have social anxiety exposure. And if you have social anxiety disorder and you want to take care of disorder and you want to take care of disorder and you want to take care of that, this is something psychologist that, this is something psychologist that, this is something psychologist clinicians can really take care of. clinicians can really take care of. clinicians can really take care of. There are lots of things that a There are lots of things that a There are lots of things that a psychologist we can't really deal with psychologist we can't really deal with psychologist we can't really deal with behaviorally. Social anxiety is behaviorally. Social anxiety is behaviorally. Social anxiety is something we really can help people something we really can help people something we really can help people with. For um for this book uh a little with. For um for this book uh a little with. For um for this book uh a little more social that I that I just wrote um more social that I that I just wrote um more social that I that I just wrote um I had a conversation with the guy who is I had a conversation with the guy who is I had a conversation with the guy who is responsible for really developing responsible for really developing responsible for really developing exposure therapy to treat anxiety exposure therapy to treat anxiety exposure therapy to treat anxiety disorder. Stefan Hofmann is his name. disorder. Stefan Hofmann is his name. disorder. Stefan Hofmann is his name. And essentially the strategy is And essentially the strategy is And essentially the strategy is very simple. If you are afraid of very simple. If you are afraid of very simple. If you are afraid of talking with a stranger or having a deep talking with a stranger or having a deep talking with a stranger or having a deep conversation, the way to get over that conversation, the way to get over that conversation, the way to get over that is not to simulate it or to imagine. is not to simulate it or to imagine. is not to simulate it or to imagine. It's not like you get up and you It's not like you get up and you It's not like you get up and you give a pretend speech. That's what give a pretend speech. That's what give a pretend speech. That's what psychologists were doing for years. It psychologists were doing for years. It psychologists were doing for years. It doesn't work because it's still doesn't work because it's still doesn't work because it's still pretending. It's you're not a real pretending. It's you're not a real pretending. It's you're not a real audience. It has to be real. And that audience. It has to be real. And that audience. It has to be real. And that was Stefan Hofmann's real was Stefan Hofmann's real was Stefan Hofmann's real uh innovation. uh innovation. uh innovation. Is you send people out in the world and Is you send people out in the world and Is you send people out in the world and to do the thing for real. to do the thing for real. to do the thing for real. You're worried about getting rejected. You're worried about getting rejected. You're worried about getting rejected. Go out and start asking people for help Go out and start asking people for help Go out and start asking people for help and you'll learn that your fear is and you'll learn that your fear is and you'll learn that your fear is misplaced, that you get accepted more misplaced, that you get accepted more misplaced, that you get accepted more often than you might guess. Exposing often than you might guess. Exposing often than you might guess. Exposing people to that thing that they are people to that thing that they are people to that thing that they are anxious of, when the belief is anxious of, when the belief is anxious of, when the belief is misplaced, and with social anxiety it is misplaced, and with social anxiety it is misplaced, and with social anxiety it is usually wildly misplaced. That's what we usually wildly misplaced. That's what we usually wildly misplaced. That's what we find over and over again. It's a find over and over again. It's a find over and over again. It's a mistaken barrier to connecting with mistaken barrier to connecting with mistaken barrier to connecting with other people. other people. other people. That then that's how you ease that That then that's how you ease that That then that's how you ease that social anxiety and get rid of it. Now, social anxiety and get rid of it. Now, social anxiety and get rid of it. Now, exposure therapy doesn't work for exposure therapy doesn't work for exposure therapy doesn't work for everything. If you're afraid of bullets, everything. If you're afraid of bullets, everything. If you're afraid of bullets, right? You're afraid of getting shot by right? You're afraid of getting shot by right? You're afraid of getting shot by bullets, right? Repeated exposure to bullets, right? Repeated exposure to bullets, right? Repeated exposure to being shot by bullets is not going to being shot by bullets is not going to being shot by bullets is not going to make you less afraid of that. That's make you less afraid of that. That's make you less afraid of that. That's going to be one trial learning and going to be one trial learning and going to be one trial learning and that's going to be the end of it. But that's going to be the end of it. But that's going to be the end of it. But when your fears are misplaced, like it when your fears are misplaced, like it when your fears are misplaced, like it is with social stuff, exposure is what is with social stuff, exposure is what is with social stuff, exposure is what is what takes care of it. Not because is what takes care of it. Not because is what takes care of it. Not because you do you dull your anxiety so much. you do you dull your anxiety so much. you do you dull your anxiety so much. It's because you change your beliefs It's because you change your beliefs It's because you change your beliefs about what other people are like. You about what other people are like. You about what other people are like. You learn, "Oh, wait. learn, "Oh, wait. learn, "Oh, wait. Other people are nicer than I think. Other people are nicer than I think. Other people are nicer than I think. When I say hi to somebody, they tend to When I say hi to somebody, they tend to When I say hi to somebody, they tend to say hi back. say hi back. say hi back. When I take an interest in somebody, When I take an interest in somebody, When I take an interest in somebody, they tend to say take an interest in me. they tend to say take an interest in me. they tend to say take an interest in me. When I ask somebody for a cigarette, When I ask somebody for a cigarette, When I ask somebody for a cigarette, they and they have one, they tend to they and they have one, they tend to they and they have one, they tend to give me one when I ask for it. And makes give me one when I ask for it. And makes give me one when I ask for it. And makes us nice conversation. Changes your us nice conversation. Changes your us nice conversation. Changes your beliefs. That's why exposure therapy beliefs. That's why exposure therapy beliefs. That's why exposure therapy works. That's really interesting and works. That's really interesting and works. That's really interesting and a bit surprising. I completely believe a bit surprising. I completely believe a bit surprising. I completely believe it as you say it, but that exposure it as you say it, but that exposure it as you say it, but that exposure therapy doesn't reduce your anxiety per therapy doesn't reduce your anxiety per therapy doesn't reduce your anxiety per se, it changes your beliefs about how se, it changes your beliefs about how se, it changes your beliefs about how other people are going to react. other people are going to react. other people are going to react. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which indirectly &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which indirectly &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which indirectly &gt;&gt; Yeah. feeds back and &gt;&gt; Yeah. feeds back and &gt;&gt; Yeah. feeds back and &gt;&gt; Yeah. changes how you feel. &gt;&gt; Yeah. changes how you feel. &gt;&gt; Yeah. changes how you feel. &gt;&gt; give you a story about somebody who I &gt;&gt; give you a story about somebody who I &gt;&gt; give you a story about somebody who I got connected to a little bit while I got connected to a little bit while I got connected to a little bit while I was writing this book. Jia Jiang is his was writing this book. Jia Jiang is his was writing this book. Jia Jiang is his name. And Jia name. And Jia name. And Jia uh lives up in the Bay Area, well, at uh lives up in the Bay Area, well, at uh lives up in the Bay Area, well, at least he did at the time. I think least he did at the time. I think least he did at the time. I think that's still where he is. He was a He that's still where he is. He was a He that's still where he is. He was a He was an aspiring entrepreneur. You can was an aspiring entrepreneur. You can was an aspiring entrepreneur. You can find him at rejectiontherapy.com, find him at rejectiontherapy.com, find him at rejectiontherapy.com, which is a website where he put this uh which is a website where he put this uh which is a website where he put this uh together. He's got all these videos, together. He's got all these videos, together. He's got all these videos, they're amazing. He decided he was an they're amazing. He decided he was an they're amazing. He decided he was an aspiring entrepreneur and he aspiring entrepreneur and he aspiring entrepreneur and he uh but he was afraid of rejection. And uh but he was afraid of rejection. And uh but he was afraid of rejection. And he decided he was going to cure himself he decided he was going to cure himself he decided he was going to cure himself of this fear of rejection by subjecting of this fear of rejection by subjecting of this fear of rejection by subjecting himself to exposure therapy. He heard of himself to exposure therapy. He heard of himself to exposure therapy. He heard of this that you do this for a month, this that you do this for a month, this that you do this for a month, right? This Stefan Hofmann work. right? This Stefan Hofmann work. right? This Stefan Hofmann work. You're going to He's going to try to You're going to He's going to try to You're going to He's going to try to make some outlandish request every day make some outlandish request every day make some outlandish request every day for a month and get rejected every day. for a month and get rejected every day. for a month and get rejected every day. But because his anxiety was so bad, he But because his anxiety was so bad, he But because his anxiety was so bad, he needed more than a month. He needed 100 needed more than a month. He needed 100 needed more than a month. He needed 100 days. So, he was 100 days in a row, he days. So, he was 100 days in a row, he days. So, he was 100 days in a row, he was going to ask somebody some ludicrous was going to ask somebody some ludicrous was going to ask somebody some ludicrous request so that he would get rejected request so that he would get rejected request so that he would get rejected and then he was going to develop thick and then he was going to develop thick and then he was going to develop thick skin, right? He was going to become skin, right? He was going to become skin, right? He was going to become immune to rejection cuz he's going to immune to rejection cuz he's going to immune to rejection cuz he's going to toughen himself up. He was going to toughen himself up. He was going to toughen himself up. He was going to desensitize himself, okay? desensitize himself, okay? desensitize himself, okay? First day he goes up to a security First day he goes up to a security First day he goes up to a security guard. And he videotapes all these, so guard. And he videotapes all these, so guard. And he videotapes all these, so you can find these online, they're you can find these online, they're you can find these online, they're beautiful. Uh they're beautiful. Uh they're beautiful. Uh he goes up to somebody at a bank, like a he goes up to somebody at a bank, like a he goes up to somebody at a bank, like a security guard outside of a bank, and he security guard outside of a bank, and he security guard outside of a bank, and he asks him, "Can I borrow $100 from you?" asks him, "Can I borrow $100 from you?" asks him, "Can I borrow $100 from you?" And the security guard says, "Uh I'm And the security guard says, "Uh I'm And the security guard says, "Uh I'm That's not how this works, That's not how this works, That's not how this works, buddy." Uh and so Jia walks away. buddy." Uh and so Jia walks away. buddy." Uh and so Jia walks away. Ah, success. I got rejected. But then he Ah, success. I got rejected. But then he Ah, success. I got rejected. But then he says, "But it actually wasn't that bad." "But it actually wasn't that bad." "But it actually wasn't that bad." Right? He thought the rejection was Right? He thought the rejection was Right? He thought the rejection was going to be harsh, right? Middle fingers going to be harsh, right? Middle fingers going to be harsh, right? Middle fingers blazing, swear words coming, somebody blazing, swear words coming, somebody blazing, swear words coming, somebody punch him in the face, whatever. He punch him in the face, whatever. He punch him in the face, whatever. He thought it was going to be harsh. thought it was going to be harsh. thought it was going to be harsh. It wasn't that bad. It wasn't that bad. It wasn't that bad. By the third day, he starts to fail. He By the third day, he starts to fail. He By the third day, he starts to fail. He goes into a Krispy Kreme donut store in goes into a Krispy Kreme donut store in goes into a Krispy Kreme donut store in Atlanta. Goes up to the desk. Woman named Jackie Goes up to the desk. Woman named Jackie Goes up to the desk. Woman named Jackie Brown is kind of managing the shift Brown is kind of managing the shift Brown is kind of managing the shift there that day. She comes up and he there that day. She comes up and he there that day. She comes up and he comes to the counter and he says, comes to the counter and he says, comes to the counter and he says, "Can I get "Can I get "Can I get Krispy Kreme donuts in the shape of the Krispy Kreme donuts in the shape of the Krispy Kreme donuts in the shape of the Olympic rings? Shape and color of the Olympic rings? Shape and color of the Olympic rings? Shape and color of the Olympic rings, right?" And he's Olympic rings, right?" And he's Olympic rings, right?" And he's thinking, "Oh, they're going to say, uh, thinking, "Oh, they're going to say, uh, thinking, "Oh, they're going to say, uh, we don't do that here." Um, and instead, we don't do that here." Um, and instead, we don't do that here." Um, and instead, Jackie sits down, gets in her thinker Jackie sits down, gets in her thinker Jackie sits down, gets in her thinker pose, and starts drawing on a piece of pose, and starts drawing on a piece of pose, and starts drawing on a piece of paper what the Olympic rings are. What paper what the Olympic rings are. What paper what the Olympic rings are. What colors are they? We don't know. They're colors are they? We don't know. They're colors are they? We don't know. They're trying to figure this out. So, just wait trying to figure this out. So, just wait trying to figure this out. So, just wait a minute. He goes Jiago goes and sits a minute. He goes Jiago goes and sits a minute. He goes Jiago goes and sits down. 15 minutes later, she comes out down. 15 minutes later, she comes out down. 15 minutes later, she comes out with a box of donuts, a little with a box of donuts, a little with a box of donuts, a little sheepishly, cuz she thought she could sheepishly, cuz she thought she could sheepishly, cuz she thought she could have done better. have done better. have done better. And there are these Olympic rings that And there are these Olympic rings that And there are these Olympic rings that are amazing. The voiceover on his video are amazing. The voiceover on his video are amazing. The voiceover on his video is something to the effect of, "And this is something to the effect of, "And this is something to the effect of, "And this is why humanity is worth saving." is why humanity is worth saving." is why humanity is worth saving." Over the course of his 100 days, he Over the course of his 100 days, he Over the course of his 100 days, he doubles up a few days. He ends up with doubles up a few days. He ends up with doubles up a few days. He ends up with like 106 requests. We, Don Lyons, who like 106 requests. We, Don Lyons, who like 106 requests. We, Don Lyons, who was my lab manager at the time, was my lab manager at the time, was my lab manager at the time, uh, went through and evaluated all of uh, went through and evaluated all of uh, went through and evaluated all of those requests that he posted. And we those requests that he posted. And we those requests that he posted. And we just asked, "How often was he actually just asked, "How often was he actually just asked, "How often was he actually rejected?" Walks up to a house in Texas and asks Walks up to a house in Texas and asks Walks up to a house in Texas and asks the guy at the house, "Would you take a the guy at the house, "Would you take a the guy at the house, "Would you take a picture of me playing soccer in your picture of me playing soccer in your picture of me playing soccer in your backyard?" Yes is the answer. There he's playing Yes is the answer. There he's playing Yes is the answer. There he's playing soccer. He walks up to a Southwest soccer. He walks up to a Southwest soccer. He walks up to a Southwest Airlines gate. He's getting on the Airlines gate. He's getting on the Airlines gate. He's getting on the plane. He says, "Can I do the security plane. He says, "Can I do the security plane. He says, "Can I do the security briefing at the beginning?" He says, briefing at the beginning?" He says, briefing at the beginning?" He says, "Well, you can't do that, but you can "Well, you can't do that, but you can "Well, you can't do that, but you can address the entire plane if you want." address the entire plane if you want." address the entire plane if you want." So, there he is standing in front of the So, there he is standing in front of the So, there he is standing in front of the entire plane, addressing this plane, entire plane, addressing this plane, entire plane, addressing this plane, right? He, um, he goes to another right? He, um, he goes to another right? He, um, he goes to another airport, a private airport. Never flown airport, a private airport. Never flown airport, a private airport. Never flown a plane in his life. He asks, a plane in his life. He asks, a plane in his life. He asks, "Can I co-pilot a plane?" "Can I co-pilot a plane?" "Can I co-pilot a plane?" Right? Can I do that? Yeah, he does. He Right? Can I do that? Yeah, he does. He Right? Can I do that? Yeah, he does. He gets it done, right? Walks up to a gets it done, right? Walks up to a gets it done, right? Walks up to a woman's house. He's got a potted rose, woman's house. He's got a potted rose, woman's house. He's got a potted rose, pink rose. Can I plant this in your pink rose. Can I plant this in your pink rose. Can I plant this in your front yard? Oh, I love roses, you bet. front yard? Oh, I love roses, you bet. front yard? Oh, I love roses, you bet. Put it right there. Put it right there. Put it right there. He actually is rejected less often than He actually is rejected less often than He actually is rejected less often than he is accepted. And we coded the videos he is accepted. And we coded the videos he is accepted. And we coded the videos for how negative they are. for how negative they are. for how negative they are. Mostly not negative at all. Only about Mostly not negative at all. Only about Mostly not negative at all. Only about seven out of those 100 times is there seven out of those 100 times is there seven out of those 100 times is there any negativity whatsoever. And if any negativity whatsoever. And if any negativity whatsoever. And if anything it's just slight. Sometimes anything it's just slight. Sometimes anything it's just slight. Sometimes people can't do it, right? So, so he's people can't do it, right? So, so he's people can't do it, right? So, so he's accepted 51 times if I he's accepted 51 times if I he's accepted 51 times if I remember right and rejected 48 times. remember right and rejected 48 times. remember right and rejected 48 times. And then there are a few where they are And then there are a few where they are And then there are a few where they are and be ambiguous where he can't do the and be ambiguous where he can't do the and be ambiguous where he can't do the thing he asked for but they do something thing he asked for but they do something thing he asked for but they do something else. Um but out of all those only a few times is but out of all those only a few times is but out of all those only a few times is there any negativity. When I was talking there any negativity. When I was talking there any negativity. When I was talking to him about this, to him about this, to him about this, he said, "I went into this thinking I he said, "I went into this thinking I he said, "I went into this thinking I was going to develop thicker skin. I was going to develop thicker skin. I was going to develop thicker skin. I lost my fear of rejection. lost my fear of rejection. lost my fear of rejection. But it was because I changed how I think But it was because I changed how I think But it was because I changed how I think about other people. Other people are way about other people. Other people are way about other people. Other people are way kinder than I expect." And he talked kinder than I expect." And he talked kinder than I expect." And he talked about this now, this belief he is he has about this now, this belief he is he has about this now, this belief he is he has as being a kind of superpower. as being a kind of superpower. as being a kind of superpower. Cuz he realizes that Cuz he realizes that Cuz he realizes that if you ask people for help, if you ask people for help, if you ask people for help, they're much more interested in trying they're much more interested in trying they're much more interested in trying to help you than you'd imagine. to help you than you'd imagine. to help you than you'd imagine. That's why exposure to mistaken beliefs That's why exposure to mistaken beliefs That's why exposure to mistaken beliefs like our social anxiety works cuz you like our social anxiety works cuz you like our social anxiety works cuz you learn that your beliefs are wrong. learn that your beliefs are wrong. learn that your beliefs are wrong. But if you never test them, But if you never test them, But if you never test them, you never find out you'd be wrong. you never find out you'd be wrong. you never find out you'd be wrong. How persistent was he? For instance, if How persistent was he? For instance, if How persistent was he? For instance, if he asked a question and the person said, he asked a question and the person said, he asked a question and the person said, "Listen, you can't come over my backyard "Listen, you can't come over my backyard "Listen, you can't come over my backyard and play soccer, and play soccer, and play soccer, but maybe the front yard." Would he say but maybe the front yard." Would he say but maybe the front yard." Would he say backyard, please? Or if they said no backyard, please? Or if they said no backyard, please? Or if they said no outright? You know, he won't Would he outright? You know, he won't Would he outright? You know, he won't Would he push? He wasn't that persistent in these He wasn't that persistent in these He wasn't that persistent in these things. And this Jia's experience is things. And this Jia's experience is things. And this Jia's experience is very consistent with what we find in the very consistent with what we find in the very consistent with what we find in the research literature as well. There's a research literature as well. There's a research literature as well. There's a phenomena Frank Flynn and Vanessa Bones. phenomena Frank Flynn and Vanessa Bones. phenomena Frank Flynn and Vanessa Bones. Frank's is at is at Stanford, Vanessa's Frank's is at is at Stanford, Vanessa's Frank's is at is at Stanford, Vanessa's at Cornell, both fabulous researchers, at Cornell, both fabulous researchers, at Cornell, both fabulous researchers, documented this phenomena known as the documented this phenomena known as the documented this phenomena known as the underestimation of compliance effect, underestimation of compliance effect, underestimation of compliance effect, which is which is which is you ask people to predict what you ask people to predict what you ask people to predict what percentage of people or how many people percentage of people or how many people percentage of people or how many people will agree to some request and the very will agree to some request and the very will agree to some request and the very robust tendency is that they robust tendency is that they robust tendency is that they overestimate how many people they'll overestimate how many people they'll overestimate how many people they'll have to ask in order to get some number have to ask in order to get some number have to ask in order to get some number to agree to a request. People are just to agree to a request. People are just to agree to a request. People are just much more likely to agree than you much more likely to agree than you much more likely to agree than you think. We find in our research that not think. We find in our research that not think. We find in our research that not only are they more willing to agree to only are they more willing to agree to only are they more willing to agree to the request, they also feel much better the request, they also feel much better the request, they also feel much better when they agree to help you than you when they agree to help you than you when they agree to help you than you would guess. You ask somebody to take a would guess. You ask somebody to take a would guess. You ask somebody to take a picture of you down along the boardwalk picture of you down along the boardwalk picture of you down along the boardwalk on in LA, right? You think you're on in LA, right? You think you're on in LA, right? You think you're pestering somebody, you're pestering somebody, you're pestering somebody, right? You're being a burden to them. right? You're being a burden to them. right? You're being a burden to them. They're usually happier to have helped They're usually happier to have helped They're usually happier to have helped you because we are happier when we are you because we are happier when we are you because we are happier when we are being kind to other people. So so Gia's being kind to other people. So so Gia's being kind to other people. So so Gia's result is consistent with all of this result is consistent with all of this result is consistent with all of this work. In his videos he was not that work. In his videos he was not that work. In his videos he was not that persistent, but he would often accept persistent, but he would often accept persistent, but he would often accept other alternatives. So he goes into other alternatives. So he goes into other alternatives. So he goes into Costco one time. Goes up to the manager Costco one time. Goes up to the manager Costco one time. Goes up to the manager and says, "I love Costco. It's just my and says, "I love Costco. It's just my and says, "I love Costco. It's just my favorite store. Can I go on the intercom favorite store. Can I go on the intercom favorite store. Can I go on the intercom and tell the entire store how much I and tell the entire store how much I and tell the entire store how much I love Costco and how fabulous I think you love Costco and how fabulous I think you love Costco and how fabulous I think you all are?" And the manager says, "Well, I all are?" And the manager says, "Well, I all are?" And the manager says, "Well, I can't let you do that, but we can go get can't let you do that, but we can go get can't let you do that, but we can go get lunch over here at the you know, the lunch over here at the you know, the lunch over here at the you know, the pizza shop that's in Costco and we can pizza shop that's in Costco and we can pizza shop that's in Costco and we can spend some time talking." And so he cops spend some time talking." And so he cops spend some time talking." And so he cops him a lunch and then he gets a free him a lunch and then he gets a free him a lunch and then he gets a free lunch out of it, that's what he that's lunch out of it, that's what he that's lunch out of it, that's what he that's what he does. So there were a few and what he does. So there were a few and what he does. So there were a few and like on the Southwest Airlines thing, he like on the Southwest Airlines thing, he like on the Southwest Airlines thing, he couldn't he couldn't do the security couldn't he couldn't do the security couldn't he couldn't do the security briefing. But he could just address the whole But he could just address the whole But he could just address the whole plane flight, which is what he did, plane flight, which is what he did, plane flight, which is what he did, right? So he would accept those right? So he would accept those right? So he would accept those and those were the few cases where it and those were the few cases where it and those were the few cases where it wasn't outright accepted, but if he got wasn't outright accepted, but if he got wasn't outright accepted, but if he got a no, he said thank you and that was it. a no, he said thank you and that was it. a no, he said thank you and that was it. I don't want to give anyone social I don't want to give anyone social I don't want to give anyone social anxiety cuz you just provided a anxiety cuz you just provided a anxiety cuz you just provided a wonderful uh or I don't want to wonderful uh or I don't want to wonderful uh or I don't want to discourage anyone from uh from doing discourage anyone from uh from doing discourage anyone from uh from doing what you just described cuz it's a it's what you just described cuz it's a it's what you just described cuz it's a it's a really both entertaining and beautiful a really both entertaining and beautiful a really both entertaining and beautiful example of the goodness of humanity example of the goodness of humanity example of the goodness of humanity um really being a fundamental feature of um really being a fundamental feature of um really being a fundamental feature of most of most of most &gt;&gt; surprisingly. So it's not the case that &gt;&gt; surprisingly. So it's not the case that &gt;&gt; surprisingly. So it's not the case that everybody's always No, of course not, everybody's always No, of course not, everybody's always No, of course not, but it tends to go He thought he'd be but it tends to go He thought he'd be but it tends to go He thought he'd be rejected 100 days in a row. rejected 100 days in a row. rejected 100 days in a row. He wasn't. You have data, I just have an He wasn't. You have data, I just have an He wasn't. You have data, I just have an anecdote. Um so the fact that I'm going anecdote. Um so the fact that I'm going anecdote. Um so the fact that I'm going to tell you that uh it to tell you that uh it to tell you that uh it a piece of the that anecdote comes from a piece of the that anecdote comes from a piece of the that anecdote comes from a neurologist does not mean it has any a neurologist does not mean it has any a neurologist does not mean it has any more validity than and it more validity than and it more validity than and it maybe even less. That was a joke against maybe even less. That was a joke against maybe even less. That was a joke against my neurology. I have great jokes about my neurology. I have great jokes about my neurology. I have great jokes about neurologists, by the way. I could do an neurologists, by the way. I could do an neurologists, by the way. I could do an entire podcast about the jokes against entire podcast about the jokes against entire podcast about the jokes against the different divisions of medicine. the different divisions of medicine. the different divisions of medicine. Maybe I'll do that sometime. We should Maybe I'll do that sometime. We should Maybe I'll do that sometime. We should do that, Rob. The do that, Rob. The do that, Rob. The So, I had a post doc advisor. So, I had a post doc advisor. So, I had a post doc advisor. Unfortunately, he passed, but that's not Unfortunately, he passed, but that's not Unfortunately, he passed, but that's not the point here. Uh he was a neurologist the point here. Uh he was a neurologist the point here. Uh he was a neurologist and he was an extremely friendly person. and he was an extremely friendly person. and he was an extremely friendly person. His name was Ben Barres. He used to walk His name was Ben Barres. He used to walk His name was Ben Barres. He used to walk down the hall. He'd say, "Hi to the down the hall. He'd say, "Hi to the down the hall. He'd say, "Hi to the janitors." He'd say He was always a very janitors." He'd say He was always a very janitors." He'd say He was always a very good about bringing things to the good about bringing things to the good about bringing things to the admins up front. You and I both know admins up front. You and I both know admins up front. You and I both know they are underpaid at all they are underpaid at all they are underpaid at all universities. They are truly People universities. They are truly People universities. They are truly People always say, "The oh all the always say, "The oh all the always say, "The oh all the administrators." Like, well, you got administrators." Like, well, you got administrators." Like, well, you got high-level administrators. I'm not going high-level administrators. I'm not going high-level administrators. I'm not going to comment on what they make. I don't to comment on what they make. I don't to comment on what they make. I don't know. Um but all the administrators know. Um but all the administrators know. Um but all the administrators at the level of like the front office, at the level of like the front office, at the level of like the front office, etc., they're underpaid, they're etc., they're underpaid, they're etc., they're underpaid, they're overworked. And he was just an extremely overworked. And he was just an extremely overworked. And he was just an extremely kind person. He was just very outgoing kind person. He was just very outgoing kind person. He was just very outgoing and um but he was a neurologist and um but he was a neurologist and um but he was a neurologist in addition to being a scientist. And he in addition to being a scientist. And he in addition to being a scientist. And he pointed something out, which was that pointed something out, which was that pointed something out, which was that there would be some people who would um there would be some people who would um there would be some people who would um that he would interact with on campus. that he would interact with on campus. that he would interact with on campus. And we were adjacent to the And we were adjacent to the And we were adjacent to the hospital, so this plays in. Who he'd be hospital, so this plays in. Who he'd be hospital, so this plays in. Who he'd be friendly to. Like, "Hey, how's it friendly to. Like, "Hey, how's it friendly to. Like, "Hey, how's it going?" And they'd say, "Hey, what do going?" And they'd say, "Hey, what do going?" And they'd say, "Hey, what do you do here?" And he'd say, "Oh, well, you do here?" And he'd say, "Oh, well, you do here?" And he'd say, "Oh, well, we work on neuronal glial interactions, we work on neuronal glial interactions, we work on neuronal glial interactions, activity-dependent development of activity-dependent development of activity-dependent development of myelination." And they'd go, "Oh, cool. myelination." And they'd go, "Oh, cool. myelination." And they'd go, "Oh, cool. Like, what's that?" And you'd have a Like, what's that?" And you'd have a Like, what's that?" And you'd have a little exchange and then move on. Great. little exchange and then move on. Great. little exchange and then move on. Great. Healthy. They're learning. They realize Healthy. They're learning. They realize Healthy. They're learning. They realize academics aren't just trying to, you academics aren't just trying to, you academics aren't just trying to, you know, hide their information, no matter know, hide their information, no matter know, hide their information, no matter how busy they are. Somebody just taking how busy they are. Somebody just taking how busy they are. Somebody just taking time out of their busy pace to stop and time out of their busy pace to stop and time out of their busy pace to stop and have an interaction with you. This is have an interaction with you. This is have an interaction with you. This is something that I grew up observing in my something that I grew up observing in my something that I grew up observing in my mom and it's something that I just mom and it's something that I just mom and it's something that I just naturally do and enjoy. So, it's a naturally do and enjoy. So, it's a naturally do and enjoy. So, it's a lot of what you described before. lot of what you described before. lot of what you described before. But I'll never forget Ben once telling But I'll never forget Ben once telling But I'll never forget Ben once telling me. He said, me. He said, me. He said, "See this guy coming down the hall? "See this guy coming down the hall? "See this guy coming down the hall? He's sticky." And I said, "What's He's sticky." And I said, "What's He's sticky." And I said, "What's sticky?" And he said, "That's sticky?" And he said, "That's sticky?" And he said, "That's neurologist speak for the person that neurologist speak for the person that neurologist speak for the person that takes that kind of casual exchange takes that kind of casual exchange takes that kind of casual exchange and makes the assumption that you're a and makes the assumption that you're a and makes the assumption that you're a lot closer than you actually are." lot closer than you actually are." lot closer than you actually are." &gt;&gt; Yeah. And as somebody with a sister, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. And as somebody with a sister, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. And as somebody with a sister, you know, you grow up hearing stories of know, you grow up hearing stories of know, you grow up hearing stories of like, you know, you hear through the like, you know, you hear through the like, you know, you hear through the wall, you know, like, oh, some like, you wall, you know, like, oh, some like, you wall, you know, like, oh, some like, you know, good-looking guy asked for a know, good-looking guy asked for a know, good-looking guy asked for a number, you're excited about that, but number, you're excited about that, but number, you're excited about that, but some other guy, like, he was pretty some other guy, like, he was pretty some other guy, like, he was pretty persistent and like he wouldn't go away. persistent and like he wouldn't go away. persistent and like he wouldn't go away. We're not talking about full stalker We're not talking about full stalker We're not talking about full stalker situation. That exists, too. situation. That exists, too. situation. That exists, too. &gt;&gt; Yep. So, I think a lot of social anxiety &gt;&gt; Yep. So, I think a lot of social anxiety &gt;&gt; Yep. So, I think a lot of social anxiety comes from comes from comes from some people just don't know some people just don't know some people just don't know where the line is between normal, where the line is between normal, where the line is between normal, healthy, casual social exchange and healthy, casual social exchange and healthy, casual social exchange and being too sticky. being too sticky. being too sticky. &gt;&gt; And this takes us back to the eyes. I'll &gt;&gt; And this takes us back to the eyes. I'll &gt;&gt; And this takes us back to the eyes. I'll never forget freshman year of college, never forget freshman year of college, never forget freshman year of college, forgive me for weaving in a second forgive me for weaving in a second forgive me for weaving in a second anecdote. I had a roommate, we were anecdote. I had a roommate, we were anecdote. I had a roommate, we were triple room, but I had a roommate, and triple room, but I had a roommate, and triple room, but I had a roommate, and feedback from people around us, they're feedback from people around us, they're feedback from people around us, they're like, what's wrong with your roommate? like, what's wrong with your roommate? like, what's wrong with your roommate? I'm like, what do you mean? He's like a I'm like, what do you mean? He's like a I'm like, what do you mean? He's like a perfectly nice guy. Like, he's super perfectly nice guy. Like, he's super perfectly nice guy. Like, he's super nice and they're like, nice and they're like, nice and they're like, no, he stares at people. And I thought, no, he stares at people. And I thought, no, he stares at people. And I thought, oh, and he's he was very, very tall, you oh, and he's he was very, very tall, you oh, and he's he was very, very tall, you know, and I'm reasonably tall, but he's know, and I'm reasonably tall, but he's know, and I'm reasonably tall, but he's like really, really tall. And so, I like really, really tall. And so, I like really, really tall. And so, I started noticing when we would stand in started noticing when we would stand in started noticing when we would stand in groups, he would just like beam people. groups, he would just like beam people. groups, he would just like beam people. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So, I pulled him aside and I said, hey, &gt;&gt; So, I pulled him aside and I said, hey, &gt;&gt; So, I pulled him aside and I said, hey, listen, Dave, um, you can't stare at people. He Dave, um, you can't stare at people. He Dave, um, you can't stare at people. He goes, I'm just looking at them. And I'm goes, I'm just looking at them. And I'm goes, I'm just looking at them. And I'm like, I know, but you can't stare at like, I know, but you can't stare at like, I know, but you can't stare at people. You're creeping people out. And people. You're creeping people out. And people. You're creeping people out. And he goes, he goes, he goes, &gt;&gt; okay, where should I look? Now, he might &gt;&gt; okay, where should I look? Now, he might &gt;&gt; okay, where should I look? Now, he might have been a little bit on the spectrum, have been a little bit on the spectrum, have been a little bit on the spectrum, I don't know. We didn't have that I don't know. We didn't have that I don't know. We didn't have that language or understanding of spectrum language or understanding of spectrum language or understanding of spectrum back then. back then. back then. &gt;&gt; But I explained to him, I was like, just &gt;&gt; But I explained to him, I was like, just &gt;&gt; But I explained to him, I was like, just keep your gaze moving Yeah. keep your gaze moving Yeah. keep your gaze moving Yeah. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; And and we all loved him. Like, and he &gt;&gt; And and we all loved him. Like, and he &gt;&gt; And and we all loved him. Like, and he became part of our social circle, but in became part of our social circle, but in became part of our social circle, but in those first weeks of, you know, he was a those first weeks of, you know, he was a those first weeks of, you know, he was a little bit he was make he was giving little bit he was make he was giving little bit he was make he was giving people Yeah. an uneasy feeling. So, I people Yeah. an uneasy feeling. So, I people Yeah. an uneasy feeling. So, I think for a lot of people who have think for a lot of people who have think for a lot of people who have social anxiety, social anxiety, social anxiety, their concern is that they're going to their concern is that they're going to their concern is that they're going to be perceived as kind of creepy or be perceived as kind of creepy or be perceived as kind of creepy or sticky, and no one wants to be that sticky, and no one wants to be that sticky, and no one wants to be that person. &gt;&gt; Right. Yep. And so, it is an art. Yep. &gt;&gt; Right. Yep. And so, it is an art. Yep. &gt;&gt; Right. Yep. And so, it is an art. Yep. It is a learning to understand that It is a learning to understand that It is a learning to understand that like a fist bump is one thing, but just like a fist bump is one thing, but just like a fist bump is one thing, but just because you see that person again the because you see that person again the because you see that person again the next day, you remember their name, next day, you remember their name, next day, you remember their name, you're not best friends. you're not best friends. you're not best friends. &gt;&gt; Yes. And you're not even really friends, &gt;&gt; Yes. And you're not even really friends, &gt;&gt; Yes. And you're not even really friends, you're being friendly. you're being friendly. you're being friendly. &gt;&gt; Right. And I I'm not trying to &gt;&gt; Right. And I I'm not trying to &gt;&gt; Right. And I I'm not trying to contaminate the positive waters contaminate the positive waters contaminate the positive waters here, but I think here, but I think here, but I think &gt;&gt; a lot of people don't know how to &gt;&gt; a lot of people don't know how to &gt;&gt; a lot of people don't know how to develop this skill as a as a honed develop this skill as a as a honed develop this skill as a as a honed skill. Yes. And they're really afraid. skill. Yes. And they're really afraid. skill. Yes. And they're really afraid. And I think it's not about like get you And I think it's not about like get you And I think it's not about like get you know someone calling the police because know someone calling the police because know someone calling the police because someone is being too sticky, but someone is being too sticky, but someone is being too sticky, but &gt;&gt; Yes. yeah, like if somebody doesn't call &gt;&gt; Yes. yeah, like if somebody doesn't call &gt;&gt; Yes. yeah, like if somebody doesn't call you back, like you back, like you back, like they probably don't want you to ping they probably don't want you to ping they probably don't want you to ping them a third time. them a third time. them a third time. &gt;&gt; Right. Right? Or text you again. And &gt;&gt; Right. Right? Or text you again. And &gt;&gt; Right. Right? Or text you again. And I think a lot of it always seems to I think a lot of it always seems to I think a lot of it always seems to sort of immediately deflect to like men sort of immediately deflect to like men sort of immediately deflect to like men doing this to women. I can tell you a doing this to women. I can tell you a doing this to women. I can tell you a lot of women do this, too. So, it's lot of women do this, too. So, it's lot of women do this, too. So, it's independent of sex, right? independent of sex, right? independent of sex, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. If somebody doesn't respond a &gt;&gt; Yeah. If somebody doesn't respond a &gt;&gt; Yeah. If somebody doesn't respond a third time and it was a first time third time and it was a first time third time and it was a first time meeting and meeting and meeting and regardless of what the exchange was, regardless of what the exchange was, regardless of what the exchange was, translation, they don't want to continue translation, they don't want to continue translation, they don't want to continue the exchange for whatever reason. the exchange for whatever reason. the exchange for whatever reason. &gt;&gt; And so, how do you reconcile that in &gt;&gt; And so, how do you reconcile that in &gt;&gt; And so, how do you reconcile that in when giving advice for people to be more when giving advice for people to be more when giving advice for people to be more outgoing? How do you keep people from outgoing? How do you keep people from outgoing? How do you keep people from being sticky? I guess there's another being sticky? I guess there's another being sticky? I guess there's another way to think about, too, is that is that way to think about, too, is that is that way to think about, too, is that is that some a lot of sensitivity or concern some a lot of sensitivity or concern some a lot of sensitivity or concern about um social anxiety is about running about um social anxiety is about running about um social anxiety is about running into sticky people. And there I think into sticky people. And there I think into sticky people. And there I think there probably is a gender difference, a there probably is a gender difference, a there probably is a gender difference, a sex difference, that women are likely to sex difference, that women are likely to sex difference, that women are likely to be more nervous about men be more nervous about men be more nervous about men misinterpreting something in a way that misinterpreting something in a way that misinterpreting something in a way that might become problematic or threatening might become problematic or threatening might become problematic or threatening &gt;&gt; Sure, because of physical danger. &gt;&gt; Sure, because of physical danger. &gt;&gt; Sure, because of physical danger. &gt;&gt; Exactly. And so, I'm super sensitive to &gt;&gt; Exactly. And so, I'm super sensitive to &gt;&gt; Exactly. And so, I'm super sensitive to that. And nobody I mean, our data that. And nobody I mean, our data that. And nobody I mean, our data don't suggest that you should be don't suggest that you should be don't suggest that you should be ignoring risks or your senses about ignoring risks or your senses about ignoring risks or your senses about what's risky. Um but, our data suggests what's risky. Um but, our data suggests what's risky. Um but, our data suggests that your sense about risk is off a that your sense about risk is off a that your sense about risk is off a little bit. And there are times where little bit. And there are times where little bit. And there are times where you might want to test some of those you might want to test some of those you might want to test some of those beliefs, and you might find some places beliefs, and you might find some places beliefs, and you might find some places where you're mistaken. I think the where you're mistaken. I think the where you're mistaken. I think the important thing from my perspective on important thing from my perspective on important thing from my perspective on this is that if you're really this is that if you're really this is that if you're really pessimistic about other people, it never pessimistic about other people, it never pessimistic about other people, it never gets corrected. You never get to find gets corrected. You never get to find gets corrected. You never get to find the great people to have a conversation the great people to have a conversation the great people to have a conversation with, Right. But, it does also mean that with, Right. But, it does also mean that with, Right. But, it does also mean that you will sometimes run into the people you will sometimes run into the people you will sometimes run into the people who aren't so great to have a who aren't so great to have a who aren't so great to have a conversation with, and you need to learn conversation with, and you need to learn conversation with, and you need to learn how to move on from those people, right? how to move on from those people, right? how to move on from those people, right? We're not friends with everybody. We're not friends with everybody. We're not friends with everybody. Certainly, that is true. But, the other Certainly, that is true. But, the other Certainly, that is true. But, the other thing you mentioned was the importance thing you mentioned was the importance thing you mentioned was the importance of this being a skill. It is something of this being a skill. It is something of this being a skill. It is something that you learn to do as you practice. I that you learn to do as you practice. I that you learn to do as you practice. I have become a better conversationalist. have become a better conversationalist. have become a better conversationalist. I've become a better public speaker. I I've become a better public speaker. I I've become a better public speaker. I become better at doing this because I do become better at doing this because I do become better at doing this because I do it for a living, right? And I choose to it for a living, right? And I choose to it for a living, right? And I choose to try to do it and try to become better. try to do it and try to become better. try to do it and try to become better. And I try to be when I'm interacting And I try to be when I'm interacting And I try to be when I'm interacting with other people to be sensitive to with other people to be sensitive to with other people to be sensitive to them as well. Our data don't suggest them as well. Our data don't suggest them as well. Our data don't suggest that you should be reaching out to other that you should be reaching out to other that you should be reaching out to other people in order to make yourself feel people in order to make yourself feel people in order to make yourself feel good. Our data suggests that what feels good. Our data suggests that what feels good. Our data suggests that what feels good is when you take an interest in good is when you take an interest in good is when you take an interest in other people and you open them up to you other people and you open them up to you other people and you open them up to you in a way that you would have avoided or in a way that you would have avoided or in a way that you would have avoided or missed before. And you'll just have a missed before. And you'll just have a missed before. And you'll just have a lot more positive experiences that way. lot more positive experiences that way. lot more positive experiences that way. But it does mean being sensitive to how But it does mean being sensitive to how But it does mean being sensitive to how they respond. And you do learn to do they respond. And you do learn to do they respond. And you do learn to do this over time with practice, just like this over time with practice, just like this over time with practice, just like anything. You get better with practice, anything. You get better with practice, anything. You get better with practice, right? And so right? And so right? And so for folks who are concerned about for folks who are concerned about for folks who are concerned about starting or trying, my suggestion is starting or trying, my suggestion is starting or trying, my suggestion is just like we're just like when you're just like we're just like when you're just like we're just like when you're starting anything that you're nervous starting anything that you're nervous starting anything that you're nervous about or hard you never exercised. about or hard you never exercised. about or hard you never exercised. The prescription is always to start The prescription is always to start The prescription is always to start small. Pick a little thing that's easy small. Pick a little thing that's easy small. Pick a little thing that's easy and safe. You know that person in the and safe. You know that person in the and safe. You know that person in the office who you've seen for years but you office who you've seen for years but you office who you've seen for years but you don't know their name? don't know their name? don't know their name? Just go and say hi to them. And just see Just go and say hi to them. And just see Just go and say hi to them. And just see how that goes. And then try that with how that goes. And then try that with how that goes. And then try that with somebody else. Those are easy, those are somebody else. Those are easy, those are somebody else. Those are easy, those are safe, right? That's not that that's not safe, right? That's not that that's not safe, right? That's not that that's not that difficult. that difficult. that difficult. Um and you'll get better at this over Um and you'll get better at this over Um and you'll get better at this over time, including figuring out how to time, including figuring out how to time, including figuring out how to do things like end conversations with do things like end conversations with do things like end conversations with somebody who's too sticky or to move somebody who's too sticky or to move somebody who's too sticky or to move along or like your advisor did, to along or like your advisor did, to along or like your advisor did, to recognize the person that's sticky and recognize the person that's sticky and recognize the person that's sticky and then you can manage that a little bit then you can manage that a little bit then you can manage that a little bit differently. Those are skills you differently. Those are skills you differently. Those are skills you develop by approaching, you don't develop by approaching, you don't develop by approaching, you don't develop them by avoiding. And you miss a develop them by avoiding. And you miss a develop them by avoiding. And you miss a lot of people who are wonderful. My Uber lot of people who are wonderful. My Uber lot of people who are wonderful. My Uber driver, right? The young man Gustavo on driver, right? The young man Gustavo on driver, right? The young man Gustavo on my train ride yesterday morning. Brian my train ride yesterday morning. Brian my train ride yesterday morning. Brian on my flight here uh to speak with you on my flight here uh to speak with you on my flight here uh to speak with you today on my on my plane last night. You today on my on my plane last night. You today on my on my plane last night. You miss a lot of great people, too. And miss a lot of great people, too. And miss a lot of great people, too. And that's what we find in our that's what we find in our that's what we find in our research that I think is perhaps the research that I think is perhaps the research that I think is perhaps the bigger cost. And just like Gia found, he bigger cost. And just like Gia found, he bigger cost. And just like Gia found, he missed opportunities to get help from he missed opportunities to get help from he missed opportunities to get help from other people and even to allow people to other people and even to allow people to other people and even to allow people to feel better for helping him because he feel better for helping him because he feel better for helping him because he was too afraid to ask. was too afraid to ask. was too afraid to ask. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great-tasting Element has a bunch of great-tasting Element has a bunch of great-tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try flavor. So, if you'd like to try flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to Element, you can go to Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. A lot of people are on their phones A lot of people are on their phones A lot of people are on their phones texting with people they already know. texting with people they already know. texting with people they already know. Yes. They have an established Yes. They have an established Yes. They have an established relationship. Presumably, established relationship. Presumably, established relationship. Presumably, they're continuing to maintain, if not they're continuing to maintain, if not they're continuing to maintain, if not build those relationships by doing that. build those relationships by doing that. build those relationships by doing that. And I think that, um, going back to And I think that, um, going back to And I think that, um, going back to this, uh, eye gaze thing from earlier, I this, uh, eye gaze thing from earlier, I this, uh, eye gaze thing from earlier, I eyes down into a little box is it's a eyes down into a little box is it's a eyes down into a little box is it's a thicker shell to break through, right? thicker shell to break through, right? thicker shell to break through, right? Like, I don't think any of us really Like, I don't think any of us really Like, I don't think any of us really feel comfortable, um, interrupting feel comfortable, um, interrupting feel comfortable, um, interrupting somebody texting or on a call. somebody texting or on a call. somebody texting or on a call. &gt;&gt; Right. Um, I mean, I wouldn't do that. &gt;&gt; Right. Um, I mean, I wouldn't do that. &gt;&gt; Right. Um, I mean, I wouldn't do that. &gt;&gt; You would think of it as bad manners, &gt;&gt; You would think of it as bad manners, &gt;&gt; You would think of it as bad manners, impolite. Yeah, they're clearly in a impolite. Yeah, they're clearly in a impolite. Yeah, they're clearly in a conversation with somebody else, the conversation with somebody else, the conversation with somebody else, the same way I wouldn't just walk up and same way I wouldn't just walk up and same way I wouldn't just walk up and interrupt. Actually, yesterday I was at interrupt. Actually, yesterday I was at interrupt. Actually, yesterday I was at a social gathering and there was like a social gathering and there was like a social gathering and there was like three people talking and these guys all three people talking and these guys all three people talking and these guys all knew each other. I was the stranger in knew each other. I was the stranger in knew each other. I was the stranger in the group and like you sort of learn the group and like you sort of learn the group and like you sort of learn like how like what is this guy You have like how like what is this guy You have like how like what is this guy You have to quickly assess like what is this to quickly assess like what is this to quickly assess like what is this conversation? So I said, "Sorry, I don't conversation? So I said, "Sorry, I don't conversation? So I said, "Sorry, I don't know if I'm interrupting something know if I'm interrupting something know if I'm interrupting something critical, but if so, I'm going to stand critical, but if so, I'm going to stand critical, but if so, I'm going to stand right here." No, I just said "If I'm right here." No, I just said "If I'm right here." No, I just said "If I'm interrupting like I you know" and interrupting like I you know" and interrupting like I you know" and they're like "No, no, like you like they're like "No, no, like you like they're like "No, no, like you like you have to be able to know how to break you have to be able to know how to break you have to be able to know how to break into a conversation." It's very hard into a conversation." It's very hard into a conversation." It's very hard when people are on their phones. when people are on their phones. when people are on their phones. &gt;&gt; It can be. Um the way I think of it is &gt;&gt; It can be. Um the way I think of it is &gt;&gt; It can be. Um the way I think of it is you're giving people an invitation. you're giving people an invitation. you're giving people an invitation. I got off the train one morning. This I got off the train one morning. This I got off the train one morning. This guy came up behind me. I remember this very came up behind me. I remember this very came up behind me. I remember this very distinctly. Uh he was a little taller than I was. So Uh he was a little taller than I was. So Uh he was a little taller than I was. So I'm about 6 ft. He was probably I'm about 6 ft. He was probably I'm about 6 ft. He was probably 6 ft 3. Looks like an Orthodox monk, 6 ft 3. Looks like an Orthodox monk, 6 ft 3. Looks like an Orthodox monk, right? He's got this big long beard, right? He's got this big long beard, right? He's got this big long beard, graying beard, long hair. Looks like you graying beard, long hair. Looks like you graying beard, long hair. Looks like you know, the last thing he would want to do know, the last thing he would want to do know, the last thing he would want to do is talk to another person. Very stern is talk to another person. Very stern is talk to another person. Very stern kind of dead off-to-work face. And and I kind of dead off-to-work face. And and I kind of dead off-to-work face. And and I saw him come up sidle up next to me. saw him come up sidle up next to me. saw him come up sidle up next to me. He'd already put his left ear bud in and He'd already put his left ear bud in and He'd already put his left ear bud in and he was putting his right ear bud in at he was putting his right ear bud in at he was putting his right ear bud in at the same time, right? the same time, right? the same time, right? It would have been easy for me to infer It would have been easy for me to infer It would have been easy for me to infer that he didn't want to talk to me, that he didn't want to talk to me, that he didn't want to talk to me, right? But of course, nobody was talking right? But of course, nobody was talking right? But of course, nobody was talking to him either. to him either. to him either. Nobody's talking. And so that signal was Nobody's talking. And so that signal was Nobody's talking. And so that signal was a little ambiguous. What does it mean? a little ambiguous. What does it mean? a little ambiguous. What does it mean? Does he want to talk to me? It's it's Does he want to talk to me? It's it's Does he want to talk to me? It's it's not clear. He could be putting his ear not clear. He could be putting his ear not clear. He could be putting his ear bud in because nobody's talking to him. bud in because nobody's talking to him. bud in because nobody's talking to him. He doesn't think other people want to He doesn't think other people want to He doesn't think other people want to talk to him. So he's going to get off to talk to him. So he's going to get off to talk to him. So he's going to get off to work, right? Get away from all these work, right? Get away from all these work, right? Get away from all these jerks. I turned to him and said, "Hi, I'm I turned to him and said, "Hi, I'm I turned to him and said, "Hi, I'm Nick." Most powerful words you have in your Most powerful words you have in your Most powerful words you have in your life. Hi, I'm whoever you are. I'm Nick. life. Hi, I'm whoever you are. I'm Nick. life. Hi, I'm whoever you are. I'm Nick. He took out his ear bud and he turned to He took out his ear bud and he turned to He took out his ear bud and he turned to me and he just like came alive like I me and he just like came alive like I me and he just like came alive like I was flipping a switch on his back. Huge was flipping a switch on his back. Huge was flipping a switch on his back. Huge smile. "Hi, I'm Thibault." He's Turns smile. "Hi, I'm Thibault." He's Turns smile. "Hi, I'm Thibault." He's Turns out he's French, very strong French out he's French, very strong French out he's French, very strong French accent. We became friends over the accent. We became friends over the accent. We became friends over the years, right? We walked down the four years, right? We walked down the four years, right? We walked down the four blocks to my office there. And so blocks to my office there. And so blocks to my office there. And so sometimes these cues can be ambiguous. sometimes these cues can be ambiguous. sometimes these cues can be ambiguous. And you don't know what the cue means And you don't know what the cue means And you don't know what the cue means until you test it. until you test it. until you test it. So the way I think about reaching out to So the way I think about reaching out to So the way I think about reaching out to connect with other people to test our connect with other people to test our connect with other people to test our fears, right? Our anxiety, our fears, right? Our anxiety, our fears, right? Our anxiety, our interpretations of other people, knowing interpretations of other people, knowing interpretations of other people, knowing that we can make mistakes with each that we can make mistakes with each that we can make mistakes with each other. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; It's to think of it as an invitation. &gt;&gt; It's to think of it as an invitation. &gt;&gt; It's to think of it as an invitation. Right? When I turned to Gustavo Right? When I turned to Gustavo Right? When I turned to Gustavo yesterday, Brian last night, my cab yesterday, Brian last night, my cab yesterday, Brian last night, my cab driver my Uber driver this morning, I driver my Uber driver this morning, I driver my Uber driver this morning, I wasn't demanding anything. wasn't demanding anything. wasn't demanding anything. I was offering them an opportunity, an I was offering them an opportunity, an I was offering them an opportunity, an invitation to connect if they wanted to. invitation to connect if they wanted to. invitation to connect if they wanted to. Right? Didn't have to pull their earbud Right? Didn't have to pull their earbud Right? Didn't have to pull their earbud out. Didn't have Brian last night had a out. Didn't have Brian last night had a out. Didn't have Brian last night had a little video game little video game little video game uh player in front of him, right? I uh player in front of him, right? I uh player in front of him, right? I thought maybe he wanted to play video thought maybe he wanted to play video thought maybe he wanted to play video games. No, he was happy to talk, right? games. No, he was happy to talk, right? games. No, he was happy to talk, right? We kind of went in and out. I had a We kind of went in and out. I had a We kind of went in and out. I had a manuscript review I had to do. But if manuscript review I had to do. But if manuscript review I had to do. But if you start thinking of these you start thinking of these you start thinking of these opportunities as potential places where opportunities as potential places where opportunities as potential places where you might be misunderstanding somebody, you might be misunderstanding somebody, you might be misunderstanding somebody, and don't take your beliefs about and don't take your beliefs about and don't take your beliefs about another person for granted, another person for granted, another person for granted, but treat them as bets that might be but treat them as bets that might be but treat them as bets that might be wrong. Well, then you start to see wrong. Well, then you start to see wrong. Well, then you start to see places where maybe you'd made a mistake, places where maybe you'd made a mistake, places where maybe you'd made a mistake, and you give people an opportunity to and you give people an opportunity to and you give people an opportunity to show you, no, Thibault would have been show you, no, Thibault would have been show you, no, Thibault would have been happy to talk to me. We became friends happy to talk to me. We became friends happy to talk to me. We became friends um over years just because I was willing um over years just because I was willing um over years just because I was willing to test that initial belief I had, which to test that initial belief I had, which to test that initial belief I had, which was mistaken, that he didn't want to was mistaken, that he didn't want to was mistaken, that he didn't want to talk to me. And the problem that at talk to me. And the problem that at talk to me. And the problem that at least we find over and over again in our least we find over and over again in our least we find over and over again in our social lives is all too often social lives is all too often social lives is all too often we infer immediately we infer immediately we infer immediately a pessi- we have overly pessimistic a pessi- we have overly pessimistic a pessi- we have overly pessimistic expectations about how other people will expectations about how other people will expectations about how other people will respond to us when we try, and we just respond to us when we try, and we just respond to us when we try, and we just miss opportunities to connect with other miss opportunities to connect with other miss opportunities to connect with other people that we could have across the people that we could have across the people that we could have across the moments of our days, weeks, months, moments of our days, weeks, months, moments of our days, weeks, months, years of our lives that would just years of our lives that would just years of our lives that would just enrich our lives in lots of ways if we enrich our lives in lots of ways if we enrich our lives in lots of ways if we were willing to test those barriers that were willing to test those barriers that were willing to test those barriers that were keeping us from connecting with were keeping us from connecting with were keeping us from connecting with other people to see if are they made out other people to see if are they made out other people to see if are they made out of steel or is it a pasta noodle? of steel or is it a pasta noodle? of steel or is it a pasta noodle? Sometimes they're pasta noodles. Sometimes they're pasta noodles. Sometimes they're pasta noodles. The data I've seen um suggests that more The data I've seen um suggests that more The data I've seen um suggests that more and more people are and more people are and more people are going to church, they're attending other going to church, they're attending other going to church, they're attending other religious gatherings, you know, it seems religious gatherings, you know, it seems religious gatherings, you know, it seems that um some that um some that um some &gt;&gt; in just recent years it's very high. &gt;&gt; in just recent years it's very high. &gt;&gt; in just recent years it's very high. &gt;&gt; it's really on the upswing. And and my &gt;&gt; it's really on the upswing. And and my &gt;&gt; it's really on the upswing. And and my guess is there are a number of reasons guess is there are a number of reasons guess is there are a number of reasons for that. People want to meet people for that. People want to meet people for that. People want to meet people with a certain set of values. Um with a certain set of values. Um with a certain set of values. Um maybe they are drinking less, who knows. maybe they are drinking less, who knows. maybe they are drinking less, who knows. You know, I think a component of those You know, I think a component of those You know, I think a component of those types of gatherings types of gatherings types of gatherings are that people generally are pretty are that people generally are pretty are that people generally are pretty friendly. Yes. It's pretty inviting, friendly. Yes. It's pretty inviting, friendly. Yes. It's pretty inviting, right? You know, You know, You know, I mean people still go to festivals, I mean people still go to festivals, I mean people still go to festivals, too. Like I didn't go, but Coachella was too. Like I didn't go, but Coachella was too. Like I didn't go, but Coachella was recently. And people tend to be in a recently. And people tend to be in a recently. And people tend to be in a good mood at festivals. I was at TED good mood at festivals. I was at TED good mood at festivals. I was at TED last week. And it was very friendly. last week. And it was very friendly. last week. And it was very friendly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I'm just, you know, we could &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I'm just, you know, we could &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I'm just, you know, we could pepper with different examples and I pepper with different examples and I pepper with different examples and I think it is important to do so. I didn't think it is important to do so. I didn't think it is important to do so. I didn't want to imply it was just churches, want to imply it was just churches, want to imply it was just churches, but these kinds of common gatherings but these kinds of common gatherings but these kinds of common gatherings where people are there for their own where people are there for their own where people are there for their own reasons, but also to interact with reasons, but also to interact with reasons, but also to interact with others, including strangers. Absolutely. others, including strangers. Absolutely. others, including strangers. Absolutely. And I think this, in my mind, can be And I think this, in my mind, can be And I think this, in my mind, can be pretty well explained by the fact that pretty well explained by the fact that pretty well explained by the fact that people were indoors during the pandemic. people were indoors during the pandemic. people were indoors during the pandemic. A lot of people were, anyway. And and A lot of people were, anyway. And and A lot of people were, anyway. And and everyone's on their phones more and everyone's on their phones more and everyone's on their phones more and devices. So, attending venues where devices. So, attending venues where devices. So, attending venues where there's clearly a clearly a clearly a an impulse towards interacting with an impulse towards interacting with an impulse towards interacting with strangers. Actually, sauna gatherings strangers. Actually, sauna gatherings strangers. Actually, sauna gatherings are really big in major cities. You are really big in major cities. You are really big in major cities. You know, people not just sitting in a sauna know, people not just sitting in a sauna know, people not just sitting in a sauna facing out like bleacher on bleachers, facing out like bleacher on bleachers, facing out like bleacher on bleachers, but in a round. They're doing breath but in a round. They're doing breath but in a round. They're doing breath work and you know. So, and on and on. work and you know. So, and on and on. work and you know. So, and on and on. So, it's interesting. I think So, it's interesting. I think So, it's interesting. I think people really crave this. people really crave this. people really crave this. Earlier, we talked a little bit about Earlier, we talked a little bit about Earlier, we talked a little bit about your family and adoption. And I've heard your family and adoption. And I've heard your family and adoption. And I've heard you say in a in a previous podcast you say in a in a previous podcast you say in a in a previous podcast that you have a child or children who that you have a child or children who that you have a child or children who are particularly outgoing. Yes. Our are particularly outgoing. Yes. Our are particularly outgoing. Yes. Our youngest. Yeah, so if you're willing, I youngest. Yeah, so if you're willing, I youngest. Yeah, so if you're willing, I don't would you share a little bit about that? would you share a little bit about that? would you share a little bit about that? It was it's a very interesting and I It was it's a very interesting and I It was it's a very interesting and I think important example into um well, think important example into um well, think important example into um well, differences among humans and differences among humans and differences among humans and sometimes we think of differences as sometimes we think of differences as sometimes we think of differences as good, bad. In this case, it was clearly good, bad. In this case, it was clearly good, bad. In this case, it was clearly an example of how an example of how an example of how some people, by virtue of being more some people, by virtue of being more some people, by virtue of being more outgoing, having less fear, actually outgoing, having less fear, actually outgoing, having less fear, actually afford themselves and others a uniquely afford themselves and others a uniquely afford themselves and others a uniquely wonderful experience of life. wonderful experience of life. wonderful experience of life. &gt;&gt; Yes. So, our youngest daughter, &gt;&gt; Yes. So, our youngest daughter, &gt;&gt; Yes. So, our youngest daughter, Lindsey, has Down syndrome. And Lindsey Lindsey, has Down syndrome. And Lindsey Lindsey, has Down syndrome. And Lindsey is adopted from We adopted Lindsey from is adopted from We adopted Lindsey from is adopted from We adopted Lindsey from China. The research that I've been doing over The research that I've been doing over The research that I've been doing over the last 15 or so years with my the last 15 or so years with my the last 15 or so years with my collaborators, where we're finding over collaborators, where we're finding over collaborators, where we're finding over and over again and over again and over again how overly pessimistic we are how overly pessimistic we are how overly pessimistic we are about how we'll how other people will about how we'll how other people will about how we'll how other people will respond to us when we reach out to respond to us when we reach out to respond to us when we reach out to connect with them is just really connect with them is just really connect with them is just really changed the way I live my life. It is changed the way I live my life. It is changed the way I live my life. It is sometimes hard to take behavioral sometimes hard to take behavioral sometimes hard to take behavioral science research and apply it to science research and apply it to science research and apply it to individual lives, but in my own life, individual lives, but in my own life, individual lives, but in my own life, I've seen ways to do this over and over I've seen ways to do this over and over I've seen ways to do this over and over again by testing some of these barriers again by testing some of these barriers again by testing some of these barriers and just being more open to reaching out and just being more open to reaching out and just being more open to reaching out and connect, realizing it's going to be and connect, realizing it's going to be and connect, realizing it's going to be more positive than I might imagine. So, more positive than I might imagine. So, more positive than I might imagine. So, um about 10 years ago, about 10 years ago, about 10 years ago, uh my wife, this is how this all got us uh my wife, this is how this all got us uh my wife, this is how this all got us to Lindsay in the end, and it came right to Lindsay in the end, and it came right to Lindsay in the end, and it came right through our research. I remember this so through our research. I remember this so through our research. I remember this so vividly. My wife We were 3 months into uh My wife We were 3 months into uh My wife We were 3 months into uh pregnancy. Um we'd already We had named our Um we'd already We had named our Um we'd already We had named our daughter Sophie at that point. We had daughter Sophie at that point. We had daughter Sophie at that point. We had four kids by that time. We were had four kids by that time. We were had four kids by that time. We were open to more life, and Jen open to more life, and Jen open to more life, and Jen was open. And 3 months into the was open. And 3 months into the was open. And 3 months into the pregnancy, we learned our daughter had pregnancy, we learned our daughter had pregnancy, we learned our daughter had Down syndrome. Down syndrome. Down syndrome. And my response to that was to be very And my response to that was to be very And my response to that was to be very pessimistic. It was uncertain. I didn't pessimistic. It was uncertain. I didn't pessimistic. It was uncertain. I didn't know how I was I'd never This was not know how I was I'd never This was not know how I was I'd never This was not where my mind was. I didn't think I where my mind was. I didn't think I where my mind was. I didn't think I wasn't thinking that we'd be raising a wasn't thinking that we'd be raising a wasn't thinking that we'd be raising a child when we're when we're when we're child when we're when we're when we're child when we're when we're when we're in our 40s with Down syndrome. Um in our 40s with Down syndrome. Um in our 40s with Down syndrome. Um this was This was going to be hard. I this was This was going to be hard. I this was This was going to be hard. I know, though, how easy it is to know, though, how easy it is to know, though, how easy it is to misunderstand how you'd respond in a situation you're how you'd respond in a situation you're how you'd respond in a situation you're not in. And so, my wife and I and not in. And so, my wife and I and not in. And so, my wife and I and I'm not speaking for my wife's I'm not speaking for my wife's I'm not speaking for my wife's thoughts. My wife Jen is an angel. She's thoughts. My wife Jen is an angel. She's thoughts. My wife Jen is an angel. She's an amazing human being. As my college an amazing human being. As my college an amazing human being. As my college football coach said when he learned that football coach said when he learned that football coach said when he learned that I was a uh going to ask her to marry me I was a uh going to ask her to marry me I was a uh going to ask her to marry me when I was a junior in college, he said, when I was a junior in college, he said, when I was a junior in college, he said, "Nick" He said, "Nick, you're marrying "Nick" He said, "Nick, you're marrying "Nick" He said, "Nick, you're marrying up." And he was absolutely right about up." And he was absolutely right about up." And he was absolutely right about that, marrying up. Um but for me, I was that, marrying up. Um but for me, I was that, marrying up. Um but for me, I was nervous about this. We started calling nervous about this. We started calling nervous about this. We started calling families who were raising kids with Down families who were raising kids with Down families who were raising kids with Down syndrome. Every one of those families, trying to Every one of those families, trying to Every one of those families, trying to get their perspective to learn what it get their perspective to learn what it get their perspective to learn what it would be like to be in the situation we would be like to be in the situation we would be like to be in the situation we weren't in. weren't in. weren't in. To a person, those families referred to To a person, those families referred to To a person, those families referred to their children with Down syndrome as a their children with Down syndrome as a their children with Down syndrome as a blessing. It was almost like they were blessing. It was almost like they were blessing. It was almost like they were reading off of a script. It was amazing reading off of a script. It was amazing reading off of a script. It was amazing to hear their stories about how their to hear their stories about how their to hear their stories about how their children who did not have much social children who did not have much social children who did not have much social anxiety were just were very open and anxiety were just were very open and anxiety were just were very open and loving and create were like magnets in loving and create were like magnets in loving and create were like magnets in their family that everybody flocked their family that everybody flocked their family that everybody flocked around. They just brought joy and love around. They just brought joy and love around. They just brought joy and love and a broader view of what humanity and a broader view of what humanity and a broader view of what humanity could do with each other than they'd could do with each other than they'd could do with each other than they'd ever imagined before. They just enriched ever imagined before. They just enriched ever imagined before. They just enriched their lives, broadened their worldview their lives, broadened their worldview their lives, broadened their worldview in ways they couldn't have anticipated. in ways they couldn't have anticipated. in ways they couldn't have anticipated. Was a blessing. Was a blessing. Was a blessing. 6 months into our pregnancy, 6 months into our pregnancy, 6 months into our pregnancy, uh Sophie died. So, children with Down uh Sophie died. So, children with Down uh Sophie died. So, children with Down syndrome uh face a much higher risk of syndrome uh face a much higher risk of syndrome uh face a much higher risk of miscarriage or stillbirth. 6 months of miscarriage or stillbirth. 6 months of miscarriage or stillbirth. 6 months was a stillbirth. July 11th, 2016, was a stillbirth. July 11th, 2016, was a stillbirth. July 11th, 2016, our daughter died. It was the worst It our daughter died. It was the worst It our daughter died. It was the worst It was horrible. It was the worst was horrible. It was the worst was horrible. It was the worst experience in our marriage we had ever experience in our marriage we had ever experience in our marriage we had ever had. We mourned that loss for a good had. We mourned that loss for a good had. We mourned that loss for a good long stretch. It's about a year. One long stretch. It's about a year. One long stretch. It's about a year. One morning, I went into the sunroom. My wife was I went into the sunroom. My wife was I went into the sunroom. My wife was sitting there. We had two chairs there sitting there. We had two chairs there sitting there. We had two chairs there where she was sitting in this chair where she was sitting in this chair where she was sitting in this chair where she always sits and I said, "You where she always sits and I said, "You where she always sits and I said, "You know, honey, we were know, honey, we were know, honey, we were we were ready to have another baby. We we were ready to have another baby. We we were ready to have another baby. We could do this again. There's There are could do this again. There's There are could do this again. There's There are There are children out there who need There are children out there who need There are children out there who need parents. We've adopted two before. We parents. We've adopted two before. We parents. We've adopted two before. We know how this goes. We can do this know how this goes. We can do this know how this goes. We can do this again. We were ready. We were in the again. We were ready. We were in the again. We were ready. We were in the starting blocks. We were ready to go." starting blocks. We were ready to go." starting blocks. We were ready to go." And she turned to me and she said, And she turned to me and she said, And she turned to me and she said, "Would you be open to adopting a child "Would you be open to adopting a child "Would you be open to adopting a child with Down syndrome?" with Down syndrome?" with Down syndrome?" It had not even occurred to me that It had not even occurred to me that It had not even occurred to me that was something we could do. I hadn't was something we could do. I hadn't was something we could do. I hadn't thought about it. My head was not there. thought about it. My head was not there. thought about it. My head was not there. All over again. I was back where I was 3 All over again. I was back where I was 3 All over again. I was back where I was 3 months before thinking, months before thinking, months before thinking, "I don't know that we can do this, "I don't know that we can do this, "I don't know that we can do this, right? This is going to be super hard." right? This is going to be super hard." right? This is going to be super hard." And then, And then, And then, you know, if you're a researcher, you do you know, if you're a researcher, you do you know, if you're a researcher, you do think about your data all the time. I think about your data all the time. I think about your data all the time. I started thinking again about, you know, started thinking again about, you know, started thinking again about, you know, where we were 3 months ago calling all where we were 3 months ago calling all where we were 3 months ago calling all these families who talked about their these families who talked about their these families who talked about their kids as blessings. All this data, kids as blessings. All this data, kids as blessings. All this data, thousands and thousands of data points. thousands and thousands of data points. thousands and thousands of data points. By this point, as I'm talking to you By this point, as I'm talking to you By this point, as I'm talking to you now, we've run over 30,000 people in now, we've run over 30,000 people in now, we've run over 30,000 people in over 120 experiments, people reaching over 120 experiments, people reaching over 120 experiments, people reaching out to others documenting ways in which out to others documenting ways in which out to others documenting ways in which they're underestimating how positively they're underestimating how positively they're underestimating how positively others will respond. They're making the others will respond. They're making the others will respond. They're making the choice to hold back too often rather than to hold back too often rather than to hold back too often rather than reaching out and engaging, connecting reaching out and engaging, connecting reaching out and engaging, connecting with other people too much. And and here with other people too much. And and here with other people too much. And and here we had this choice right in front of us. we had this choice right in front of us. we had this choice right in front of us. My wife was offering it. Do we reach out My wife was offering it. Do we reach out My wife was offering it. Do we reach out and bring this child into our lives, and bring this child into our lives, and bring this child into our lives, this stranger, this stranger, this stranger, or not? And I was full of doubt here, or not? And I was full of doubt here, or not? And I was full of doubt here, all the same kind of doubt. all the same kind of doubt. all the same kind of doubt. How would she respond to us? How would she respond to us? How would she respond to us? Our data though Our data though Our data though gave me some courage here, like gave me some courage here, like gave me some courage here, like data-driven courage. Like, Nick, you are data-driven courage. Like, Nick, you are data-driven courage. Like, Nick, you are in the same position that all of your in the same position that all of your in the same position that all of your participants are in over and over again. participants are in over and over again. participants are in over and over again. And it gave me courage to go where my And it gave me courage to go where my And it gave me courage to go where my wife was. wife was. wife was. And to say, "Yeah, we can do this. And to say, "Yeah, we can do this. And to say, "Yeah, we can do this. Honey, you and I can do this together." Honey, you and I can do this together." Honey, you and I can do this together." Now, Jen and I are in a position that's Now, Jen and I are in a position that's Now, Jen and I are in a position that's different from lots of other families. different from lots of other families. different from lots of other families. We have resources. She's a fabulous We have resources. She's a fabulous We have resources. She's a fabulous uh human being. We have a strong uh human being. We have a strong uh human being. We have a strong marriage. We could do Raising a child marriage. We could do Raising a child marriage. We could do Raising a child with intellectual disabilities with intellectual disabilities with intellectual disabilities challenging. But challenging. But challenging. But we We could do this. And my data really we We could do this. And my data really we We could do this. And my data really made me feel comfortable that it made me feel comfortable that it made me feel comfortable that it wouldn't just be good. It would be wouldn't just be good. It would be wouldn't just be good. It would be surprisingly good. About a year after surprisingly good. About a year after surprisingly good. About a year after that, Jen and I boarded a flight with our four Jen and I boarded a flight with our four Jen and I boarded a flight with our four other kids. We're like a traveling other kids. We're like a traveling other kids. We're like a traveling circus show on our way to China. Um circus show on our way to China. Um circus show on our way to China. Um folks had not seen a family like ours to folks had not seen a family like ours to folks had not seen a family like ours to adopt Lindsey. She's 2 years old. She adopt Lindsey. She's 2 years old. She adopt Lindsey. She's 2 years old. She was abandoned in China by a woman who we was abandoned in China by a woman who we was abandoned in China by a woman who we will never meet, whose thoughts we will never meet, whose thoughts we will never meet, whose thoughts we can't, you know, about how hard this can't, you know, about how hard this can't, you know, about how hard this might have been or the how little might have been or the how little might have been or the how little support she had to raise a child like support she had to raise a child like support she had to raise a child like Lindsey, we don't know. Lindsey, we don't know. Lindsey, we don't know. Uh Lindsey had beautiful brown eyes, Lindsey had beautiful brown eyes, Lindsey had beautiful brown eyes, relentless smile, relentless smile, relentless smile, despite a really, really hard start in despite a really, really hard start in despite a really, really hard start in life. And that was how that started. And she And that was how that started. And she And that was how that started. And she has been amazing. She has been flat-out has been amazing. She has been flat-out has been amazing. She has been flat-out amazing. Not not without difficulty. Raising a Not not without difficulty. Raising a Not not without difficulty. Raising a child with an intellectual disability is child with an intellectual disability is child with an intellectual disability is really, really hard. really, really hard. really, really hard. At the same time, she has been what At the same time, she has been what At the same time, she has been what every other family has said that raising every other family has said that raising every other family has said that raising a child with Down syndrome would be like a child with Down syndrome would be like a child with Down syndrome would be like a blessing to us in so many ways. And to a blessing to us in so many ways. And to a blessing to us in so many ways. And to watch her go around the world, I mean, watch her go around the world, I mean, watch her go around the world, I mean, she gets frustrated and she's stubborn she gets frustrated and she's stubborn she gets frustrated and she's stubborn and she gets angry at people, but she and she gets angry at people, but she and she gets angry at people, but she also lives without the same kind of also lives without the same kind of also lives without the same kind of social anxiety that many of us has. She social anxiety that many of us has. She social anxiety that many of us has. She has no filter on her hello. has no filter on her hello. has no filter on her hello. Taking her grocery shopping is super Taking her grocery shopping is super Taking her grocery shopping is super fun. Goes up and down the aisles. She fun. Goes up and down the aisles. She fun. Goes up and down the aisles. She says a hello to everybody. Everybody. says a hello to everybody. Everybody. says a hello to everybody. Everybody. And it's like just like with my with my And it's like just like with my with my And it's like just like with my with my friend Teebow who I flipped the switch friend Teebow who I flipped the switch friend Teebow who I flipped the switch on his back and he gives his big hello on his back and he gives his big hello on his back and he gives his big hello to me. She flips the switch on so many to me. She flips the switch on so many to me. She flips the switch on so many people's backs. Their faces light up people's backs. Their faces light up people's backs. Their faces light up when she says hello to them. And she when she says hello to them. And she when she says hello to them. And she walks around the world this way. Open. walks around the world this way. Open. walks around the world this way. Open. Hello to everybody. Hello to everybody. Hello to everybody. It's amazing. It's amazing. And I think It's amazing. It's amazing. And I think It's amazing. It's amazing. And I think about how close about how close about how close we could have been. I could have been to we could have been. I could have been to we could have been. I could have been to saying, "I don't think I can do this." saying, "I don't think I can do this." saying, "I don't think I can do this." Because we failed to appreciate just how Because we failed to appreciate just how Because we failed to appreciate just how well things would go when we reached out well things would go when we reached out well things would go when we reached out to love someone, bring them into our to love someone, bring them into our to love someone, bring them into our lives when we could. And she's amazing. lives when we could. And she's amazing. lives when we could. And she's amazing. What an incredible story. Uh What an incredible story. Uh What an incredible story. Uh if you don't mind me asking, what is the if you don't mind me asking, what is the if you don't mind me asking, what is the relationship between your youngest relationship between your youngest relationship between your youngest daughter and the other children in your daughter and the other children in your daughter and the other children in your family? Um because it, you know, you family? Um because it, you know, you family? Um because it, you know, you described a beautiful set of examples described a beautiful set of examples described a beautiful set of examples with people outside your family and with people outside your family and with people outside your family and obviously you and your wife obviously you and your wife obviously you and your wife [clears throat] have an incredible [clears throat] have an incredible [clears throat] have an incredible connection to her, but what is her connection to her, but what is her connection to her, but what is her relationship to the other siblings? relationship to the other siblings? relationship to the other siblings? &gt;&gt; the magnet in the family. I mean, she is &gt;&gt; the magnet in the family. I mean, she is &gt;&gt; the magnet in the family. I mean, she is the baby. Everybody just, you know, if the baby. Everybody just, you know, if the baby. Everybody just, you know, if you if you are in a family with a if you if you are in a family with a if you if you are in a family with a young, you know, a youngest sibling, you young, you know, a youngest sibling, you young, you know, a youngest sibling, you all glam around that youngest one. She all glam around that youngest one. She all glam around that youngest one. She is like that too for the siblings too. is like that too for the siblings too. is like that too for the siblings too. Now, it's also hard. They need some time Now, it's also hard. They need some time Now, it's also hard. They need some time alone, but they alone, but they alone, but they when you come home and Lindsey is there, when you come home and Lindsey is there, when you come home and Lindsey is there, I get a "Hi, Dad!" That's of a volume I get a "Hi, Dad!" That's of a volume I get a "Hi, Dad!" That's of a volume that every [clears throat] dad should that every [clears throat] dad should that every [clears throat] dad should hear when they come home. It is hear when they come home. It is hear when they come home. It is wonderful. The sisters and the brothers wonderful. The sisters and the brothers wonderful. The sisters and the brothers all get that too. all get that too. all get that too. It's great. It's great. She is very It's great. It's great. She is very It's great. It's great. She is very connected to everybody in a way that I connected to everybody in a way that I connected to everybody in a way that I think even the other siblings aren't think even the other siblings aren't think even the other siblings aren't potentially. They get older, they go potentially. They get older, they go potentially. They get older, they go their own ways. But their own ways. But their own ways. But everybody loves Lindsay. Is it the case everybody loves Lindsay. Is it the case everybody loves Lindsay. Is it the case that uh that uh that uh children with Down are given up for children with Down are given up for children with Down are given up for adoption more? I mean, you described a adoption more? I mean, you described a adoption more? I mean, you described a very what I assume is a somewhat unique what I assume is a somewhat unique what I assume is a somewhat unique situation in China. Somebody You said situation in China. Somebody You said situation in China. Somebody You said abandoned so she was given to an abandoned so she was given to an abandoned so she was given to an orphanage. &gt;&gt; Yes. I so I don't know anything about &gt;&gt; Yes. I so I don't know anything about &gt;&gt; Yes. I so I don't know anything about this, right? I yeah, I actually this, right? I yeah, I actually this, right? I yeah, I actually colleague that was like studied GABA colleague that was like studied GABA colleague that was like studied GABA transmission in the brain of you know, transmission in the brain of you know, transmission in the brain of you know, in Down and like you know, it but like I in Down and like you know, it but like I in Down and like you know, it but like I have I have zero minus infinite have I have zero minus infinite have I have zero minus infinite knowledge of this. You can knowledge of this. You can knowledge of this. You can adopt a child with Down syndrome today adopt a child with Down syndrome today adopt a child with Down syndrome today in the United States and there's a in the United States and there's a in the United States and there's a waiting list for these kids in most waiting list for these kids in most waiting list for these kids in most places. The other thing that happens places. The other thing that happens places. The other thing that happens though is what could have happened though is what could have happened though is what could have happened to us at 3 months and I think this is to us at 3 months and I think this is to us at 3 months and I think this is more common now as genetic testing more common now as genetic testing more common now as genetic testing allows you to tell whether your child allows you to tell whether your child allows you to tell whether your child has any number of different kind of has any number of different kind of has any number of different kind of genetic um you know, differences, uh diversity um you know, differences, uh diversity um you know, differences, uh diversity on that dimension. And look, there's on that dimension. And look, there's on that dimension. And look, there's some there's some conditions that are some there's some conditions that are some there's some conditions that are just very, very hard to manage or that just very, very hard to manage or that just very, very hard to manage or that aren't conducive to life. Down syndrome aren't conducive to life. Down syndrome aren't conducive to life. Down syndrome is just not one of those. But many is just not one of those. But many is just not one of those. But many families at that 3-month period because families at that 3-month period because families at that 3-month period because they're skeptical or pessimistic about they're skeptical or pessimistic about they're skeptical or pessimistic about how well they can handle this. They how well they can handle this. They how well they can handle this. They don't know the supports that are don't know the supports that are don't know the supports that are available. They don't realize the available. They don't realize the available. They don't realize the strength that they owed that they that strength that they owed that they that strength that they owed that they that they have or the amount of love that they have or the amount of love that they have or the amount of love that they will feel for this child once it they will feel for this child once it they will feel for this child once it becomes yours. Hardships becomes yours. Hardships becomes yours. Hardships notwithstanding, it is harder, no doubt notwithstanding, it is harder, no doubt notwithstanding, it is harder, no doubt about it. Will end those pregnancies about it. Will end those pregnancies about it. Will end those pregnancies when like us might have found it to be a when like us might have found it to be a when like us might have found it to be a massive blessing in their lives. I don't massive blessing in their lives. I don't massive blessing in their lives. I don't I don't know what to tell people to do I don't know what to tell people to do I don't know what to tell people to do with that other than telling our own with that other than telling our own with that other than telling our own story. I think people have strength that story. I think people have strength that story. I think people have strength that they might not realize and there are they might not realize and there are they might not realize and there are lots of very challenging conditions. lots of very challenging conditions. lots of very challenging conditions. Down syndrome is one that is not as Down syndrome is one that is not as Down syndrome is one that is not as challenging as you might imagine. These challenging as you might imagine. These challenging as you might imagine. These kids are amazing. Amazing. And you know, kids are amazing. Amazing. And you know, kids are amazing. Amazing. And you know, our kids are our kids you know, even our kids are our kids you know, even our kids are our kids you know, even like, you know, across as we were even like, you know, across as we were even like, you know, across as we were talking earlier, whether your kids have talking earlier, whether your kids have talking earlier, whether your kids have come in how however kids have come into come in how however kids have come into come in how however kids have come into your into your life, once they're your into your life, once they're your into your life, once they're your kids, I mean, the fact that she has Down kids, I mean, the fact that she has Down kids, I mean, the fact that she has Down syndrome is something that is always syndrome is something that is always syndrome is something that is always kind of on our minds cuz it governs lots kind of on our minds cuz it governs lots kind of on our minds cuz it governs lots of things we do, but it also fades very of things we do, but it also fades very of things we do, but it also fades very quickly. Lindsay's just Lindsay, right? quickly. Lindsay's just Lindsay, right? quickly. Lindsay's just Lindsay, right? She's got she's got her own personality. She's got she's got her own personality. She's got she's got her own personality. She does her own things. Like the She does her own things. Like the She does her own things. Like the intellectual disability is just is kind intellectual disability is just is kind intellectual disability is just is kind of a of a of a becomes almost a like a background becomes almost a like a background becomes almost a like a background thing. It is not what defines her. She thing. It is not what defines her. She thing. It is not what defines her. She loves playing with dolls and Disney loves playing with dolls and Disney loves playing with dolls and Disney characters. She loves listening to characters. She loves listening to characters. She loves listening to stories. She loves reading books with stories. She loves reading books with stories. She loves reading books with you. She loves playing on you. She loves playing on you. She loves playing on the trampoline and playing in her the trampoline and playing in her the trampoline and playing in her outdoor kitchen. She loves playing with outdoor kitchen. She loves playing with outdoor kitchen. She loves playing with the neighbor kids, Demi and Delilah. the neighbor kids, Demi and Delilah. the neighbor kids, Demi and Delilah. They are her closest friends. She loves They are her closest friends. She loves They are her closest friends. She loves all those things. She has a huge all those things. She has a huge all those things. She has a huge personality, and that's what defines her personality, and that's what defines her personality, and that's what defines her in our lives day-to-day, not the in our lives day-to-day, not the in our lives day-to-day, not the diagnosis. Well, I've only known you a diagnosis. Well, I've only known you a diagnosis. Well, I've only known you a short while, and I'm in no position to short while, and I'm in no position to short while, and I'm in no position to psychoanalyze you, but I have to psychoanalyze you, but I have to psychoanalyze you, but I have to assume that assume that assume that something very powerful about you, and something very powerful about you, and something very powerful about you, and I'm also assuming about your wife, Jen, I'm also assuming about your wife, Jen, I'm also assuming about your wife, Jen, that your very clear complete lack of that your very clear complete lack of that your very clear complete lack of shame about the fact that she has Down about the fact that she has Down about the fact that she has Down is has to be a positive is has to be a positive is has to be a positive um force here in this. I I'm not trying to force here in this. I I'm not trying to force here in this. I I'm not trying to take anything away from who she who take anything away from who she who take anything away from who she who Lindsay is as an individual, but um Lindsay is as an individual, but um Lindsay is as an individual, but um I don't know if I want to darken the I don't know if I want to darken the I don't know if I want to darken the conversation with a contrast story, conversation with a contrast story, conversation with a contrast story, but I will. I will. I won't reveal who but I will. I will. I won't reveal who but I will. I will. I won't reveal who this person is, but there's a very this person is, but there's a very this person is, but there's a very famous neuroscientist famous neuroscientist famous neuroscientist who was pretty well known that he had a who was pretty well known that he had a who was pretty well known that he had a son who had epileptic seizures. Yeah. I son who had epileptic seizures. Yeah. I son who had epileptic seizures. Yeah. I mean, what's the shame in that, right? mean, what's the shame in that, right? mean, what's the shame in that, right? But, he was ashamed of his son. He But, he was ashamed of his son. He But, he was ashamed of his son. He wouldn't bring him to events. He wouldn't bring him to events. He wouldn't bring him to events. He wouldn't bring him to things. I'm wouldn't bring him to things. I'm wouldn't bring him to things. I'm actually aware of several high-level actually aware of several high-level actually aware of several high-level scientists, and I don't I have to be scientists, and I don't I have to be scientists, and I don't I have to be careful because I don't want to paint a careful because I don't want to paint a careful because I don't want to paint a negative view of scientists. I could negative view of scientists. I could negative view of scientists. I could tell you a thousand stories about tell you a thousand stories about tell you a thousand stories about wonderful scientists doing wonderful scientists doing wonderful scientists doing wonderful things for every for every bad story. things for every for every bad story. things for every for every bad story. But I remember hearing this and thinking But I remember hearing this and thinking But I remember hearing this and thinking like this is crazy. Well, someone who like this is crazy. Well, someone who like this is crazy. Well, someone who worked in his lab said, yeah, you know, worked in his lab said, yeah, you know, worked in his lab said, yeah, you know, he's got a Nobel Prize, but he he's got a Nobel Prize, but he he's got a Nobel Prize, but he he's incredibly ashamed of his son. I thought incredibly ashamed of his son. I thought incredibly ashamed of his son. I thought like that's nuts. I have a good friend like that's nuts. I have a good friend like that's nuts. I have a good friend in the positive side, my good friend in the positive side, my good friend in the positive side, my good friend Eddie Chang, who's the chair of Eddie Chang, who's the chair of Eddie Chang, who's the chair of neurosurgery at UCSF, and he works on neurosurgery at UCSF, and he works on neurosurgery at UCSF, and he works on epilepsy. And then like you can treat epilepsy. And then like you can treat epilepsy. And then like you can treat various forms of epilepsy. This wasn't various forms of epilepsy. This wasn't various forms of epilepsy. This wasn't intractable epilepsy. So I think when intractable epilepsy. So I think when intractable epilepsy. So I think when parents have a shame about a child's parents have a shame about a child's parents have a shame about a child's condition. Yes. That has to impact the condition. Yes. That has to impact the condition. Yes. That has to impact the way that the child moves in the world. I way that the child moves in the world. I way that the child moves in the world. I think it's really awesome that there is think it's really awesome that there is think it's really awesome that there is like zero minus infinity shame detected. like zero minus infinity shame detected. like zero minus infinity shame detected. Like I hear I hear only I hear only Like I hear I hear only I hear only Like I hear I hear only I hear only glowing things and pride. And and I glowing things and pride. And and I glowing things and pride. And and I also don't detect any hints of like also don't detect any hints of like also don't detect any hints of like we're doing this really hard thing and we're doing this really hard thing and we're doing this really hard thing and therefore we're amazing. But like therefore we're amazing. But like therefore we're amazing. But like you said, she's just our daughter and we you said, she's just our daughter and we you said, she's just our daughter and we have this relationship. We're her have this relationship. We're her have this relationship. We're her parents, she's our daughter, and like parents, she's our daughter, and like parents, she's our daughter, and like we're just living life. Yeah. Which I we're just living life. Yeah. Which I we're just living life. Yeah. Which I think is awesome. I think it's a think is awesome. I think it's a think is awesome. I think it's a it's a real testament to who you are and it's a real testament to who you are and it's a real testament to who you are and I think it's a real and your wife and I think it's a real and your wife and I think it's a real and your wife and Lindsay and I think it's a testament and Lindsay and I think it's a testament and Lindsay and I think it's a testament to like what's possible when we get out to like what's possible when we get out to like what's possible when we get out of like what do people think. It just of like what do people think. It just of like what do people think. It just seems like every all goodness just seems like every all goodness just seems like every all goodness just emerges from you. emerges from you. emerges from you. &gt;&gt; to be clear, I mean it's been a struggle &gt;&gt; to be clear, I mean it's been a struggle &gt;&gt; to be clear, I mean it's been a struggle for me too. I don't want to certainly for me too. I don't want to certainly for me too. I don't want to certainly paint myself as not having concerns paint myself as not having concerns paint myself as not having concerns about this or being worried what people about this or being worried what people about this or being worried what people will think about us or you know, even will think about us or you know, even will think about us or you know, even our other kids when they're going our other kids when they're going our other kids when they're going through difficult stretches in their through difficult stretches in their through difficult stretches in their lives. They're not doing the kinds of lives. They're not doing the kinds of lives. They're not doing the kinds of things that maybe I did, right? I have things that maybe I did, right? I have things that maybe I did, right? I have to make myself okay with that and come to make myself okay with that and come to make myself okay with that and come to accept that. And when I when I do that, accept that. And when I when I do that, accept that. And when I when I do that, so I have another son who we just love so I have another son who we just love so I have another son who we just love absolute love dearly who college just absolute love dearly who college just absolute love dearly who college just wasn't for him. You know, I'm a I'm a wasn't for him. You know, I'm a I'm a wasn't for him. You know, I'm a I'm a PhD I'm a third generation PhD. One of PhD I'm a third generation PhD. One of PhD I'm a third generation PhD. One of them on my mom's side and my dad is a them on my mom's side and my dad is a them on my mom's side and my dad is a PhD as well and college is just the PhD as well and college is just the PhD as well and college is just the root, right? I've been in academic life root, right? I've been in academic life root, right? I've been in academic life for my whole college was just the root, for my whole college was just the root, for my whole college was just the root, but it just wasn't for him. And it just but it just wasn't for him. And it just but it just wasn't for him. And it just wasn't engaging with it. And I kept wasn't engaging with it. And I kept wasn't engaging with it. And I kept and I mean this is I'm saying this and I mean this is I'm saying this and I mean this is I'm saying this with some shame myself right now that with some shame myself right now that with some shame myself right now that we kind of kept him in this path we kind of kept him in this path we kind of kept him in this path thinking this is the right way to go and thinking this is the right way to go and thinking this is the right way to go and it was would have been clear to an it was would have been clear to an it was would have been clear to an outsider that this isn't what he wants outsider that this isn't what he wants outsider that this isn't what he wants to be doing. He finally came to us very to be doing. He finally came to us very to be doing. He finally came to us very clearly and said that, you know, Dad, we clearly and said that, you know, Dad, we clearly and said that, you know, Dad, we I just not what I want to keep I just not what I want to keep I just not what I want to keep doing. And when we finally let go of doing. And when we finally let go of doing. And when we finally let go of that and just let him do what he wanted that and just let him do what he wanted that and just let him do what he wanted to do which is now he's in a trade to do which is now he's in a trade to do which is now he's in a trade school. I've never seen him happier. school. I've never seen him happier. school. I've never seen him happier. We're just so proud of him. Now like the We're just so proud of him. Now like the We're just so proud of him. Now like the like the Sabu who I met on the train like the Sabu who I met on the train like the Sabu who I met on the train yesterday morning taking this culinary yesterday morning taking this culinary yesterday morning taking this culinary class. He's so proud of what he's doing. class. He's so proud of what he's doing. class. He's so proud of what he's doing. Just made me feel so good about him and Just made me feel so good about him and Just made me feel so good about him and also about my son to let go of those also about my son to let go of those also about my son to let go of those things and just to love him for who he things and just to love him for who he things and just to love him for who he is. Every parent struggles with that. is. Every parent struggles with that. is. Every parent struggles with that. Every parent struggles with loving their Every parent struggles with loving their Every parent struggles with loving their kids for who they are and that takes kids for who they are and that takes kids for who they are and that takes some practice too and also some practice too and also some practice too and also some deliberate careful thought and deliberate careful thought and deliberate careful thought and attention. Um and it's worth challenging attention. Um and it's worth challenging attention. Um and it's worth challenging yourself to do because of course it yourself to do because of course it yourself to do because of course it makes the world of difference for them makes the world of difference for them makes the world of difference for them and we all struggle to do that somewhat. we all struggle to do that somewhat. we all struggle to do that somewhat. With Lindsey, she's a ray of sunshine. With Lindsey, she's a ray of sunshine. With Lindsey, she's a ray of sunshine. We refer to her sometimes as a unicorn We refer to her sometimes as a unicorn We refer to her sometimes as a unicorn cuz there aren't too many out there and cuz there aren't too many out there and cuz there aren't too many out there and we learned a little while ago, I don't we learned a little while ago, I don't we learned a little while ago, I don't know how true this is. I don't know who know how true this is. I don't know who know how true this is. I don't know who comes up with these things, but it turns comes up with these things, but it turns comes up with these things, but it turns out a collection of unicorns, do you out a collection of unicorns, do you out a collection of unicorns, do you know what it is ostensibly called? A know what it is ostensibly called? A know what it is ostensibly called? A blessing. Really? That's awesome. Who'd Really? That's awesome. Who'd Really? That's awesome. Who'd have guessed? have guessed? have guessed? Look, I'm [laughter] not I don't I yeah. Look, I'm [laughter] not I don't I yeah. Look, I'm [laughter] not I don't I yeah. I won't I won't put that I won't I won't put that I won't I won't put that to some sort of actual test. That is to some sort of actual test. That is to some sort of actual test. That is what they are apparently called as a what they are apparently called as a what they are apparently called as a blessing and that certainly has been blessing and that certainly has been blessing and that certainly has been what she's been for us. what she's been for us. what she's been for us. A lot of lessons in there and a and a A lot of lessons in there and a and a A lot of lessons in there and a and a lot of lot of lot of things for people to think about in things for people to think about in things for people to think about in terms of who they are and how they terms of who they are and how they terms of who they are and how they relate to people. Um if you don't relate to people. Um if you don't relate to people. Um if you don't mind, I just would like to peel back mind, I just would like to peel back mind, I just would like to peel back another layer on relationships with another layer on relationships with another layer on relationships with I'll use the example of children, but it I'll use the example of children, but it I'll use the example of children, but it could be with family other family member could be with family other family member could be with family other family member where that person is not typical of the where that person is not typical of the where that person is not typical of the average population. the average population. the average population. And you described Lindsey in this And you described Lindsey in this And you described Lindsey in this in this beautiful way. I almost feel in this beautiful way. I almost feel in this beautiful way. I almost feel like she's like a bit in the room, like she's like a bit in the room, like she's like a bit in the room, right? You know, the way you describe right? You know, the way you describe right? You know, the way you describe her. Um and I think when I'm out and about and I see I think when I'm out and about and I see I think when I'm out and about and I see um a parent or parents with a kid who um a parent or parents with a kid who um a parent or parents with a kid who has an I mean, I don't know what the has an I mean, I don't know what the has an I mean, I don't know what the diagnoses are, right? How could I? Um an diagnoses are, right? How could I? Um an diagnoses are, right? How could I? Um an intellectual or a some sort of a intellectual or a some sort of a intellectual or a some sort of a atypical behavior. The way you describe atypical behavior. The way you describe atypical behavior. The way you describe her is very delightful. Yeah. her is very delightful. Yeah. her is very delightful. Yeah. Sometimes um the behavior of children Sometimes um the behavior of children Sometimes um the behavior of children with these um challenges are with these um challenges are with these um challenges are disruptive. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's hard to not feel the shame of &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's hard to not feel the shame of &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's hard to not feel the shame of the parent. You know, like if a kid is the parent. You know, like if a kid is the parent. You know, like if a kid is being really loud or throwing a tantrum being really loud or throwing a tantrum being really loud or throwing a tantrum and this isn't a small child, for and this isn't a small child, for and this isn't a small child, for instance, or saying things that clearly instance, or saying things that clearly instance, or saying things that clearly don't make sense. And um I don't make sense. And um I don't make sense. And um I don't expect you to be, you know, the expect you to be, you know, the expect you to be, you know, the ambassador for all these people. I think ambassador for all these people. I think ambassador for all these people. I think we as um sentient we as um sentient we as um sentient well-meaning people around we don't well-meaning people around we don't well-meaning people around we don't quite know how to react to that. Like quite know how to react to that. Like quite know how to react to that. Like you want to say, "Gosh, I'm so sorry." you want to say, "Gosh, I'm so sorry." you want to say, "Gosh, I'm so sorry." No, of course not. Like that's their No, of course not. Like that's their No, of course not. Like that's their life, you know, who are you? You also life, you know, who are you? You also life, you know, who are you? You also don't want to don't want to don't want to perhaps ignore them, but you also don't perhaps ignore them, but you also don't perhaps ignore them, but you also don't want people to feel like that you're want people to feel like that you're want people to feel like that you're calling attention to them. Do you have calling attention to them. Do you have calling attention to them. Do you have any ideas like or suggestions? I mean, I any ideas like or suggestions? I mean, I any ideas like or suggestions? I mean, I mean, it's like mean, it's like mean, it's like it must be it must be an odd experience it must be it must be an odd experience it must be it must be an odd experience to move through life that way. to move through life that way. to move through life that way. Um and I'm so glad they don't isolate their and I'm so glad they don't isolate their and I'm so glad they don't isolate their kid. Yeah. But I think we've all been in kid. Yeah. But I think we've all been in kid. Yeah. But I think we've all been in this circumstance and we don't quite this circumstance and we don't quite this circumstance and we don't quite know how to react. know how to react. know how to react. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I think uh a good analog to &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I think uh a good analog to &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I think uh a good analog to this is um is with stuttering. And I this is um is with stuttering. And I this is um is with stuttering. And I think we all know how to deal with think we all know how to deal with think we all know how to deal with stuttering. Somebody who has a stutter stuttering. Somebody who has a stutter stuttering. Somebody who has a stutter is you wait patiently. Mhm. And you is you wait patiently. Mhm. And you is you wait patiently. Mhm. And you know, you don't call attention to it. know, you don't call attention to it. know, you don't call attention to it. &gt;&gt; Mhm. You just wait patiently for them to &gt;&gt; Mhm. You just wait patiently for them to &gt;&gt; Mhm. You just wait patiently for them to express what they want to express and express what they want to express and express what they want to express and then you carry on, right? And um then you carry on, right? And um then you carry on, right? And um maybe sometime if you get to know maybe sometime if you get to know maybe sometime if you get to know somebody, you can ask more specifically somebody, you can ask more specifically somebody, you can ask more specifically about, you know, how would you like me about, you know, how would you like me about, you know, how would you like me to help in this particular case? Is to help in this particular case? Is to help in this particular case? Is there anything I can do to be of there anything I can do to be of there anything I can do to be of assistance? How how would you like me to assistance? How how would you like me to assistance? How how would you like me to respond? We can ask people that to respond? We can ask people that to respond? We can ask people that directly, right? Um directly, right? Um directly, right? Um and you know, often somebody a and you know, often somebody a and you know, often somebody a caretaker will be able to tell you caretaker will be able to tell you caretaker will be able to tell you that. But patience is I think the way to that. But patience is I think the way to that. But patience is I think the way to deal with just to wait until whatever to deal with just to wait until whatever to deal with just to wait until whatever they're trying to do becomes clear. And they're trying to do becomes clear. And they're trying to do becomes clear. And I think we can all do that with I think we can all do that with I think we can all do that with stuttering. I think that's kind of stuttering. I think that's kind of stuttering. I think that's kind of understood, and maybe that's the way I understood, and maybe that's the way I understood, and maybe that's the way I would think about it. But, yes, some, would think about it. But, yes, some, would think about it. But, yes, some, you know, some differences are harder you know, some differences are harder you know, some differences are harder than others, for sure. Yeah, having than others, for sure. Yeah, having than others, for sure. Yeah, having grown up in a town, Palo Alto, where grown up in a town, Palo Alto, where grown up in a town, Palo Alto, where there are many, many professors and there are many, many professors and there are many, many professors and high-achieving parents, and high-achieving parents, and high-achieving parents, and um I could list off a dozen or more I could list off a dozen or more I could list off a dozen or more examples of examples of examples of uh where the kids either uh where the kids either uh where the kids either didn't follow the traditional track. didn't follow the traditional track. didn't follow the traditional track. &gt;&gt; Yes. You could say, "Oh, they didn't &gt;&gt; Yes. You could say, "Oh, they didn't &gt;&gt; Yes. You could say, "Oh, they didn't follow the traditional track, but they follow the traditional track, but they follow the traditional track, but they became like a politicing became like a politicing became like a politicing Pulitzer-winning writer, you know, or Pulitzer-winning writer, you know, or Pulitzer-winning writer, you know, or something like that." I'm not talking something like that." I'm not talking something like that." I'm not talking about that, right? I think it's so cool, about that, right? I think it's so cool, about that, right? I think it's so cool, by the way, that your son is in trade by the way, that your son is in trade by the way, that your son is in trade school. I have friends that from all school. I have friends that from all school. I have friends that from all walks of life, and fulfillment is walks of life, and fulfillment is walks of life, and fulfillment is I've never seen our son happier. Yeah, I I've never seen our son happier. Yeah, I I've never seen our son happier. Yeah, I mean, we're two academics, you know, my mean, we're two academics, you know, my mean, we're two academics, you know, my dad's an academic, and I can say that dad's an academic, and I can say that dad's an academic, and I can say that um I actually think I would've been um I actually think I would've been um I actually think I would've been happy doing any number of things. At one happy doing any number of things. At one happy doing any number of things. At one point, I wanted to join the fire point, I wanted to join the fire point, I wanted to join the fire service. I absolutely My dad, every once service. I absolutely My dad, every once service. I absolutely My dad, every once in a while, sorry, Dad, he'll say like, in a while, sorry, Dad, he'll say like, in a while, sorry, Dad, he'll say like, "Oh, you know, I don't think that "Oh, you know, I don't think that "Oh, you know, I don't think that would've been fulfilling." I think it would've been fulfilling." I think it would've been fulfilling." I think it would've been awesome. Like, you get to would've been awesome. Like, you get to would've been awesome. Like, you get to work out, and the dog, like, I love work out, and the dog, like, I love work out, and the dog, like, I love serving others, like, get out, you know, serving others, like, get out, you know, serving others, like, get out, you know, and do things, and we're I'm friends and do things, and we're I'm friends and do things, and we're I'm friends with the local fire department. When with the local fire department. When with the local fire department. When they come through, like, they come through, like, they come through, like, I certainly don't know what it is to do I certainly don't know what it is to do I certainly don't know what it is to do that profession, but like, I think that profession, but like, I think that profession, but like, I think fulfillment can be found in a number of fulfillment can be found in a number of fulfillment can be found in a number of ways. &gt;&gt; Fulfillment's about engagement, right? &gt;&gt; Fulfillment's about engagement, right? &gt;&gt; Fulfillment's about engagement, right? And people like firefighters. Being a And people like firefighters. Being a And people like firefighters. Being a cop is a little tricky, cuz some people cop is a little tricky, cuz some people cop is a little tricky, cuz some people like you, and some people hate you, and like you, and some people hate you, and like you, and some people hate you, and the job is much more it the job is much more it the job is much more it from moment to moment is a lot less from moment to moment is a lot less from moment to moment is a lot less predictable. &gt;&gt; I think one thing that we can do, and I &gt;&gt; I think one thing that we can do, and I &gt;&gt; I think one thing that we can do, and I haven't always been great at this in I haven't always been great at this in I haven't always been great at this in my family. I told you, it took me a in my family. I told you, it took me a in my family. I told you, it took me a while with my son to encourage him more while with my son to encourage him more while with my son to encourage him more down that path, and I'm just now down that path, and I'm just now down that path, and I'm just now realizing that's what I need to be doing realizing that's what I need to be doing realizing that's what I need to be doing is to you know, I think kids will also to you know, I think kids will also to you know, I think kids will also often will feel like they are not often will feel like they are not often will feel like they are not following the right path, and won't feel following the right path, and won't feel following the right path, and won't feel good about the path they're going down. good about the path they're going down. good about the path they're going down. And that's where parents can really be And that's where parents can really be And that's where parents can really be helpful. We have, right outside my helpful. We have, right outside my helpful. We have, right outside my office window, is the University of office window, is the University of office window, is the University of Chicago Laboratory School, which is a Chicago Laboratory School, which is a Chicago Laboratory School, which is a very elite, private, um very elite, private, um very elite, private, um high school. And it goes all the way high school. And it goes all the way high school. And it goes all the way through, you know, down to preschool through, you know, down to preschool through, you know, down to preschool as well. And the kids come out of there as well. And the kids come out of there as well. And the kids come out of there with a very clear expectation about what with a very clear expectation about what with a very clear expectation about what the right path is for them and a lot of the right path is for them and a lot of the right path is for them and a lot of kids struggle with that. I just had a kids struggle with that. I just had a kids struggle with that. I just had a faculty member in my office yesterday faculty member in my office yesterday faculty member in my office yesterday before I left to get on a flight with before I left to get on a flight with before I left to get on a flight with you describing um how their children you describing um how their children you describing um how their children are struggling, I think, with are struggling, I think, with are struggling, I think, with expectations for what they ought to be doing that for what they ought to be doing that for what they ought to be doing that just don't fit with who they are. And I just don't fit with who they are. And I just don't fit with who they are. And I think that's where parents can be really think that's where parents can be really think that's where parents can be really helpful for their kids is loving them helpful for their kids is loving them helpful for their kids is loving them for who they are and helping them find for who they are and helping them find for who they are and helping them find what's going to make them the happiest what's going to make them the happiest what's going to make them the happiest and telling them making sure that kids and telling them making sure that kids and telling them making sure that kids know that any path is okay. You want to know that any path is okay. You want to know that any path is okay. You want to be a carpenter, great. That job won't be a carpenter, great. That job won't be a carpenter, great. That job won't be AI'd, at least, right? Or, you know, you AI'd, at least, right? Or, you know, you AI'd, at least, right? Or, you know, you want to be get a PhD, fabulous. Whatever want to be get a PhD, fabulous. Whatever want to be get a PhD, fabulous. Whatever field, go for it, right? Trying to field, go for it, right? Trying to field, go for it, right? Trying to encourage kids with their passions and encourage kids with their passions and encourage kids with their passions and encouraging them to feel like it's okay. encouraging them to feel like it's okay. encouraging them to feel like it's okay. That's important. You have another side That's important. You have another side That's important. You have another side of you that most people aren't aware of you that most people aren't aware of you that most people aren't aware of that we somehow landed on walking in that we somehow landed on walking in that we somehow landed on walking in here was like somewhat randomly, which here was like somewhat randomly, which here was like somewhat randomly, which is Yeah. um you enjoy a lot of as much is Yeah. um you enjoy a lot of as much is Yeah. um you enjoy a lot of as much time as possible in the out of doors. time as possible in the out of doors. time as possible in the out of doors. You're a hunter and a fisherman, a You're a hunter and a fisherman, a You're a hunter and a fisherman, a outdoorsman. So, you wanted to be outdoorsman. So, you wanted to be outdoorsman. So, you wanted to be Grizzly Adams. Yeah, when I was a kid, Grizzly Adams. Yeah, when I was a kid, Grizzly Adams. Yeah, when I was a kid, yeah. &gt;&gt; But in some sense, you play him &gt;&gt; But in some sense, you play him &gt;&gt; But in some sense, you play him from time to time. from time to time. from time to time. &gt;&gt; Sort of. But not out on your own. So, &gt;&gt; Sort of. But not out on your own. So, &gt;&gt; Sort of. But not out on your own. So, you and your and your sons and you and your and your sons and you and your and your sons and daughters go get out into the waters. daughters go get out into the waters. daughters go get out into the waters. Yeah. I grew up in rural Iowa out in the Yeah. I grew up in rural Iowa out in the Yeah. I grew up in rural Iowa out in the country. My dad and I went hunting and country. My dad and I went hunting and country. My dad and I went hunting and fishing all the time when I was a kid. I fishing all the time when I was a kid. I fishing all the time when I was a kid. I was 4 years old the first time I went was 4 years old the first time I went was 4 years old the first time I went deer hunting with my dad and I loved deer hunting with my dad and I loved deer hunting with my dad and I loved that time. For yeah, I walked along cuz that time. For yeah, I walked along cuz that time. For yeah, I walked along cuz we were we were we were &gt;&gt; shorter than the than the rifle. &gt;&gt; shorter than the than the rifle. &gt;&gt; shorter than the than the rifle. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. No, I remember years where the &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. No, I remember years where the &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. No, I remember years where the snow would feel like it was up to my snow would feel like it was up to my snow would feel like it was up to my hips hunting deer in Iowa in early hips hunting deer in Iowa in early hips hunting deer in Iowa in early December and I wouldn't carry a gun December and I wouldn't carry a gun December and I wouldn't carry a gun until I was 12 or a bow. I started until I was 12 or a bow. I started until I was 12 or a bow. I started bow hunting when I was 12. Um but before bow hunting when I was 12. Um but before bow hunting when I was 12. Um but before then, you would you would push the deer. then, you would you would push the deer. then, you would you would push the deer. You'd walk through the woods with other You'd walk through the woods with other You'd walk through the woods with other guys, with my dad or with the friends guys, with my dad or with the friends guys, with my dad or with the friends that we'd have. It was a real community that we'd have. It was a real community that we'd have. It was a real community of people. I mean, the social of people. I mean, the social of people. I mean, the social connection there was great. We used to connection there was great. We used to connection there was great. We used to go hunting with a guy when I was a kid, go hunting with a guy when I was a kid, go hunting with a guy when I was a kid, Lane McDowell, who was friends with my Lane McDowell, who was friends with my Lane McDowell, who was friends with my dad, he was a football player for the dad, he was a football player for the dad, he was a football player for the University of Iowa and he played for the University of Iowa and he played for the University of Iowa and he played for the Detroit Lions. He's just a big monster Detroit Lions. He's just a big monster Detroit Lions. He's just a big monster of a man. of a man. of a man. Fabulous guy and his son Thad, who would Fabulous guy and his son Thad, who would Fabulous guy and his son Thad, who would go who was also in my same age, we go who was also in my same age, we go who was also in my same age, we played football together played football together played football together against each other in high school. But against each other in high school. But against each other in high school. But yeah, I grew up doing that and then, you yeah, I grew up doing that and then, you yeah, I grew up doing that and then, you know, as I've gotten older, I've stayed know, as I've gotten older, I've stayed know, as I've gotten older, I've stayed connected to the outdoors. I love being connected to the outdoors. I love being connected to the outdoors. I love being in the woods. I love doing conservation in the woods. I love doing conservation in the woods. I love doing conservation kind of work. There's kind of an element kind of work. There's kind of an element kind of work. There's kind of an element of caring of caring of caring for other people that also extends to for other people that also extends to for other people that also extends to caring for the for the woodlands that caring for the for the woodlands that caring for the for the woodlands that are out there. I do a lot of invasive are out there. I do a lot of invasive are out there. I do a lot of invasive removal. We have enrolled 40 acres in removal. We have enrolled 40 acres in removal. We have enrolled 40 acres in the conservation reserve program, the conservation reserve program, the conservation reserve program, planted 9,000 trees on it. And I see a planted 9,000 trees on it. And I see a planted 9,000 trees on it. And I see a lot of opportunities to connect with lot of opportunities to connect with lot of opportunities to connect with people in places that other people in places that other people in places that other people wouldn't. Like I see the outdoors, wouldn't. Like I see the outdoors, wouldn't. Like I see the outdoors, hunting and fishing. You almost never do hunting and fishing. You almost never do hunting and fishing. You almost never do that truly alone. that truly alone. that truly alone. Right? You always have somebody with me Right? You always have somebody with me Right? You always have somebody with me when I'm fishing. I always have, you when I'm fishing. I always have, you when I'm fishing. I always have, you know, go out with the kids when I'm know, go out with the kids when I'm know, go out with the kids when I'm turkey hunting or hunting deers and it's turkey hunting or hunting deers and it's turkey hunting or hunting deers and it's that social element that is really so that social element that is really so that social element that is really so important. And that And there is an important. And that And there is an important. And that And there is an element of this that came but just felt element of this that came but just felt element of this that came but just felt like it came right out of my research like it came right out of my research like it came right out of my research that happened last fall in Oregon. My that happened last fall in Oregon. My that happened last fall in Oregon. My son, my oldest son Ben, is a third-year son, my oldest son Ben, is a third-year son, my oldest son Ben, is a third-year PhD student at Oregon State pursuing a PhD student at Oregon State pursuing a PhD student at Oregon State pursuing a PhD there. PhD there. PhD there. Um and bless his heart, last spring he Um and bless his heart, last spring he Um and bless his heart, last spring he asked his dad to do the thing that made asked his dad to do the thing that made asked his dad to do the thing that made me just the happiest you could have me just the happiest you could have me just the happiest you could have done. He said, "Dad, would you like to done. He said, "Dad, would you like to done. He said, "Dad, would you like to come out here and go elk hunting with come out here and go elk hunting with come out here and go elk hunting with me?" Like I you know, I'm grew up in me?" Like I you know, I'm grew up in me?" Like I you know, I'm grew up in rural Iowa. The idea we'd be out in the rural Iowa. The idea we'd be out in the rural Iowa. The idea we'd be out in the mountains actually doing this just never mountains actually doing this just never mountains actually doing this just never was something that occurred to me that was something that occurred to me that was something that occurred to me that we that we could do, but he asked if we that we could do, but he asked if we that we could do, but he asked if we could do it and I was so excited. We could do it and I was so excited. We could do it and I was so excited. We would get a week together out in the would get a week together out in the would get a week together out in the remote wilderness of Oregon, just the remote wilderness of Oregon, just the remote wilderness of Oregon, just the two of us, sitting around trees looking two of us, sitting around trees looking two of us, sitting around trees looking for elk. It doesn't matter if you get for elk. It doesn't matter if you get for elk. It doesn't matter if you get one or not, whatever. That's not what one or not, whatever. That's not what one or not, whatever. That's not what it's about. It's about being out there it's about. It's about being out there it's about. It's about being out there and seeing what you see and seeing what you see and seeing what you see and being together. And it was going to be being together. And it was going to be being together. And it was going to be fabulous. And I was so excited. So last fabulous. And I was so excited. So last fabulous. And I was so excited. So last fall, this was uh, October, November, I fall, this was uh, October, November, I fall, this was uh, October, November, I can't quite remember the exact date. can't quite remember the exact date. can't quite remember the exact date. Went into northeast Oregon. And we went Went into northeast Oregon. And we went Went into northeast Oregon. And we went out into the, uh, out in the woods. out into the, uh, out in the woods. out into the, uh, out in the woods. We're miles away from the nearest road. We're miles away from the nearest road. We're miles away from the nearest road. We hike in. It's really hard. It's cold. We hike in. It's really hard. It's cold. We hike in. It's really hard. It's cold. There's snow on the ground. We got, There's snow on the ground. We got, There's snow on the ground. We got, we're not really prepared for this. we're not really prepared for this. we're not really prepared for this. First the time we've ever done this. We First the time we've ever done this. We First the time we've ever done this. We don't have any chairs with us or don't have any chairs with us or don't have any chairs with us or anything. We got backpacking tents, anything. We got backpacking tents, anything. We got backpacking tents, freezing our butts off. Uh, and the freezing our butts off. Uh, and the freezing our butts off. Uh, and the first day we go out to scout. We don't first day we go out to scout. We don't first day we go out to scout. We don't know what we're doing here at all. We're know what we're doing here at all. We're know what we're doing here at all. We're just going to see, I don't know, where just going to see, I don't know, where just going to see, I don't know, where the elk are. How do we do this? We go the elk are. How do we do this? We go the elk are. How do we do this? We go down into this valley. And we're not down into this valley. And we're not down into this valley. And we're not there for more than 20 minutes, maybe. there for more than 20 minutes, maybe. there for more than 20 minutes, maybe. When our time alone suddenly becomes a When our time alone suddenly becomes a When our time alone suddenly becomes a little more social than it would have little more social than it would have little more social than it would have been otherwise. We look behind us, like been otherwise. We look behind us, like been otherwise. We look behind us, like 3/4 of a mile up the valley, we got this 3/4 of a mile up the valley, we got this 3/4 of a mile up the valley, we got this group of guys coming in camo down the group of guys coming in camo down the group of guys coming in camo down the way. And my son, Ben, was a little way. And my son, Ben, was a little way. And my son, Ben, was a little nervous about this, right? A little nervous about this, right? A little nervous about this, right? A little anxiety about reaching out and anxiety about reaching out and anxiety about reaching out and connecting with other people, right? A connecting with other people, right? A connecting with other people, right? A little like you'd have somebody sits little like you'd have somebody sits little like you'd have somebody sits down next to you train, well, maybe I'll down next to you train, well, maybe I'll down next to you train, well, maybe I'll just keep to myself, or on a plane, just keep to myself, or on a plane, just keep to myself, or on a plane, just keep to myself. Here we're out in the keep to myself. Here we're out in the keep to myself. Here we're out in the wilderness and we got this group of wilderness and we got this group of wilderness and we got this group of hunters. It's like a gang of men coming hunters. It's like a gang of men coming hunters. It's like a gang of men coming down the down the valley towards us, all down the down the valley towards us, all down the down the valley towards us, all in camo. in camo. in camo. And so Ben's like, you know, let's And so Ben's like, you know, let's And so Ben's like, you know, let's move on, Dad. Let's let's get going. And move on, Dad. Let's let's get going. And move on, Dad. Let's let's get going. And I said, "No, let's stay and talk I said, "No, let's stay and talk I said, "No, let's stay and talk with these guys." And they wait, they with these guys." And they wait, they with these guys." And they wait, they come down, and we start talking. It come down, and we start talking. It come down, and we start talking. It turns out these guys have been hunting turns out these guys have been hunting turns out these guys have been hunting in this valley in this area for years, in this valley in this area for years, in this valley in this area for years, for decades. The older guy, Dennis, had for decades. The older guy, Dennis, had for decades. The older guy, Dennis, had been going with another older guy. I been going with another older guy. I been going with another older guy. I think they gotten connected through think they gotten connected through think they gotten connected through their church. The the other older guy their church. The the other older guy their church. The the other older guy had passed away recently. But they now had passed away recently. But they now had passed away recently. But they now they have another guy, Corey, who they have another guy, Corey, who they have another guy, Corey, who they who gotten connected to them. And the who gotten connected to them. And the who gotten connected to them. And the kids are all with them, Eric and, the kids are all with them, Eric and, the kids are all with them, Eric and, um, and there were, I think there were there and there were, I think there were there and there were, I think there were there were five at the time. And we just were five at the time. And we just were five at the time. And we just started talking, and then they start started talking, and then they start started talking, and then they start telling us how to do this. And where we telling us how to do this. And where we telling us how to do this. And where we could go. And how we could coordinate could go. And how we could coordinate could go. And how we could coordinate with each other to make sure we weren't, with each other to make sure we weren't, with each other to make sure we weren't, you know, we both had the best time that you know, we both had the best time that you know, we both had the best time that we could. And they told us, "Well, we could. And they told us, "Well, we could. And they told us, "Well, there's a blind up here where you could there's a blind up here where you could there's a blind up here where you could hunt. And and you could go down there hunt. And and you could go down there hunt. And and you could go down there and hunt in this other spot." And we and hunt in this other spot." And we and hunt in this other spot." And we just started working together. And they just started working together. And they just started working together. And they were delightful. Just like just were delightful. Just like just were delightful. Just like just like it is when you reach out to connect like it is when you reach out to connect like it is when you reach out to connect with other people, they reach back to with other people, they reach back to with other people, they reach back to you. They invited us to their tent for you. They invited us to their tent for you. They invited us to their tent for dinner. I'll just never forget they got this I'll just never forget they got this I'll just never forget they got this huge this amazing wall tent. They've got huge this amazing wall tent. They've got huge this amazing wall tent. They've got a camp stove. They've got a spring a camp stove. They've got a spring a camp stove. They've got a spring where they get fresh water. They got a where they get fresh water. They got a where they get fresh water. They got a bathroom where they are. Uh we walk into bathroom where they are. Uh we walk into bathroom where they are. Uh we walk into their tent, it's heated. We're freezing. their tent, it's heated. We're freezing. their tent, it's heated. We're freezing. Our truck is off in the snow. We walk Our truck is off in the snow. We walk Our truck is off in the snow. We walk into their tent, the first thing they into their tent, the first thing they into their tent, the first thing they say to us, "Would you like a red or say to us, "Would you like a red or say to us, "Would you like a red or white?" They got wine in their in their white?" They got wine in their in their white?" They got wine in their in their cabin miles from it. These guys were cabin miles from it. These guys were cabin miles from it. These guys were fabulous. And it turned an event that fabulous. And it turned an event that fabulous. And it turned an event that was great for Ben and I was great for Ben and I was great for Ben and I into an even better event cuz we into an even better event cuz we into an even better event cuz we connected with these men who now just connected with these men who now just connected with these men who now just yesterday Corey sent me a text message yesterday Corey sent me a text message yesterday Corey sent me a text message saying, "It's time to apply for your elk saying, "It's time to apply for your elk saying, "It's time to apply for your elk tags. This is when we're going to go and tags. This is when we're going to go and tags. This is when we're going to go and this is when we're going to come out in this is when we're going to come out in this is when we're going to come out in case you want to do this with us again." case you want to do this with us again." case you want to do this with us again." And in fact, Corey um Corey got an got And in fact, Corey um Corey got an got And in fact, Corey um Corey got an got an elk the first day, right? He filled an elk the first day, right? He filled an elk the first day, right? He filled his bull tag. And we were coming back his bull tag. And we were coming back his bull tag. And we were coming back from hunting. Ben and I had seen one, from hunting. Ben and I had seen one, from hunting. Ben and I had seen one, but we weren't able to get a shot at it. but we weren't able to get a shot at it. but we weren't able to get a shot at it. Still amazing to see one. And we're Still amazing to see one. And we're Still amazing to see one. And we're walking back and the young walking back and the young walking back and the young kids, Eric, uh is leading this group. kids, Eric, uh is leading this group. kids, Eric, uh is leading this group. He says, He says, He says, "Get on down there and show Corey how to "Get on down there and show Corey how to "Get on down there and show Corey how to bone out that elk." I've boned out bone out that elk." I've boned out bone out that elk." I've boned out many deer. So this is the only red many deer. So this is the only red many deer. So this is the only red meat we eat is the venison that I meat we eat is the venison that I meat we eat is the venison that I get. And um so I know how to butcher get. And um so I know how to butcher get. And um so I know how to butcher these animals and prepare them to these animals and prepare them to these animals and prepare them to eat. And they had just been hauling out eat. And they had just been hauling out eat. And they had just been hauling out these big quarters of animals, like these big quarters of animals, like these big quarters of animals, like 100-lb rib cage, right? That's a lot of 100-lb rib cage, right? That's a lot of 100-lb rib cage, right? That's a lot of bones that you don't even want to. So I bones that you don't even want to. So I bones that you don't even want to. So I got to go down and help Corey and show got to go down and help Corey and show got to go down and help Corey and show him how to bone out the backstrap and him how to bone out the backstrap and him how to bone out the backstrap and the loins and all the meat that you the loins and all the meat that you the loins and all the meat that you actually eat and leave the bones that actually eat and leave the bones that actually eat and leave the bones that are there for the you know the cougars are there for the you know the cougars are there for the you know the cougars and stuff to get later. And it was it and stuff to get later. And it was it and stuff to get later. And it was it was it was fabulous, right? And that the was it was fabulous, right? And that the was it was fabulous, right? And that the courage that I had to talk with them to courage that I had to talk with them to courage that I had to talk with them to connect with them out there, again, I connect with them out there, again, I connect with them out there, again, I felt just came straight from our felt just came straight from our felt just came straight from our research that how easy it is to research that how easy it is to research that how easy it is to underestimate how positively other underestimate how positively other underestimate how positively other people respond when you reach out to people respond when you reach out to people respond when you reach out to them. And here it would have been easy them. And here it would have been easy them. And here it would have been easy for us to be competitive or avoid this. for us to be competitive or avoid this. for us to be competitive or avoid this. And it was such a blessing to have And it was such a blessing to have And it was such a blessing to have connected with them. And we've stayed connected with them. And we've stayed connected with them. And we've stayed connected with this since, and I hope I connected with this since, and I hope I connected with this since, and I hope I hope we see him again in the fall out hope we see him again in the fall out hope we see him again in the fall out there in the woods. It would be there in the woods. It would be there in the woods. It would be fabulous. Wonderful men. That's awesome, fabulous. Wonderful men. That's awesome, fabulous. Wonderful men. That's awesome, and thanks for putting in a strong, and thanks for putting in a strong, and thanks for putting in a strong, clear, ethical picture of hunters. I think a ethical picture of hunters. I think a ethical picture of hunters. I think a lot of people have a picture of hunters lot of people have a picture of hunters lot of people have a picture of hunters that is very different than what you that is very different than what you that is very different than what you just described. Uh my friend Cam Hanes just described. Uh my friend Cam Hanes just described. Uh my friend Cam Hanes is a serious about preserving wild is a serious about preserving wild is a serious about preserving wild lands, and he's a very, very serious bow lands, and he's a very, very serious bow lands, and he's a very, very serious bow hunter, and I mean, there are really hunter, and I mean, there are really hunter, and I mean, there are really shining examples. There are bad apples shining examples. There are bad apples shining examples. There are bad apples out there, too, but I think people often out there, too, but I think people often out there, too, but I think people often have a certain stereotype of hunters, um have a certain stereotype of hunters, um have a certain stereotype of hunters, um you know, and yet most of those people you know, and yet most of those people you know, and yet most of those people also buy store-bought meat um also buy store-bought meat um also buy store-bought meat um from factory farms. And so, you know, from factory farms. And so, you know, from factory farms. And so, you know, and not to guilt anybody, but there's a and not to guilt anybody, but there's a and not to guilt anybody, but there's a lot more to explore there. So, I lot more to explore there. So, I lot more to explore there. So, I appreciate not just the appreciate not just the appreciate not just the description of the beautiful social description of the beautiful social description of the beautiful social interaction and what grew from it, but interaction and what grew from it, but interaction and what grew from it, but also the context. also the context. also the context. &gt;&gt; There's a level of caring. I mean, I &gt;&gt; There's a level of caring. I mean, I &gt;&gt; There's a level of caring. I mean, I care about the woodlands, and I try to care about the woodlands, and I try to care about the woodlands, and I try to protect it as best I can. Turns out the protect it as best I can. Turns out the protect it as best I can. Turns out the deer are kind of a threat. There's a lot deer are kind of a threat. There's a lot deer are kind of a threat. There's a lot of ecological damage that they that they of ecological damage that they that they of ecological damage that they that they cause in the woodlands in the Midwest cause in the woodlands in the Midwest cause in the woodlands in the Midwest because there's just a lot of them. It's because there's just a lot of them. It's because there's just a lot of them. It's a harvesting responsibly and a harvesting responsibly and a harvesting responsibly and respectfully. I only hunt with a respectfully. I only hunt with a respectfully. I only hunt with a crossbow now, for instance, because I crossbow now, for instance, because I crossbow now, for instance, because I can be much more accurate with it, and can be much more accurate with it, and can be much more accurate with it, and so I can take an animal ethically, and so I can take an animal ethically, and so I can take an animal ethically, and humanely, and quickly, and that's why humanely, and quickly, and that's why humanely, and quickly, and that's why I do that. So, most of the hunters why I do that. So, most of the hunters why I do that. So, most of the hunters that I've ever met are that way. They that I've ever met are that way. They that I've ever met are that way. They care about being outdoors. They like care about being outdoors. They like care about being outdoors. They like being with each other. Getting an animal being with each other. Getting an animal being with each other. Getting an animal is a different is part of it, but is not is a different is part of it, but is not is a different is part of it, but is not is not the main thing, and um yeah, I'm is not the main thing, and um yeah, I'm is not the main thing, and um yeah, I'm and I folks who don't hunt, I think and I folks who don't hunt, I think and I folks who don't hunt, I think don't appreciate that care don't appreciate that care don't appreciate that care that people have, outdoorsmen have for that people have, outdoorsmen have for that people have, outdoorsmen have for the outdoors. What a great uh lesson for the outdoors. What a great uh lesson for the outdoors. What a great uh lesson for your son. He's lucky to have you as a your son. He's lucky to have you as a your son. He's lucky to have you as a dad. I can say that. dad. I can say that. dad. I can say that. It's awesome. I was reflecting on a It's awesome. I was reflecting on a It's awesome. I was reflecting on a couple of things, which leads me to uh couple of things, which leads me to uh couple of things, which leads me to uh probably what is our the final question probably what is our the final question probably what is our the final question in a minute or two, but I was just in a minute or two, but I was just in a minute or two, but I was just sort of chuckling inside at one moment sort of chuckling inside at one moment sort of chuckling inside at one moment because as you're describing that, I'm because as you're describing that, I'm because as you're describing that, I'm thinking, "Okay, so my dad was a thinking, "Okay, so my dad was a thinking, "Okay, so my dad was a theoretical physicist, right? So, theoretical physicist, right? So, theoretical physicist, right? So, bringing me to work was a little bringing me to work was a little bringing me to work was a little different." I mean, we did a great many different." I mean, we did a great many different." I mean, we did a great many things together, but um but he things together, but um but he things together, but um but he realized and uh he's realized and uh he's realized and uh he's quite smart and he realized that quite smart and he realized that quite smart and he realized that showing me a bunch of equations on a showing me a bunch of equations on a showing me a bunch of equations on a whiteboard wasn't going to cut whiteboard wasn't going to cut whiteboard wasn't going to cut it. So I'll never forget it. So I'll never forget it. So I'll never forget he started off as an experimentalist and he started off as an experimentalist and he started off as an experimentalist and so my first like go to go to work with so my first like go to go to work with so my first like go to go to work with dad day was he took me to the lab and dad day was he took me to the lab and dad day was he took me to the lab and they had all these fruit out and a big they had all these fruit out and a big they had all these fruit out and a big tank of liquid nitrogen and we spent the tank of liquid nitrogen and we spent the tank of liquid nitrogen and we spent the day dipping bananas into liquid nitrogen day dipping bananas into liquid nitrogen day dipping bananas into liquid nitrogen smashing them on the walls which for smashing them on the walls which for smashing them on the walls which for like a 6-year-old kid was like pure joy. like a 6-year-old kid was like pure joy. like a 6-year-old kid was like pure joy. That's awesome thing. I went back to That's awesome thing. I went back to That's awesome thing. I went back to school telling all my friends that I school telling all my friends that I school telling all my friends that I could [laughter] shatter bananas and all could [laughter] shatter bananas and all could [laughter] shatter bananas and all this stuff. So wasn't quite what you this stuff. So wasn't quite what you this stuff. So wasn't quite what you described but I've fisherman on my described but I've fisherman on my described but I've fisherman on my mom's side and mom's side and mom's side and my girlfriend's family she's got a and my girlfriend's family she's got a and my girlfriend's family she's got a long line of hunters long line of hunters long line of hunters and farmers so I think they're going and farmers so I think they're going and farmers so I think they're going to put me to the test soon but to put me to the test soon but to put me to the test soon but &gt;&gt; Well, here's the parents doing great &gt;&gt; Well, here's the parents doing great &gt;&gt; Well, here's the parents doing great things with their kids. Well, and that's things with their kids. Well, and that's things with their kids. Well, and that's the question I was going to ask you the question I was going to ask you the question I was going to ask you know um know um know um not to uh not to uh not to uh in fact to do the opposite of in fact to do the opposite of in fact to do the opposite of trivialize um trivialize um trivialize um older generations teaching younger older generations teaching younger older generations teaching younger generations about what proper social generations about what proper social generations about what proper social interactions are. interactions are. interactions are. The other thing I was thinking The other thing I was thinking The other thing I was thinking during your story is that you know this during your story is that you know this during your story is that you know this is how is how is how social dynamics and learning occurs in our dynamics and learning occurs in our dynamics and learning occurs in our species. Like if species. Like if species. Like if that series that was on Netflix the that series that was on Netflix the that series that was on Netflix the chimp empire series did you watch it? chimp empire series did you watch it? chimp empire series did you watch it? Oh wow fascinating because it's all Oh wow fascinating because it's all Oh wow fascinating because it's all about social dynamics in chimps. about social dynamics in chimps. about social dynamics in chimps. Everything from covert gaze and Everything from covert gaze and Everything from covert gaze and they're brutal to each other. They they're brutal to each other. They they're brutal to each other. They ostracize they it's very intense ostracize they it's very intense ostracize they it's very intense and there's also a lot of beauty but and there's also a lot of beauty but and there's also a lot of beauty but it's not just a bunch of you know like it's not just a bunch of you know like it's not just a bunch of you know like happy chimps. It's it's intense happy chimps. It's it's intense happy chimps. It's it's intense warring between troops and so forth but warring between troops and so forth but warring between troops and so forth but it makes you think about our species it makes you think about our species it makes you think about our species right? And I'm raising a puppy right now right? And I'm raising a puppy right now right? And I'm raising a puppy right now and I was telling my girlfriend cuz and I was telling my girlfriend cuz and I was telling my girlfriend cuz she's not raised a puppy before. She's she's not raised a puppy before. She's she's not raised a puppy before. She's she's like better at it than I am she's like better at it than I am she's like better at it than I am already of course and I'm and I'm already of course and I'm and I'm already of course and I'm and I'm explained to her I said you know the explained to her I said you know the explained to her I said you know the fastest way to train Strummer our little fastest way to train Strummer our little fastest way to train Strummer our little bulldog mastiff would be to get an older bulldog mastiff would be to get an older bulldog mastiff would be to get an older dog Mhm. here we are like teaching at dog Mhm. here we are like teaching at dog Mhm. here we are like teaching at these human cues and trying to but we these human cues and trying to but we these human cues and trying to but we really need to get into the mindset of a really need to get into the mindset of a really need to get into the mindset of a dog and I only a dog can really do that. dog and I only a dog can really do that. dog and I only a dog can really do that. Like they're so nose led. They're Like they're so nose led. They're Like they're so nose led. They're they're great at sensing literally the they're great at sensing literally the they're great at sensing literally the autonomic tone of people around. the autonomic tone of people around. the autonomic tone of people around. They're sensitive to space. Here we are They're sensitive to space. Here we are They're sensitive to space. Here we are saying sit and stay and do it like Yeah. saying sit and stay and do it like Yeah. saying sit and stay and do it like Yeah. They hear it but like we're Yeah. They hear it but like we're Yeah. They hear it but like we're bringing them it'll be like us trying to bringing them it'll be like us trying to bringing them it'll be like us trying to learn how to use our noses to it to learn how to use our noses to it to learn how to use our noses to it to navigate. So navigate. So navigate. So it is a fact that within every species it is a fact that within every species it is a fact that within every species the older members of that species teach the older members of that species teach the older members of that species teach the younger members of that species how the younger members of that species how the younger members of that species how to socialize. And I could rattle off to socialize. And I could rattle off to socialize. And I could rattle off lots of examples from my own life but I lots of examples from my own life but I lots of examples from my own life but I won't where I observed won't where I observed won't where I observed &gt;&gt; Yes. my mom and dad doing certain things &gt;&gt; Yes. my mom and dad doing certain things &gt;&gt; Yes. my mom and dad doing certain things in certain situations. And so while on in certain situations. And so while on in certain situations. And so while on the one hand until now I feel like we've the one hand until now I feel like we've the one hand until now I feel like we've been talking to the kind of like the been talking to the kind of like the been talking to the kind of like the young listeners and stuff the parents of young listeners and stuff the parents of young listeners and stuff the parents of kids or the to be parents of kids or the kids or the to be parents of kids or the kids or the to be parents of kids or the siblings or the older or people who siblings or the older or people who siblings or the older or people who don't even have kids like modeling don't even have kids like modeling don't even have kids like modeling really good social interactions. really good social interactions. really good social interactions. I firmly believe based on everything we've firmly believe based on everything we've firmly believe based on everything we've talked about today that is every bit as talked about today that is every bit as talked about today that is every bit as critical as the person getting out there critical as the person getting out there critical as the person getting out there and pushing themselves past their and pushing themselves past their and pushing themselves past their anxiety to um to do the right things. anxiety to um to do the right things. anxiety to um to do the right things. What we need to model better What we need to model better What we need to model better everyday social interactions. And so everyday social interactions. And so everyday social interactions. And so it's clear you did that in this example it's clear you did that in this example it's clear you did that in this example and in other examples. So it any ideas and in other examples. So it any ideas and in other examples. So it any ideas off the top of your head as to the let's off the top of your head as to the let's off the top of your head as to the let's just call it like the uh the 40 and up just call it like the uh the 40 and up just call it like the uh the 40 and up crowd like it's all it's kind of on us crowd like it's all it's kind of on us crowd like it's all it's kind of on us to model really good social interactions to model really good social interactions to model really good social interactions because that's how just like Strummer because that's how just like Strummer because that's how just like Strummer would learn better from a dog would learn better from a dog would learn better from a dog learning from the internet is great but learning from the internet is great but learning from the internet is great but a lot of kids don't have Yeah. maybe a lot of kids don't have Yeah. maybe a lot of kids don't have Yeah. maybe they have a single parent or they're they have a single parent or they're they have a single parent or they're away from their parents or the ship away from their parents or the ship away from their parents or the ship passed or maybe mom or dad was passed or maybe mom or dad was passed or maybe mom or dad was kind of a nasty person unhappy person. kind of a nasty person unhappy person. kind of a nasty person unhappy person. Yeah. Or overly outgoing and it got them Yeah. Or overly outgoing and it got them Yeah. Or overly outgoing and it got them hurt. [clears throat] Like like so what hurt. [clears throat] Like like so what hurt. [clears throat] Like like so what do you recommend people do to model do you recommend people do to model do you recommend people do to model really good social interactions? really good social interactions? really good social interactions? &gt;&gt; So pay attention to your habits. That's &gt;&gt; So pay attention to your habits. That's &gt;&gt; So pay attention to your habits. That's the most important thing. It's those the most important thing. It's those the most important thing. It's those little moments and you know where I little moments and you know where I little moments and you know where I screw up I'm prone to a quick temper screw up I'm prone to a quick temper screw up I'm prone to a quick temper and where I've made I'm still have a I and where I've made I'm still have a I and where I've made I'm still have a I still have the college football player still have the college football player still have the college football player inside me. You like to hit things with inside me. You like to hit things with inside me. You like to hit things with your head? Well, I want to fix your head? Well, I want to fix your head? Well, I want to fix something, right? And so, if something's something, right? And so, if something's something, right? And so, if something's not going my way, I'll try to fix it in not going my way, I'll try to fix it in not going my way, I'll try to fix it in some way. And so, I still have that some way. And so, I still have that some way. And so, I still have that inside me from time to time, and I have inside me from time to time, and I have inside me from time to time, and I have to actively try to create habits that to actively try to create habits that to actively try to create habits that don't do that. So, you know, that don't do that. So, you know, that don't do that. So, you know, act get out of a situation if I'm act get out of a situation if I'm act get out of a situation if I'm getting frustrated rather than try to getting frustrated rather than try to getting frustrated rather than try to respond and correct it in that moment. respond and correct it in that moment. respond and correct it in that moment. But, those little habits, that's where But, those little habits, that's where But, those little habits, that's where it shows up. People are watching. People it shows up. People are watching. People it shows up. People are watching. People are watching you in those moments. Those are watching you in those moments. Those are watching you in those moments. Those little things that you think aren't that little things that you think aren't that little things that you think aren't that important are what folks are paying important are what folks are paying important are what folks are paying attention to. In our research, when I attention to. In our research, when I attention to. In our research, when I think about how you how you apply the think about how you how you apply the think about how you how you apply the stuff we're learning in our experiments stuff we're learning in our experiments stuff we're learning in our experiments of people being overly pessimistic about of people being overly pessimistic about of people being overly pessimistic about how others will respond to them, the way how others will respond to them, the way how others will respond to them, the way you apply that in your own life isn't you apply that in your own life isn't you apply that in your own life isn't that you learn how to behave differently that you learn how to behave differently that you learn how to behave differently from learning this is that you take that from learning this is that you take that from learning this is that you take that and you try to develop a little habit and you try to develop a little habit and you try to develop a little habit that then makes that something you do that then makes that something you do that then makes that something you do routinely over and over again. So, for routinely over and over again. So, for routinely over and over again. So, for instance, one a little thing that I have instance, one a little thing that I have instance, one a little thing that I have started doing with this routine little started doing with this routine little started doing with this routine little habit in mind is I've made a habit when habit in mind is I've made a habit when habit in mind is I've made a habit when I get into my office, and it's now I get into my office, and it's now I get into my office, and it's now expanded kind of beyond that, but I expanded kind of beyond that, but I expanded kind of beyond that, but I started at the office. I was realizing started at the office. I was realizing started at the office. I was realizing one day that when I get to the office one day that when I get to the office one day that when I get to the office where my where the door is to get into where my where the door is to get into where my where the door is to get into the building, I've got maybe, I don't the building, I've got maybe, I don't the building, I've got maybe, I don't know, 150-yd walk through the atrium know, 150-yd walk through the atrium know, 150-yd walk through the atrium in the middle of the building to the in the middle of the building to the in the middle of the building to the elevators up to the fourth floor, down elevators up to the fourth floor, down elevators up to the fourth floor, down my halls to my office. And I was usually my halls to my office. And I was usually my halls to my office. And I was usually making that walk with my head down, making that walk with my head down, making that walk with my head down, focused on getting to work as quickly, focused on getting to work as quickly, focused on getting to work as quickly, you know, as I could. And I was passing you know, as I could. And I was passing you know, as I could. And I was passing all these people by all these people by all these people by without saying hello or hi or whatever, without saying hello or hi or whatever, without saying hello or hi or whatever, and I was missing all these and I was missing all these and I was missing all these opportunities just to brighten my mood opportunities just to brighten my mood opportunities just to brighten my mood [snorts] a little bit there. [snorts] a little bit there. [snorts] a little bit there. And so, I started, you know, doing a And so, I started, you know, doing a And so, I started, you know, doing a little happiness walk, a little hello little happiness walk, a little hello little happiness walk, a little hello walk when I'd go from the door to my walk when I'd go from the door to my walk when I'd go from the door to my office. Where I Now, when I walk in, I office. Where I Now, when I walk in, I office. Where I Now, when I walk in, I keep my head up, and I smile and say keep my head up, and I smile and say keep my head up, and I smile and say hello to almost everybody I pass if I hello to almost everybody I pass if I hello to almost everybody I pass if I can, right? So, this last quarter, can, right? So, this last quarter, can, right? So, this last quarter, Nigel's been sitting right here to my Nigel's been sitting right here to my Nigel's been sitting right here to my right when I walk in at the table. And right when I walk in at the table. And right when I walk in at the table. And Keith, who's got the biggest smile in Keith, who's got the biggest smile in Keith, who's got the biggest smile in the building, one of our custodial the building, one of our custodial the building, one of our custodial staff, is delightful. Mario's usually staff, is delightful. Mario's usually staff, is delightful. Mario's usually somewhere around the second floor. I can somewhere around the second floor. I can somewhere around the second floor. I can give him a shout-out on the on the way give him a shout-out on the on the way give him a shout-out on the on the way in. Zaya's often around the elevator in. Zaya's often around the elevator in. Zaya's often around the elevator when I walk in. Eric, Virginia, Jane, when I walk in. Eric, Virginia, Jane, when I walk in. Eric, Virginia, Jane, Emma, Joe, my colleagues when I walk in, Emma, Joe, my colleagues when I walk in, Emma, Joe, my colleagues when I walk in, I give them a shout-out hello when I give them a shout-out hello when I give them a shout-out hello when I walk by their offices. And that [snorts] walk by their offices. And that [snorts] walk by their offices. And that [snorts] whole thing that just makes me a little whole thing that just makes me a little whole thing that just makes me a little brighter when I get to my office. And brighter when I get to my office. And brighter when I get to my office. And it's also created a habit that I now it's also created a habit that I now it's also created a habit that I now just do without thinking. Right? And just do without thinking. Right? And just do without thinking. Right? And those little moments that become part of those little moments that become part of those little moments that become part of who you are, that's what people see. And who you are, that's what people see. And who you are, that's what people see. And I think as a parent, if you can think I think as a parent, if you can think I think as a parent, if you can think about how can you cultivate those habits about how can you cultivate those habits about how can you cultivate those habits to do these things routinely cuz your to do these things routinely cuz your to do these things routinely cuz your kids are watching all the time, kids are watching all the time, kids are watching all the time, that's what's going to matter. I had a that's what's going to matter. I had a that's what's going to matter. I had a colleague one time, I thought this was colleague one time, I thought this was colleague one time, I thought this was very wise. He realized that he was very wise. He realized that he was very wise. He realized that he was sometimes swearing in class. And I sometimes swearing in class. And I sometimes swearing in class. And I sometimes I'm guilty of that, too. sometimes I'm guilty of that, too. sometimes I'm guilty of that, too. That's my college football player come That's my college football player come That's my college football player come out. I got to be careful. I try not to out. I got to be careful. I try not to out. I got to be careful. I try not to do that. But I had one colleague who was do that. But I had one colleague who was do that. But I had one colleague who was adamant, and this is really what got me adamant, and this is really what got me adamant, and this is really what got me started thinking about this years ago. started thinking about this years ago. started thinking about this years ago. Just you never slip up in class because Just you never slip up in class because Just you never slip up in class because when you do that there, people see that when you do that there, people see that when you do that there, people see that and they think that's who you are and they think that's who you are and they think that's who you are and what's appropriate in that context, and what's appropriate in that context, and what's appropriate in that context, and that's just not the way you want to be. that's just not the way you want to be. that's just not the way you want to be. So he's made a habit never doing So he's made a habit never doing So he's made a habit never doing that anywhere in any part of his life so that anywhere in any part of his life so that anywhere in any part of his life so that he also doesn't do it in class. I that he also doesn't do it in class. I that he also doesn't do it in class. I like the notion of classroom rules. It's like the notion of classroom rules. It's like the notion of classroom rules. It's actually the one of the only ways actually the one of the only ways actually the one of the only ways I've survived social media is I don't I've survived social media is I don't I've survived social media is I don't get into exchanges that I wouldn't get into exchanges that I wouldn't get into exchanges that I wouldn't get into in a in a classroom. into in a in a classroom. into in a in a classroom. I also don't honor the presence of I also don't honor the presence of I also don't honor the presence of comments. Uh people can say what they comments. Uh people can say what they comments. Uh people can say what they want about me uh to a point. Um you want about me uh to a point. Um you want about me uh to a point. Um you know, uh but know, uh but know, uh but when they start attacking each other, when they start attacking each other, when they start attacking each other, you know, I always think if I we were you know, I always think if I we were you know, I always think if I we were back in back in back in an undergraduate graduate or medical an undergraduate graduate or medical an undergraduate graduate or medical school classroom, I would never let this school classroom, I would never let this school classroom, I would never let this exchange occur. And and this is my exchange occur. And and this is my exchange occur. And and this is my website. So website. So website. So &gt;&gt; Yeah. Blocked. Right. You know, and &gt;&gt; Yeah. Blocked. Right. You know, and &gt;&gt; Yeah. Blocked. Right. You know, and people think, "Oh, you're blocking people think, "Oh, you're blocking people think, "Oh, you're blocking things. You're deleting them." It's like things. You're deleting them." It's like things. You're deleting them." It's like it's not to avoid criticism. It's like it's not to avoid criticism. It's like it's not to avoid criticism. It's like we're trying to keep a tone of education we're trying to keep a tone of education we're trying to keep a tone of education and respect. Yeah. Right? And and it and respect. Yeah. Right? And and it and respect. Yeah. Right? And and it can be heated, but so I fully uh can be heated, but so I fully uh can be heated, but so I fully uh appreciate what you just said. appreciate what you just said. appreciate what you just said. &gt;&gt; the key to that is that it's not a &gt;&gt; the key to that is that it's not a &gt;&gt; the key to that is that it's not a huge thing. It's a small thing that you huge thing. It's a small thing that you huge thing. It's a small thing that you do routinely and over and over again and do routinely and over and over again and do routinely and over and over again and that's those small habits are important that's those small habits are important that's those small habits are important to keep in mind. I've been told by some to keep in mind. I've been told by some to keep in mind. I've been told by some of the people that are regular kind of the people that are regular kind of the people that are regular kind of commenters and things that they feel commenters and things that they feel commenters and things that they feel safe to comment there, which tells me safe to comment there, which tells me safe to comment there, which tells me they feel unsafe to comment elsewhere. they feel unsafe to comment elsewhere. they feel unsafe to comment elsewhere. And the safe unsafe thing, I'm not And the safe unsafe thing, I'm not And the safe unsafe thing, I'm not trying to like use like snowflake trying to like use like snowflake trying to like use like snowflake language. I think like who wants to go language. I think like who wants to go language. I think like who wants to go online just for people to like be nasty, online just for people to like be nasty, online just for people to like be nasty, right? So there's a lot of goodness to right? So there's a lot of goodness to right? So there's a lot of goodness to be had by keeping classroom rules, I be had by keeping classroom rules, I be had by keeping classroom rules, I guess as Correct. Well, Nick, thank guess as Correct. Well, Nick, thank guess as Correct. Well, Nick, thank you so much for coming here today and you so much for coming here today and you so much for coming here today and sharing. I and sharing. I and sharing. I really appreciate you taking the time I really appreciate you taking the time I really appreciate you taking the time out of your schedule and out of your schedule and out of your schedule and I also really appreciate the work you I also really appreciate the work you I also really appreciate the work you do. Also, thank you for writing the do. Also, thank you for writing the do. Also, thank you for writing the book, &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; A Little More Social, How Small Choices &gt;&gt; A Little More Social, How Small Choices &gt;&gt; A Little More Social, How Small Choices Create Unexpected Happiness, Health, and Create Unexpected Happiness, Health, and Create Unexpected Happiness, Health, and Connection, which comes out very soon. Connection, which comes out very soon. Connection, which comes out very soon. Excited to read it. And and I have to Excited to read it. And and I have to Excited to read it. And and I have to say of all the guests we've ever had on say of all the guests we've ever had on say of all the guests we've ever had on this podcast, this podcast, this podcast, I think I think I think you represent the kind of extreme you represent the kind of extreme you represent the kind of extreme example of somebody whose work has example of somebody whose work has example of somebody whose work has informed their life and life has informed their life and life has informed their life and life has informed their work. And that's somewhat informed their work. And that's somewhat informed their work. And that's somewhat straightforward to do straightforward to do straightforward to do when always makes for kind of the when always makes for kind of the when always makes for kind of the easier, better, obvious choice. Like, easier, better, obvious choice. Like, easier, better, obvious choice. Like, "Oh, I did research, discovered, you "Oh, I did research, discovered, you "Oh, I did research, discovered, you know, the this style of cardiovascular know, the this style of cardiovascular know, the this style of cardiovascular exercise is better than that one. I'm exercise is better than that one. I'm exercise is better than that one. I'm going to do that one." But as you going to do that one." But as you going to do that one." But as you pointed out, it's brought many, many pointed out, it's brought many, many pointed out, it's brought many, many rewards than it has uh challenges, but rewards than it has uh challenges, but rewards than it has uh challenges, but in your case, your sensitivity to the in your case, your sensitivity to the in your case, your sensitivity to the theme of your work, which is the theme of your work, which is the theme of your work, which is that there's goodness and that there's goodness and that there's goodness and untapped beauty to be had in the in the untapped beauty to be had in the in the untapped beauty to be had in the in the spaces that we don't reflexively step spaces that we don't reflexively step spaces that we don't reflexively step into. And that maybe even we initially into. And that maybe even we initially into. And that maybe even we initially are a little averse to. are a little averse to. are a little averse to. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That that's where the real &gt;&gt; Yeah. That that's where the real &gt;&gt; Yeah. That that's where the real magic often lies, and you apply it in magic often lies, and you apply it in magic often lies, and you apply it in your own life in the realest your own life in the realest your own life in the realest [clears throat] of ways, and you [clears throat] of ways, and you [clears throat] of ways, and you benefit, too. And that's the whole benefit, too. And that's the whole benefit, too. And that's the whole point. So, thank you for being point. So, thank you for being point. So, thank you for being both a scholar and a shining example of both a scholar and a shining example of both a scholar and a shining example of what you've taught us today. Thank of what you've taught us today. Thank of what you've taught us today. Thank you so much, Andrew. It's been wonderful you so much, Andrew. It's been wonderful you so much, Andrew. It's been wonderful being here. I really appreciate it. And being here. I really appreciate it. And being here. I really appreciate it. And we'll come back again. Thank you. I we'll come back again. Thank you. I we'll come back again. Thank you. I would love to. Thank you for joining me would love to. Thank you for joining me would love to. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Nick for today's discussion with Dr. Nick for today's discussion with Dr. Nick Epley. To learn more about his work and Epley. To learn more about his work and Epley. To learn more about his work and to find a link to his new book entitled to find a link to his new book entitled to find a link to his new book entitled A Little More Social, How Small Choices A Little More Social, How Small Choices A Little More Social, How Small Choices Create Unexpected Happiness, Health, and Create Unexpected Happiness, Health, and Create Unexpected Happiness, Health, and Connection, please see the links in the Connection, please see the links in the Connection, please see the links in the show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, from and/or enjoying this podcast, from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to That's a terrific zero-cost way to That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can up to a five-star review. And you can up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, An Operating It's entitled Protocols, An Operating It's entitled Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Protocols, An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one-to-three protocols in the form of one-to-three protocols in the form of one-to-three page PDFs that cover everything from how page PDFs that cover everything from how page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize to optimize your sleep, how to optimize to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, the menu simply go to hubermanlab.com, the menu simply go to hubermanlab.com, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down tab in the top right corner, scroll down tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And to newsletter, and enter your email. And to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share I should emphasize that we do not share I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once your email with anybody. Thank you once your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's again for joining me for today's again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Nick Epley. And discussion with Dr. Nick Epley. And discussion with Dr. Nick Epley. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for [music] your interest in science.