Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, I have the pleasure of Today, I have the pleasure of Today, I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Robert Sapolsky. introducing Dr. Robert Sapolsky. introducing Dr. Robert Sapolsky. Dr. Sapolsky is a professor of biology Dr. Sapolsky is a professor of biology Dr. Sapolsky is a professor of biology and neurosurgery at Stanford University. and neurosurgery at Stanford University. and neurosurgery at Stanford University. His laboratory has worked on a large His laboratory has worked on a large His laboratory has worked on a large variety of topics, including stress, variety of topics, including stress, variety of topics, including stress, hormones, including testosterone and hormones, including testosterone and hormones, including testosterone and estrogen, and how the different members estrogen, and how the different members estrogen, and how the different members of a given species interact according to of a given species interact according to of a given species interact according to factors like hormones, hierarchy within factors like hormones, hierarchy within factors like hormones, hierarchy within primate troops, and how things like primate troops, and how things like primate troops, and how things like stress, reproduction, and competition stress, reproduction, and competition stress, reproduction, and competition impact behavior. impact behavior. impact behavior. One of the things that makes Dr. One of the things that makes Dr. One of the things that makes Dr. Sapolsky's work so unique is that it Sapolsky's work so unique is that it Sapolsky's work so unique is that it combines elements from primatology, combines elements from primatology, combines elements from primatology, including field studies, including field studies, including field studies, with human behavior. In essence, trying with human behavior. In essence, trying with human behavior. In essence, trying to unveil how humans, as old-world to unveil how humans, as old-world to unveil how humans, as old-world primates, are controlled by different elements of are controlled by different elements of are controlled by different elements of our biology as well as our psychology. our biology as well as our psychology. our biology as well as our psychology. Dr. Sapolsky is also a prolific author Dr. Sapolsky is also a prolific author Dr. Sapolsky is also a prolific author of popular books, of popular books, of popular books, such as Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers, The such as Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers, The such as Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers, The Trouble with Testosterone, and Behave: Trouble with Testosterone, and Behave: Trouble with Testosterone, and Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and The Biology of Humans at Our Best and The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst. During the course of our Worst. During the course of our Worst. During the course of our discussion today, Robert also revealed discussion today, Robert also revealed discussion today, Robert also revealed to me that he is close to completing a to me that he is close to completing a to me that he is close to completing a new book entitled Determined: The new book entitled Determined: The new book entitled Determined: The Science of Life Without Free Will. And Science of Life Without Free Will. And Science of Life Without Free Will. And indeed, we discuss the science of life indeed, we discuss the science of life indeed, we discuss the science of life without free will during this episode. without free will during this episode. without free will during this episode. We also discuss stress and how best to We also discuss stress and how best to We also discuss stress and how best to control stress and how stress controls control stress and how stress controls control stress and how stress controls us at both conscious and subconscious us at both conscious and subconscious us at both conscious and subconscious levels. We talk about testosterone and estrogen We talk about testosterone and estrogen We talk about testosterone and estrogen and hormone replacement therapy and how and hormone replacement therapy and how and hormone replacement therapy and how those impact our mind, our psychology, those impact our mind, our psychology, those impact our mind, our psychology, and our interactions with others. and our interactions with others. and our interactions with others. As with any discussion with Dr. As with any discussion with Dr. As with any discussion with Dr. Sapolsky, we learn about scientific Sapolsky, we learn about scientific Sapolsky, we learn about scientific mechanisms that make us who we are. And mechanisms that make us who we are. And mechanisms that make us who we are. And today, we also discuss tools and how today, we also discuss tools and how today, we also discuss tools and how can leverage those scientific mechanisms can leverage those scientific mechanisms can leverage those scientific mechanisms in order to be better versions of in order to be better versions of in order to be better versions of ourselves. I should mention that unlike most guest I should mention that unlike most guest I should mention that unlike most guest interviews on the Huberman Lab podcast, interviews on the Huberman Lab podcast, interviews on the Huberman Lab podcast, this one had to be carried out remotely this one had to be carried out remotely this one had to be carried out remotely due to various constraints. So, you may due to various constraints. So, you may due to various constraints. So, you may hear the occasional audio artifact. hear the occasional audio artifact. hear the occasional audio artifact. Please excuse that. We felt that the Please excuse that. We felt that the Please excuse that. We felt that the value of a conversation with Dr. value of a conversation with Dr. value of a conversation with Dr. Sapolsky was well worth those minor Sapolsky was well worth those minor Sapolsky was well worth those minor glitches. And indeed, the minor glitches. And indeed, the minor glitches. And indeed, the information that he delivers us is information that he delivers us is information that he delivers us is tremendously valuable, interesting, and tremendously valuable, interesting, and tremendously valuable, interesting, and in many cases actionable as well. Before in many cases actionable as well. Before in many cases actionable as well. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The of the absolute highest quality. The of the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American company was founded by two All-American company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything swimmers from Stanford, and everything swimmers from Stanford, and everything about the design of the sunglasses and about the design of the sunglasses and about the design of the sunglasses and eyeglasses was created with performance eyeglasses was created with performance eyeglasses was created with performance in mind. in mind. in mind. There are several things I like about There are several things I like about There are several things I like about Roka glasses so much. One of them is Roka glasses so much. One of them is Roka glasses so much. One of them is that the aesthetic of the glasses is that the aesthetic of the glasses is that the aesthetic of the glasses is great. Unlike a lot of performance great. Unlike a lot of performance great. Unlike a lot of performance glasses out there that you can wear glasses out there that you can wear glasses out there that you can wear while swimming and running, but also while swimming and running, but also while swimming and running, but also indoors, these glasses don't make you indoors, these glasses don't make you indoors, these glasses don't make you look like a cyborg. The aesthetic of look like a cyborg. The aesthetic of look like a cyborg. The aesthetic of them is really terrific, and they have a them is really terrific, and they have a them is really terrific, and they have a lot of different styles to select from. lot of different styles to select from. lot of different styles to select from. In addition to that, the quality of the In addition to that, the quality of the In addition to that, the quality of the lenses on both the sunglasses and lenses on both the sunglasses and lenses on both the sunglasses and eyeglasses are superb. The optical eyeglasses are superb. The optical eyeglasses are superb. The optical clarity is great. You can move from clarity is great. You can move from clarity is great. You can move from brightly lit areas to shadowed areas, brightly lit areas to shadowed areas, brightly lit areas to shadowed areas, and you don't get any degradation in the and you don't get any degradation in the and you don't get any degradation in the quality of the visual image, and that's quality of the visual image, and that's quality of the visual image, and that's absolutely essential. absolutely essential. absolutely essential. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to roka.com and enter the code can go to roka.com and enter the code can go to roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first Huberman to save 20% off your first Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's r o k a.com and enter the order. That's r o k a.com and enter the order. That's r o k a.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's code Huberman at checkout. Today's code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by podcast is also brought to us by podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. reach your health goals. reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done. And now with regular blood work done. And now with regular blood work done. And now with the advent of quality DNA tests, you can the advent of quality DNA tests, you can the advent of quality DNA tests, you can get a lot of information about your get a lot of information about your get a lot of information about your genetics and how that also impacts your genetics and how that also impacts your genetics and how that also impacts your immediate and long-term health. The immediate and long-term health. The immediate and long-term health. The reason I'm such a fan of getting blood reason I'm such a fan of getting blood reason I'm such a fan of getting blood work done is that it is really the only work done is that it is really the only work done is that it is really the only way to understand what's going on in way to understand what's going on in way to understand what's going on in your system at a level that can really your system at a level that can really your system at a level that can really inform your decisions about your inform your decisions about your inform your decisions about your immediate and long-term health. The immediate and long-term health. The immediate and long-term health. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA problem with a lot of blood and DNA problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests, however, is that you get numbers tests, however, is that you get numbers tests, however, is that you get numbers back about your hormones and your back about your hormones and your back about your hormones and your metabolic factors, etc., but you don't metabolic factors, etc., but you don't metabolic factors, etc., but you don't know what to do with that information. know what to do with that information. know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they have a very With InsideTracker, they have a very With InsideTracker, they have a very easy-to-use dashboard that gives you easy-to-use dashboard that gives you easy-to-use dashboard that gives you that information and then gives you some that information and then gives you some that information and then gives you some suggestions and directives about things suggestions and directives about things suggestions and directives about things you could change about your nutrition, you could change about your nutrition, you could change about your nutrition, about your exercise, and other lifestyle about your exercise, and other lifestyle about your exercise, and other lifestyle factors that can help you move those factors that can help you move those factors that can help you move those numbers in the direction that's best for numbers in the direction that's best for numbers in the direction that's best for you and for your health. you and for your health. you and for your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at plans. Just use the code Huberman at plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also checkout. Today's podcast is also checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Belcampo. Belcampo is a brought to us by Belcampo. Belcampo is a brought to us by Belcampo. Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California regenerative farm in Northern California regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic, grass-fed, and that raises organic, grass-fed, and that raises organic, grass-fed, and finished, certified humane meats. finished, certified humane meats. finished, certified humane meats. I eat meat about once a day. In general, I eat meat about once a day. In general, I eat meat about once a day. In general, my lunch or my breakfast consists of my lunch or my breakfast consists of my lunch or my breakfast consists of some meat, and that meat has to be a some meat, and that meat has to be a some meat, and that meat has to be a very high quality, and generally I'll very high quality, and generally I'll very high quality, and generally I'll eat some vegetable as well. And then I eat some vegetable as well. And then I eat some vegetable as well. And then I tend to eat pastas and rice and things tend to eat pastas and rice and things tend to eat pastas and rice and things of that sort later in the day or in the of that sort later in the day or in the of that sort later in the day or in the evening in order to facilitate the evening in order to facilitate the evening in order to facilitate the transition to sleep. So, I'm eating meat transition to sleep. So, I'm eating meat transition to sleep. So, I'm eating meat about once a day. And I always insist about once a day. And I always insist about once a day. And I always insist that the meat that I eat be of the very that the meat that I eat be of the very that the meat that I eat be of the very highest quality and that the animals highest quality and that the animals highest quality and that the animals were raised and maintained humanely. were raised and maintained humanely. were raised and maintained humanely. While conventionally raised animals are While conventionally raised animals are While conventionally raised animals are confined to feedlots and eat a diet of confined to feedlots and eat a diet of confined to feedlots and eat a diet of inflammatory grains, Belcampo's animals inflammatory grains, Belcampo's animals inflammatory grains, Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures and seasonal graze on open pastures and seasonal graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, resulting in meat that's higher grasses, resulting in meat that's higher grasses, resulting in meat that's higher in nutrients and healthy fats. in nutrients and healthy fats. in nutrients and healthy fats. In addition, they raise their animals in In addition, they raise their animals in In addition, they raise their animals in a way that's not just better for our a way that's not just better for our a way that's not just better for our health, but also has a positive impact health, but also has a positive impact health, but also has a positive impact on the environment. They practice on the environment. They practice on the environment. They practice regenerative agriculture, which means regenerative agriculture, which means regenerative agriculture, which means the meat is climate positive and carbon the meat is climate positive and carbon the meat is climate positive and carbon negative. So, you can feel good about negative. So, you can feel good about negative. So, you can feel good about what you're eating at the environmental what you're eating at the environmental what you're eating at the environmental level and for sake of your health. You level and for sake of your health. You level and for sake of your health. You can order Belcampo's sustainably raised can order Belcampo's sustainably raised can order Belcampo's sustainably raised meats to be delivered to you by using my meats to be delivered to you by using my meats to be delivered to you by using my code Huberman at belcampo.com/huberman code Huberman at belcampo.com/huberman code Huberman at belcampo.com/huberman and entering my code Huberman to get 20% and entering my code Huberman to get 20% and entering my code Huberman to get 20% off your first-time order. off your first-time order. off your first-time order. I'm partial to the ribeyes or the New I'm partial to the ribeyes or the New I'm partial to the ribeyes or the New York steaks. So, on one day I might have York steaks. So, on one day I might have York steaks. So, on one day I might have a ribeye, the next day I might have a ribeye, the next day I might have a ribeye, the next day I might have a New York steak. I also really like the New York steak. I also really like the New York steak. I also really like the meatballs. I'm a particular fan of the meatballs. I'm a particular fan of the meatballs. I'm a particular fan of the meatballs. So, again, that's meatballs. So, again, that's meatballs. So, again, that's belcampo.com/huberman and enter the code Huberman at checkout and enter the code Huberman at checkout and enter the code Huberman at checkout to get 20% off your order. And now, to get 20% off your order. And now, to get 20% off your order. And now, without further ado, my conversation without further ado, my conversation without further ado, my conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. Great. Well, thank you so much, Robert, Great. Well, thank you so much, Robert, Great. Well, thank you so much, Robert, for joining us today. I've been looking for joining us today. I've been looking for joining us today. I've been looking forward to this for a very long time. I forward to this for a very long time. I forward to this for a very long time. I appreciate it. Likewise. Glad to be appreciate it. Likewise. Glad to be appreciate it. Likewise. Glad to be here. There's an enormous range of topics that we an enormous range of topics that we an enormous range of topics that we could uh drill into, but just to start off, I uh drill into, but just to start off, I uh drill into, but just to start off, I want to return to a topic that is near want to return to a topic that is near want to return to a topic that is near and dear to your heart, which is stress. and dear to your heart, which is stress. and dear to your heart, which is stress. And one of the questions that I get most And one of the questions that I get most And one of the questions that I get most commonly is commonly is commonly is what is the difference between short and what is the difference between short and what is the difference between short and long-term stress in terms of their long-term stress in terms of their long-term stress in terms of their benefits and their drawbacks. And the benefits and their drawbacks. And the benefits and their drawbacks. And the reason I say benefits is that reason I say benefits is that reason I say benefits is that obviously stress and the stress response obviously stress and the stress response obviously stress and the stress response can keep us alive, but can keep us alive, but can keep us alive, but stress, of course, can also sharpen our stress, of course, can also sharpen our stress, of course, can also sharpen our mental acuity and things of that sort. mental acuity and things of that sort. mental acuity and things of that sort. So, how should we conceptualize stress So, how should we conceptualize stress So, how should we conceptualize stress and how should we conceptualize stress and how should we conceptualize stress and how should we conceptualize stress in the short-term and in the long-term? in the short-term and in the long-term? in the short-term and in the long-term? Well, basically sort of two graphs that one basically sort of two graphs that one basically sort of two graphs that one would draw. The first one is just would draw. The first one is just would draw. The first one is just all sorts of beneficial effects of all sorts of beneficial effects of all sorts of beneficial effects of stress short-term. And then, once we get stress short-term. And then, once we get stress short-term. And then, once we get into chronicity, it's just downhill from into chronicity, it's just downhill from into chronicity, it's just downhill from there. Short-term because it saves you there. Short-term because it saves you there. Short-term because it saves you from the predator. Short-term because from the predator. Short-term because from the predator. Short-term because you're giving a presentation and you you're giving a presentation and you you're giving a presentation and you think more clearly or your focus is think more clearly or your focus is think more clearly or your focus is better all sorts of aspects of that. Um better all sorts of aspects of that. Um better all sorts of aspects of that. Um and what then winds up being an argument and what then winds up being an argument and what then winds up being an argument is how long does it take to go from is how long does it take to go from is how long does it take to go from short-term to long-term? short-term to long-term? short-term to long-term? And you know, that's somewhat arbitrary but you know, that's somewhat arbitrary but you know, that's somewhat arbitrary but the sorts of chronic stressors that most the sorts of chronic stressors that most the sorts of chronic stressors that most people deal with are just undeniably in people deal with are just undeniably in people deal with are just undeniably in the chronic range like having spent the chronic range like having spent the chronic range like having spent the last 20 years daily traffic jams or last 20 years daily traffic jams or last 20 years daily traffic jams or abusive boss or some such thing. abusive boss or some such thing. abusive boss or some such thing. Um the other curve that's sort of Um the other curve that's sort of Um the other curve that's sort of perpendicular to this is dealing with perpendicular to this is dealing with perpendicular to this is dealing with the fact that sometimes stress is a the fact that sometimes stress is a the fact that sometimes stress is a great thing. Um like our goal is not to great thing. Um like our goal is not to great thing. Um like our goal is not to cure people of stress um because if it's cure people of stress um because if it's cure people of stress um because if it's the right kind, we love it. We we pay the right kind, we love it. We we pay the right kind, we love it. We we pay good money to be stressed that way by a good money to be stressed that way by a good money to be stressed that way by a scary movie or roller coaster ride. Um scary movie or roller coaster ride. Um scary movie or roller coaster ride. Um what you wind up seeing is when it's the what you wind up seeing is when it's the what you wind up seeing is when it's the right amount of stress right amount of stress right amount of stress it's what we call stimulation. it's what we call stimulation. it's what we call stimulation. And the basic curve there is here's an And the basic curve there is here's an And the basic curve there is here's an optimal level of stimulation and too optimal level of stimulation and too optimal level of stimulation and too little and function goes down with what little and function goes down with what little and function goes down with what we would call boredom and too much and we would call boredom and too much and we would call boredom and too much and function goes down with what we would function goes down with what we would function goes down with what we would call stress. And the optimum is what all call stress. And the optimum is what all call stress. And the optimum is what all of us aim for. of us aim for. of us aim for. In terms of the benefits of stress in In terms of the benefits of stress in In terms of the benefits of stress in the short term, uh the short term, uh the short term, uh one thing that's really striking to me one thing that's really striking to me one thing that's really striking to me is how the physiologically how the physiologically how the physiologically the stress response looks so much like the stress response looks so much like the stress response looks so much like the excitement response to a positive the excitement response to a positive the excitement response to a positive event. And we can speculate that the event. And we can speculate that the event. And we can speculate that the that the fundamental difference between that the fundamental difference between that the fundamental difference between short-term stress and short-term stress and short-term stress and short-term excitement is some neuromodulator like excitement is some neuromodulator like excitement is some neuromodulator like dopamine or something like that. But, is dopamine or something like that. But, is dopamine or something like that. But, is there anything else that we know about there anything else that we know about there anything else that we know about the biology that reveals to us, you the biology that reveals to us, you the biology that reveals to us, you know, what really creates this know, what really creates this know, what really creates this thing we call valence that an experience thing we call valence that an experience thing we call valence that an experience can be terrible can be terrible can be terrible or feel awful or it can feel wonderful, or feel awful or it can feel wonderful, or feel awful or it can feel wonderful, exhilarating, depending on this somewhat exhilarating, depending on this somewhat exhilarating, depending on this somewhat subjective feature we call valence. What subjective feature we call valence. What subjective feature we call valence. What Do we know what valence is or where it Do we know what valence is or where it Do we know what valence is or where it resides? Um on a really mechanical level, on a really mechanical level, on a really mechanical level, um if you're in a circumstance that is um if you're in a circumstance that is um if you're in a circumstance that is requiring that your heart races and your requiring that your heart races and your requiring that your heart races and your breathing is fast and you're using your breathing is fast and you're using your breathing is fast and you're using your muscles and some such thing, um your muscles and some such thing, um your muscles and some such thing, um you're going to be having roughly the you're going to be having roughly the you're going to be having roughly the same brain activation profile whether same brain activation profile whether same brain activation profile whether this is for something wonderful or this is for something wonderful or this is for something wonderful or something terrible, with the one something terrible, with the one something terrible, with the one exception being that if the amygdala is exception being that if the amygdala is exception being that if the amygdala is part of the activation, part of the activation, part of the activation, this is something that's going to be this is something that's going to be this is something that's going to be counted as adverse. Um whether that's counted as adverse. Um whether that's counted as adverse. Um whether that's the circumstance, an adverse the circumstance, an adverse the circumstance, an adverse circumstance, recruiting the amygdala circumstance, recruiting the amygdala circumstance, recruiting the amygdala into it and how much it's the amygdala into it and how much it's the amygdala into it and how much it's the amygdala being involved biases you towards, you being involved biases you towards, you being involved biases you towards, you know, interpreting it as even more know, interpreting it as even more know, interpreting it as even more awful. The amygdala in some ways is kind awful. The amygdala in some ways is kind awful. The amygdala in some ways is kind of the checkpoint as to whether we're of the checkpoint as to whether we're of the checkpoint as to whether we're talking about excitement or terror. talking about excitement or terror. talking about excitement or terror. Let's use the amygdala as a transition Let's use the amygdala as a transition Let's use the amygdala as a transition point to another topic that you've spent point to another topic that you've spent point to another topic that you've spent uh many years working on and thinking uh many years working on and thinking uh many years working on and thinking about, which is testosterone and other about, which is testosterone and other about, which is testosterone and other sex steroid hormones. sex steroid hormones. sex steroid hormones. I heard you say once before that I heard you say once before that I heard you say once before that um among all the brain areas that bind um among all the brain areas that bind um among all the brain areas that bind testosterone, that you know, where testosterone, that you know, where testosterone, that you know, where testosterone can park and create testosterone can park and create testosterone can park and create effects, that the amygdala is among the effects, that the amygdala is among the effects, that the amygdala is among the uh the most chock-a-block full of the uh the most chock-a-block full of the uh the most chock-a-block full of these parking spots, these receptors. these parking spots, these receptors. these parking spots, these receptors. Uh I realize there's a lot Uh I realize there's a lot Uh I realize there's a lot here, but how should we think about the here, but how should we think about the here, but how should we think about the role of testosterone in the amygdala role of testosterone in the amygdala role of testosterone in the amygdala given that the engagement of the given that the engagement of the given that the engagement of the amygdala is fundamental in this amygdala is fundamental in this amygdala is fundamental in this transition point between a exhilarating transition point between a exhilarating transition point between a exhilarating positive response and a positive response and a positive response and a and a negative stressful response. Or and a negative stressful response. Or and a negative stressful response. Or maybe you just broadly, how should we maybe you just broadly, how should we maybe you just broadly, how should we think about testosterone and its effects think about testosterone and its effects think about testosterone and its effects on the brain? on the brain? on the brain? And pertinent to the transition from And pertinent to the transition from And pertinent to the transition from whether this is a stressor that's whether this is a stressor that's whether this is a stressor that's evoking fear or evoking aggression evoking fear or evoking aggression evoking fear or evoking aggression in terms of that continuum also because in terms of that continuum also because in terms of that continuum also because the amygdala is in the center of all the amygdala is in the center of all the amygdala is in the center of all four points on those axes. four points on those axes. four points on those axes. Um, basically, Um, basically, Um, basically, um, almost everybody out there has a um, almost everybody out there has a um, almost everybody out there has a completely wrong idea as to what completely wrong idea as to what completely wrong idea as to what testosterone does, which is testosterone does, which is testosterone does, which is testosterone makes you aggressive because males makes you aggressive because males makes you aggressive because males virtually every species out there have virtually every species out there have virtually every species out there have more testosterone and are more testosterone and are more testosterone and are more aggressive and seasonal maters have aggressive and seasonal maters have aggressive and seasonal maters have testosterone surging at the time of year testosterone surging at the time of year testosterone surging at the time of year they're punching it out over territory they're punching it out over territory they're punching it out over territory and you take testosterone out of the and you take testosterone out of the and you take testosterone out of the picture, you castrate any mammal out picture, you castrate any mammal out picture, you castrate any mammal out there including us and levels of there including us and levels of there including us and levels of aggression will go down. aggression will go down. aggression will go down. And the easy thing then tends to include And the easy thing then tends to include And the easy thing then tends to include to conclude that testosterone causes to conclude that testosterone causes to conclude that testosterone causes aggression. And the reality is testosterone does no And the reality is testosterone does no And the reality is testosterone does no such thing. It doesn't cause aggression. such thing. It doesn't cause aggression. such thing. It doesn't cause aggression. And you can see this both behaviorally And you can see this both behaviorally And you can see this both behaviorally and in the amygdala. What does and in the amygdala. What does and in the amygdala. What does testosterone do? It lowers the threshold testosterone do? It lowers the threshold testosterone do? It lowers the threshold for the sort of things that would for the sort of things that would for the sort of things that would normally provoke you into being normally provoke you into being normally provoke you into being aggressive so that it happens more aggressive so that it happens more aggressive so that it happens more easily. It makes systems that are already turned It makes systems that are already turned It makes systems that are already turned on turn on louder rather than turning on turn on louder rather than turning on turn on louder rather than turning on aggressive music or some such thing. aggressive music or some such thing. aggressive music or some such thing. What does that look like behaviorally? What does that look like behaviorally? What does that look like behaviorally? You take five male monkeys, put them You take five male monkeys, put them You take five male monkeys, put them together, and they form a dominance together, and they form a dominance together, and they form a dominance hierarchy. Uh number one is great, number five is Uh number one is great, number five is Uh number one is great, number five is miserable, number three is right in miserable, number three is right in miserable, number three is right in between. Now, take number three and between. Now, take number three and between. Now, take number three and shoot the guy up with tons of shoot the guy up with tons of shoot the guy up with tons of testosterone, and he's going to be testosterone, and he's going to be testosterone, and he's going to be involved in more fights. Aha, involved in more fights. Aha, involved in more fights. Aha, testosterone uniformly causes testosterone uniformly causes testosterone uniformly causes aggression. But you look closely, and aggression. But you look closely, and aggression. But you look closely, and there's a pattern to it. Is number three there's a pattern to it. Is number three there's a pattern to it. Is number three now challenging numbers two and one for now challenging numbers two and one for now challenging numbers two and one for their place higher? Absolutely not. He their place higher? Absolutely not. He their place higher? Absolutely not. He is brown-nosing them exactly as much as is brown-nosing them exactly as much as is brown-nosing them exactly as much as he used to. What's going on is he's just he used to. What's going on is he's just he used to. What's going on is he's just a miserable terror to poor number four a miserable terror to poor number four a miserable terror to poor number four and five. and five. and five. And in that case, what testosterone is And in that case, what testosterone is And in that case, what testosterone is doing is amplifying the pre-existing doing is amplifying the pre-existing doing is amplifying the pre-existing patterns of aggression. patterns of aggression. patterns of aggression. Amplifying the social learning that's Amplifying the social learning that's Amplifying the social learning that's already gone into it. already gone into it. already gone into it. Now, on sort of the more reductive Now, on sort of the more reductive Now, on sort of the more reductive level, so how does that translate into level, so how does that translate into level, so how does that translate into the amygdala? Does testosterone make the amygdala? Does testosterone make the amygdala? Does testosterone make amygdaloid neurons have action amygdaloid neurons have action amygdaloid neurons have action potentials? Does it cause those neurons potentials? Does it cause those neurons potentials? Does it cause those neurons to suddenly speak to suddenly speak to suddenly speak about fear and aggression spontaneously? about fear and aggression spontaneously? about fear and aggression spontaneously? Absolutely not. What they do is, if the Absolutely not. What they do is, if the Absolutely not. What they do is, if the amygdala is already being stimulated, it amygdala is already being stimulated, it amygdala is already being stimulated, it increases the rate of neuronal firing. increases the rate of neuronal firing. increases the rate of neuronal firing. And what it was worth, it did shortens And what it was worth, it did shortens And what it was worth, it did shortens after hyperpolarizations. after hyperpolarizations. after hyperpolarizations. So, the theme there exactly is it's not So, the theme there exactly is it's not So, the theme there exactly is it's not creating aggression, it's just upping creating aggression, it's just upping creating aggression, it's just upping the volume of whatever aggression is the volume of whatever aggression is the volume of whatever aggression is already there. already there. already there. And once you factor that in, And once you factor that in, And once you factor that in, you know, it's impossible to say you know, it's impossible to say you know, it's impossible to say anything about what testosterone does anything about what testosterone does anything about what testosterone does outside the context of what outside the context of what outside the context of what testosterone-related behaviors, testosterone-related behaviors, testosterone-related behaviors, how they get treated in your how they get treated in your how they get treated in your in your social setting. Mhm. Yeah, and in your social setting. Mhm. Yeah, and in your social setting. Mhm. Yeah, and in terms of uh in terms of uh in terms of uh status and the relationship between status and the relationship between status and the relationship between individuals, either non-human primates individuals, either non-human primates individuals, either non-human primates or humans, or humans, or humans, uh can we say that testosterone and uh can we say that testosterone and uh can we say that testosterone and levels of testosterone or I should say levels of testosterone or I should say levels of testosterone or I should say can we say that relative levels of can we say that relative levels of can we say that relative levels of testosterone between individuals is testosterone between individuals is testosterone between individuals is correlated to status within the correlated to status within the correlated to status within the hierarchy? Um yes, but in a way that winds up being Um yes, but in a way that winds up being Um yes, but in a way that winds up being totally uninteresting. totally uninteresting. totally uninteresting. Um like you go back, I don't know, Um like you go back, I don't know, Um like you go back, I don't know, whatever number of decades to whatever number of decades to whatever number of decades to endocrinology texts, and there were two endocrinology texts, and there were two endocrinology texts, and there were two totally reliable findings in there. totally reliable findings in there. totally reliable findings in there. Let's see, I have a picture of a dog in Let's see, I have a picture of a dog in Let's see, I have a picture of a dog in here that's so good. here that's so good. here that's so good. we like dogs at the Huberman Lab we like dogs at the Huberman Lab we like dogs at the Huberman Lab Podcast. Oh good, he's jingling a Podcast. Oh good, he's jingling a Podcast. Oh good, he's jingling a bit. Um They are welcome. They are bit. Um They are welcome. They are bit. Um They are welcome. They are absolutely welcome. Yeah. Um and there'd absolutely welcome. Yeah. Um and there'd absolutely welcome. Yeah. Um and there'd be two truisms, which is higher levels be two truisms, which is higher levels be two truisms, which is higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of aggression in humans and other animals. Higher in humans and other animals. Higher in humans and other animals. Higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of sexual activity. Whoa, levels of sexual activity. Whoa, levels of sexual activity. Whoa, testosterone causing both, and the testosterone causing both, and the testosterone causing both, and the correlation is there. And when you look correlation is there. And when you look correlation is there. And when you look closely, we got cause and effect stuff. closely, we got cause and effect stuff. closely, we got cause and effect stuff. Sexual behavior raises testosterone Sexual behavior raises testosterone Sexual behavior raises testosterone levels. Aggression raises testosterone levels. Aggression raises testosterone levels. Aggression raises testosterone levels. Your levels beforehand are levels. Your levels beforehand are levels. Your levels beforehand are barely predictive of what's going to barely predictive of what's going to barely predictive of what's going to happen. So, it's a response rather than a cause. So, it's a response rather than a cause. So, it's a response rather than a cause. Um when you look at that, though, in Um when you look at that, though, in Um when you look at that, though, in terms of making sense of individual terms of making sense of individual terms of making sense of individual differences, they don't matter a whole lot. Um they don't matter a whole lot. Um they don't matter a whole lot. Um you can like spend an entire career on you can like spend an entire career on you can like spend an entire career on the social circumstances that produce 3 the social circumstances that produce 3 the social circumstances that produce 3 and 1/2% more testosterone in the and 1/2% more testosterone in the and 1/2% more testosterone in the circulation and circulation and circulation and expect to see all sorts of interesting expect to see all sorts of interesting expect to see all sorts of interesting implications, and that's not really the implications, and that's not really the implications, and that's not really the case. It's somewhat of a yes or no case. It's somewhat of a yes or no case. It's somewhat of a yes or no modulator of the much more subtle social modulator of the much more subtle social modulator of the much more subtle social stuff that's already there. stuff that's already there. stuff that's already there. Very interesting. You know, I think that Very interesting. You know, I think that Very interesting. You know, I think that um there's a um there's a um there's a there are a lot of misconceptions about there are a lot of misconceptions about there are a lot of misconceptions about human biology, but testosterone seems to human biology, but testosterone seems to human biology, but testosterone seems to be one area where at least from what I be one area where at least from what I be one area where at least from what I can find on the internet, there's a It's can find on the internet, there's a It's can find on the internet, there's a It's sort of at the peak of misunderstanding. sort of at the peak of misunderstanding. sort of at the peak of misunderstanding. Maybe we could just ask a few more Maybe we could just ask a few more Maybe we could just ask a few more questions about testosterone and sexual questions about testosterone and sexual questions about testosterone and sexual behavior because there's an interesting behavior because there's an interesting behavior because there's an interesting story there about castration versus story there about castration versus story there about castration versus non-castration and the causality again. non-castration and the causality again. non-castration and the causality again. But before you address that, I just But before you address that, I just But before you address that, I just want to highlight something that you want to highlight something that you want to highlight something that you said that I think is so vital, which is said that I think is so vital, which is said that I think is so vital, which is that behaviors such as aggressive that behaviors such as aggressive that behaviors such as aggressive behaviors and sexual behaviors can behaviors and sexual behaviors can behaviors and sexual behaviors can actually increase testosterone. Did I actually increase testosterone. Did I actually increase testosterone. Did I hear that correctly? And the reverse is hear that correctly? And the reverse is hear that correctly? And the reverse is sort of true, but not sort of true, but not sort of true, but not in a causal way. Is that Is that not in a causal way. Is that Is that not in a causal way. Is that Is that right? The opposite direction with the The opposite direction with the The opposite direction with the causality, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so if I causality, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so if I causality, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so if I were to increase somebody's testosterone were to increase somebody's testosterone were to increase somebody's testosterone by 30% male or female, doesn't matter, by 30% male or female, doesn't matter, by 30% male or female, doesn't matter, that their sexual behavior may or may that their sexual behavior may or may that their sexual behavior may or may not change. Essentially zero effect at not change. Essentially zero effect at not change. Essentially zero effect at all. Your brain is not that sensitive to Your brain is not that sensitive to Your brain is not that sensitive to fluctuations in testosterone levels. fluctuations in testosterone levels. fluctuations in testosterone levels. In terms of things like aggression, In terms of things like aggression, In terms of things like aggression, raising testosterone is a great raising testosterone is a great raising testosterone is a great footnote. If you have the right type of willing to If you have the right type of willing to If you have the right type of willing to die in the trenches devotion sort of die in the trenches devotion sort of die in the trenches devotion sort of thing, watching your favorite team play thing, watching your favorite team play thing, watching your favorite team play a sport will raise your testosterone a sport will raise your testosterone a sport will raise your testosterone levels as you sit there with a potato levels as you sit there with a potato levels as you sit there with a potato chips in your armchair. So, it's not the chips in your armchair. So, it's not the chips in your armchair. So, it's not the physicality of aggression, it's the physicality of aggression, it's the physicality of aggression, it's the psychological framing of it. So, yeah, psychological framing of it. So, yeah, psychological framing of it. So, yeah, testosterone is not causing that. testosterone is not causing that. testosterone is not causing that. And a great way to appreciate that is, And a great way to appreciate that is, And a great way to appreciate that is, okay, so you had all these okay, so you had all these okay, so you had all these testosterone sexual behavior testosterone sexual behavior testosterone sexual behavior correlations, and you do the definitive correlations, and you do the definitive correlations, and you do the definitive endocrine intervention, which is you do endocrine intervention, which is you do endocrine intervention, which is you do a subtraction study, you remove the subtraction study, you remove the subtraction study, you remove the testes, and as I before, levels of testes, and as I before, levels of testes, and as I before, levels of sexual behavior goes down. sexual behavior goes down. sexual behavior goes down. Good. We've just shown that testosterone Good. We've just shown that testosterone Good. We've just shown that testosterone is somehow positive. Critically, they go is somehow positive. Critically, they go is somehow positive. Critically, they go down, but not down to zero. Whether you down, but not down to zero. Whether you down, but not down to zero. Whether you are a rat or a monkey or a human, are a rat or a monkey or a human, are a rat or a monkey or a human, whatever. And what predicts how much whatever. And what predicts how much whatever. And what predicts how much residual sexual behavior is there? residual sexual behavior is there? residual sexual behavior is there? How much sexual behavior there was How much sexual behavior there was How much sexual behavior there was before castration. before castration. before castration. What that's telling you is by then What that's telling you is by then What that's telling you is by then that's behavior that's being carried by that's behavior that's being carried by that's behavior that's being carried by social learning and context rather than social learning and context rather than social learning and context rather than by a hormone. Exact same thing with by a hormone. Exact same thing with by a hormone. Exact same thing with aggression. Drops after castration, aggression. Drops after castration, aggression. Drops after castration, doesn't go to zero. The more prior doesn't go to zero. The more prior doesn't go to zero. The more prior history of it, the more it just keeps history of it, the more it just keeps history of it, the more it just keeps coasting along on its own even without coasting along on its own even without coasting along on its own even without testosterone. Very interesting. I is can we say that Very interesting. I is can we say that Very interesting. I is can we say that there's an exception in terms of the there's an exception in terms of the there's an exception in terms of the early organizing effects of hormones? early organizing effects of hormones? early organizing effects of hormones? Like for instance, if a developing Like for instance, if a developing Like for instance, if a developing animal is deprived of animal is deprived of animal is deprived of uh testosterone or estrogen or aromatized testosterone or estrogen or aromatized testosterone or estrogen or aromatized testosterone into estrogen, you know, testosterone into estrogen, you know, testosterone into estrogen, you know, there's a whole story there as you know, there's a whole story there as you know, there's a whole story there as you know, but uh then I could imagine that the but uh then I could imagine that the but uh then I could imagine that the circuits of the brain that are circuits of the brain that are circuits of the brain that are responsible for initiating sexual responsible for initiating sexual responsible for initiating sexual behavior in the first place might not behavior in the first place might not behavior in the first place might not emerge and therefore not be sensitive to emerge and therefore not be sensitive to emerge and therefore not be sensitive to testosterone later in life. Is that testosterone later in life. Is that testosterone later in life. Is that right? Okay. Yeah, exactly. And and a right? Okay. Yeah, exactly. And and a right? Okay. Yeah, exactly. And and a great way of seeing that is this totally great way of seeing that is this totally great way of seeing that is this totally nutty biological factor it um which is nutty biological factor it um which is nutty biological factor it um which is the second to fourth the second to fourth the second to fourth digit ratio in hands. Oh, yeah. Totally digit ratio in hands. Oh, yeah. Totally digit ratio in hands. Oh, yeah. Totally obscure thing. The ratio of one to the obscure thing. The ratio of one to the obscure thing. The ratio of one to the other in some way reflects levels of other in some way reflects levels of other in some way reflects levels of testosterone androgen exposure during testosterone androgen exposure during testosterone androgen exposure during fetal life. And I can't remember which fetal life. And I can't remember which fetal life. And I can't remember which way it goes and it's minuscule and you way it goes and it's minuscule and you way it goes and it's minuscule and you need a thousand people in your sample need a thousand people in your sample need a thousand people in your sample size to be able to see anything, but you size to be able to see anything, but you size to be able to see anything, but you see it in other primates. It's already see it in other primates. It's already see it in other primates. It's already there in fetal sonograms, all of that. there in fetal sonograms, all of that. there in fetal sonograms, all of that. So, that's a readout of subtle differences that's a readout of subtle differences that's a readout of subtle differences in prenatal exposure and that winds up in prenatal exposure and that winds up in prenatal exposure and that winds up being a predictor of a whole range of being a predictor of a whole range of being a predictor of a whole range of sort of stuff in adult behavior. So sort of stuff in adult behavior. So sort of stuff in adult behavior. So yeah, at the fetal end when you're still yeah, at the fetal end when you're still yeah, at the fetal end when you're still building everything, testosterone and building everything, testosterone and building everything, testosterone and the amount of it is making a huge the amount of it is making a huge the amount of it is making a huge difference. By the time you're an adult, difference. By the time you're an adult, difference. By the time you're an adult, it's just it's just it's just you know, somewhat of an all or none you know, somewhat of an all or none you know, somewhat of an all or none signal. Yeah. I could I have a signal. Yeah. I could I have a signal. Yeah. I could I have a confession which is that I was a master confession which is that I was a master confession which is that I was a master student at Berkeley in Mark Breedlove's student at Berkeley in Mark Breedlove's student at Berkeley in Mark Breedlove's um arena. So I uh I'm an author on um arena. So I uh I'm an author on um arena. So I uh I'm an author on that paper, although I'm deep within the that paper, although I'm deep within the that paper, although I'm deep within the author line and um you got the author line and um you got the author line and um you got the description of it exactly right that description of it exactly right that description of it exactly right that it's the D2, the index finger to the it's the D2, the index finger to the it's the D2, the index finger to the ring finger ratio is more similar in ring finger ratio is more similar in ring finger ratio is more similar in uh females and then it is in males. In uh females and then it is in males. In uh females and then it is in males. In males, the index finger tends to be males, the index finger tends to be males, the index finger tends to be shorter. And for people out there who shorter. And for people out there who shorter. And for people out there who are listening to this who are now um are listening to this who are now um are listening to this who are now um freaking out or measuring the freaking out or measuring the freaking out or measuring the there's a proper way to measure this there's a proper way to measure this there's a proper way to measure this which is um it eyeballing it doesn't which is um it eyeballing it doesn't which is um it eyeballing it doesn't work all the time unless at the extremes work all the time unless at the extremes work all the time unless at the extremes and there's some really interesting and there's some really interesting and there's some really interesting stories there. It actually has been stories there. It actually has been stories there. It actually has been replicated um no fewer than five times, replicated um no fewer than five times, replicated um no fewer than five times, um Mark Breedlove tells me. Um um Mark Breedlove tells me. Um um Mark Breedlove tells me. Um but yes, in term in terms of these early but yes, in term in terms of these early but yes, in term in terms of these early organizing effects, um those are very uh organizing effects, um those are very uh organizing effects, um those are very uh seem very robust uh in most studies. seem very robust uh in most studies. seem very robust uh in most studies. These later effects are a sort of These later effects are a sort of These later effects are a sort of activation of neural circuits by activation of neural circuits by activation of neural circuits by hormones. I'm absolutely fascinated by hormones. I'm absolutely fascinated by hormones. I'm absolutely fascinated by this and if we I do have a couple other this and if we I do have a couple other this and if we I do have a couple other uh questions which is uh we uh questions which is uh we uh questions which is uh we normally associate testosterone with normally associate testosterone with normally associate testosterone with males, but of course females make males, but of course females make males, but of course females make testosterone as well uh from the testosterone as well uh from the testosterone as well uh from the adrenals and presumably elsewhere adrenals and presumably elsewhere adrenals and presumably elsewhere too. I'm guessing if we looked hard too. I'm guessing if we looked hard too. I'm guessing if we looked hard enough, we'd probably find that there enough, we'd probably find that there enough, we'd probably find that there were other sources of androgens um in were other sources of androgens um in were other sources of androgens um in females. It can we say that the that females. It can we say that the that females. It can we say that the that these general contours of effects on these general contours of effects on these general contours of effects on aggression um aggression um aggression um uh also pertain to females and um and I uh also pertain to females and um and I uh also pertain to females and um and I suppose I should ask in particular about suppose I should ask in particular about suppose I should ask in particular about female-female aggression which does female-female aggression which does female-female aggression which does exist in many species, female-male exist in many species, female-male exist in many species, female-male aggression as well as maternal aggression as well as maternal aggression as well as maternal aggression, which is a robust aggression, which is a robust aggression, which is a robust aspect of our evolution, of course, that aspect of our evolution, of course, that aspect of our evolution, of course, that the mother will the mother will the mother will uh an angry mother animal of any kind uh an angry mother animal of any kind uh an angry mother animal of any kind protecting her young is truly dangerous protecting her young is truly dangerous protecting her young is truly dangerous in the best sense of the of the word. in the best sense of the of the word. in the best sense of the of the word. And that type of, you know, And that type of, you know, And that type of, you know, post-parturition period after birth aggression period after birth aggression period after birth aggression is all about estrogen, progesterone, is all about estrogen, progesterone, is all about estrogen, progesterone, those sorts of things. Female aggression those sorts of things. Female aggression those sorts of things. Female aggression the rest of the time has testosterone as the rest of the time has testosterone as the rest of the time has testosterone as a major player at a much lower level on a major player at a much lower level on a major player at a much lower level on the average, on the average, one always the average, on the average, one always the average, on the average, one always has to say. Um but it's basically the has to say. Um but it's basically the has to say. Um but it's basically the same punchlines. In females, the lower same punchlines. In females, the lower same punchlines. In females, the lower levels of testosterone are essential for levels of testosterone are essential for levels of testosterone are essential for typical levels of aggression and sexual typical levels of aggression and sexual typical levels of aggression and sexual behavior. Nonetheless, they're not behavior. Nonetheless, they're not behavior. Nonetheless, they're not causing it. It's not sensitive to small causing it. It's not sensitive to small causing it. It's not sensitive to small individual differences. Same exact individual differences. Same exact individual differences. Same exact thing. You can get way over impressed thing. You can get way over impressed thing. You can get way over impressed with the importance of androgens in with the importance of androgens in with the importance of androgens in females just as readily as in males. females just as readily as in males. females just as readily as in males. So, in line with that, how should we So, in line with that, how should we So, in line with that, how should we conceptualize testosterone? I mean, I conceptualize testosterone? I mean, I conceptualize testosterone? I mean, I realize there isn't a single sentence or realize there isn't a single sentence or realize there isn't a single sentence or uh that can capture uh a hormone in all uh that can capture uh a hormone in all uh that can capture uh a hormone in all its effects because hormones have so its effects because hormones have so its effects because hormones have so many different slow and fast effects on many different slow and fast effects on many different slow and fast effects on the brain, on other glands, on their own the brain, on other glands, on their own the brain, on other glands, on their own on the very glands that produce them. on the very glands that produce them. on the very glands that produce them. But, as I've heard you talk about But, as I've heard you talk about But, as I've heard you talk about testosterone today and over the years, I testosterone today and over the years, I testosterone today and over the years, I start to get the impression that start to get the impression that start to get the impression that as the most misunderstood molecule in as the most misunderstood molecule in as the most misunderstood molecule in human health in the universe, it has human health in the universe, it has human health in the universe, it has it it's clearly doing something very it it's clearly doing something very it it's clearly doing something very powerful. It's it's shifting the way powerful. It's it's shifting the way powerful. It's it's shifting the way that certain neural circuits work, that certain neural circuits work, that certain neural circuits work, adjusting the gain on the amygdala as adjusting the gain on the amygdala as adjusting the gain on the amygdala as you described, and certainly other you described, and certainly other you described, and certainly other things as well. Is there any um truism things as well. Is there any um truism things as well. Is there any um truism about testosterone like and its about testosterone like and its about testosterone like and its relationship to effort or its relationship to effort or its relationship to effort or its relationship to um resilience and uh in relationship to um resilience and uh in relationship to um resilience and uh in a way that will maybe will help me and a way that will maybe will help me and a way that will maybe will help me and other people sort of other people sort of other people sort of think about how to think about think about how to think about think about how to think about testosterone. Yeah. Um maybe three separate answers to that. maybe three separate answers to that. maybe three separate answers to that. The first one is I think it's a fair The first one is I think it's a fair The first one is I think it's a fair summary to think that when it comes to motivated to think that when it comes to motivated to think that when it comes to motivated strong behaviors, what testosterone does strong behaviors, what testosterone does strong behaviors, what testosterone does is make you more of whatever you already is make you more of whatever you already is make you more of whatever you already are. And that too may are. And that too may are. And that too may sexual arousal, sexual arousal, sexual arousal, libido, aggressiveness, spontaneous libido, aggressiveness, spontaneous libido, aggressiveness, spontaneous aggression, reactive aggression, things aggression, reactive aggression, things aggression, reactive aggression, things of that sort. It's upping the volume of that sort. It's upping the volume of that sort. It's upping the volume of things that are already strongly there. things that are already strongly there. things that are already strongly there. Um second way to think about it is Um second way to think about it is Um second way to think about it is Well, here's like my favorite Well, here's like my favorite Well, here's like my favorite finding about testosterone. Um and this finding about testosterone. Um and this finding about testosterone. Um and this was some wonderful work by a guy this was some wonderful work by a guy this was some wonderful work by a guy John Wingfield, who's one of the best John Wingfield, who's one of the best John Wingfield, who's one of the best behavioral endocrinologists out there. behavioral endocrinologists out there. behavioral endocrinologists out there. And about 20 years ago he formulated And about 20 years ago he formulated And about 20 years ago he formulated what is called the challenge hypothesis what is called the challenge hypothesis what is called the challenge hypothesis of testosterone action. What does of testosterone action. What does of testosterone action. What does testosterone do? Testosterone is what testosterone do? Testosterone is what testosterone do? Testosterone is what you secrete when your status is being you secrete when your status is being you secrete when your status is being challenged. And it makes it more likely challenged. And it makes it more likely challenged. And it makes it more likely that you'll do the behaviors needed to that you'll do the behaviors needed to that you'll do the behaviors needed to hold on to your status. Okay, so that's hold on to your status. Okay, so that's hold on to your status. Okay, so that's totally boringly straightforward. If totally boringly straightforward. If totally boringly straightforward. If you're a baboon, if somebody is you're a baboon, if somebody is you're a baboon, if somebody is challenging your high rank, the challenging your high rank, the challenging your high rank, the appropriate response on your part is appropriate response on your part is appropriate response on your part is going to be aggression. All right, so going to be aggression. All right, so going to be aggression. All right, so you've just gotten through the back door you've just gotten through the back door you've just gotten through the back door testosterone and aggression again. But testosterone and aggression again. But testosterone and aggression again. But then you get to humans. then you get to humans. then you get to humans. And humans have lots of different ways And humans have lots of different ways And humans have lots of different ways of achieving or maintaining status. And of achieving or maintaining status. And of achieving or maintaining status. And all you need to do is go to like some all you need to do is go to like some all you need to do is go to like some fancy private schools annual auction, fancy private schools annual auction, fancy private schools annual auction, and you will see all these half-drunk and you will see all these half-drunk and you will see all these half-drunk alpha males competing to see who can alpha males competing to see who can alpha males competing to see who can give the most money away as a show of give the most money away as a show of give the most money away as a show of conspicuous like, you know, conspicuous like, you know, conspicuous like, you know, property that they have. And in a property that they have. And in a property that they have. And in a setting like that, I mean, I've setting like that, I mean, I've setting like that, I mean, I've haven't been able to take urine samples haven't been able to take urine samples haven't been able to take urine samples at those times, unfortunately. But, that at those times, unfortunately. But, that at those times, unfortunately. But, that shows the flip side of it. If you have a shows the flip side of it. If you have a shows the flip side of it. If you have a species that hands out status in a very species that hands out status in a very species that hands out status in a very different sort of way, testosterone different sort of way, testosterone different sort of way, testosterone could have boost that also. Okay, so could have boost that also. Okay, so could have boost that also. Okay, so that generates a totally nutty that generates a totally nutty that generates a totally nutty prediction. Wow, take people in a prediction. Wow, take people in a prediction. Wow, take people in a circumstance, say playing an economic circumstance, say playing an economic circumstance, say playing an economic game where you get status by being game where you get status by being game where you get status by being trustworthy and being generous in your trustworthy and being generous in your trustworthy and being generous in your interactions with the game. If you give interactions with the game. If you give interactions with the game. If you give people testosterone, does that make them people testosterone, does that make them people testosterone, does that make them more generous? And that's absolutely the more generous? And that's absolutely the more generous? And that's absolutely the case. Totally cool finding. case. Totally cool finding. case. Totally cool finding. Um, showing you, I don't know, Um, showing you, I don't know, Um, showing you, I don't know, basically, if you took a whole bunch of basically, if you took a whole bunch of basically, if you took a whole bunch of Buddhist monks and shot them up with Buddhist monks and shot them up with Buddhist monks and shot them up with testosterone, they'd get all competitive testosterone, they'd get all competitive testosterone, they'd get all competitive with each other as to who could do the with each other as to who could do the with each other as to who could do the most random acts of kindness. most random acts of kindness. most random acts of kindness. And if we have a societal problem with And if we have a societal problem with And if we have a societal problem with too much aggression, too much aggression, too much aggression, the first culprit to look at is not the first culprit to look at is not the first culprit to look at is not testosterone. The first to look at is testosterone. The first to look at is testosterone. The first to look at is that we hand out so much damn elevated that we hand out so much damn elevated that we hand out so much damn elevated status for aggression in so many status for aggression in so many status for aggression in so many circumstances. So, I find that finding to be So, I find that finding to be So, I find that finding to be fantastic. Third thing about subtlety of fantastic. Third thing about subtlety of fantastic. Third thing about subtlety of testosterone. Okay, so like some subtler testosterone. Okay, so like some subtler testosterone. Okay, so like some subtler behavioral effects, you give behavioral effects, you give behavioral effects, you give testosterone to people and they become testosterone to people and they become testosterone to people and they become more confident. They become more confident. They become more confident. They become more self-confident. Well, that's good. People pay to take Well, that's good. People pay to take Well, that's good. People pay to take all sorts of nonsensical self-help all sorts of nonsensical self-help all sorts of nonsensical self-help courses that will boost your courses that will boost your courses that will boost your self-esteem. And that's a good thing. self-esteem. And that's a good thing. self-esteem. And that's a good thing. Unless testosterone makes you more Unless testosterone makes you more Unless testosterone makes you more confident, that is inaccurate. And confident, that is inaccurate. And confident, that is inaccurate. And you're more likely to barrel into wrong you're more likely to barrel into wrong you're more likely to barrel into wrong decisions. What's shown in economic decisions. What's shown in economic decisions. What's shown in economic gameplay is that testosterone, by making gameplay is that testosterone, by making gameplay is that testosterone, by making you more confident, makes you less you more confident, makes you less you more confident, makes you less cooperative because who needs to cooperative because who needs to cooperative because who needs to cooperate because I'm on top of this all cooperate because I'm on top of this all cooperate because I'm on top of this all on my own. on my own. on my own. Testosterone makes people cocky and Testosterone makes people cocky and Testosterone makes people cocky and impulsive and that may be great in one impulsive and that may be great in one impulsive and that may be great in one setting, but if in the other is you're setting, but if in the other is you're setting, but if in the other is you're absolutely sure your army is going to absolutely sure your army is going to absolutely sure your army is going to overrun the other country in three days. overrun the other country in three days. overrun the other country in three days. So hell, let's start World War I and you So hell, let's start World War I and you So hell, let's start World War I and you get a big surprise out of it. get a big surprise out of it. get a big surprise out of it. Testosterone altering risk assessment Testosterone altering risk assessment Testosterone altering risk assessment beforehand probably played a big role in beforehand probably played a big role in beforehand probably played a big role in that kind of miscalculation. that kind of miscalculation. that kind of miscalculation. Super interesting. I always think about Super interesting. I always think about Super interesting. I always think about testosterone and dopamine being close testosterone and dopamine being close testosterone and dopamine being close cousins in the brain, not just because cousins in the brain, not just because cousins in the brain, not just because of their relationship through the of their relationship through the of their relationship through the pituitary and hypothalamus. That, of pituitary and hypothalamus. That, of pituitary and hypothalamus. That, of course, but also because of dopamine's course, but also because of dopamine's course, but also because of dopamine's salient role in creating this salient role in creating this salient role in creating this bias towards exteroception. You know, bias towards exteroception. You know, bias towards exteroception. You know, when somebody takes a drug with that somebody takes a drug with that somebody takes a drug with that increases dopamine or they're increases dopamine or they're increases dopamine or they're chock-a-block full of dopamine, they chock-a-block full of dopamine, they chock-a-block full of dopamine, they tend with I want to highlight tend cuz tend with I want to highlight tend cuz tend with I want to highlight tend cuz this is I'm really generalizing here, this is I'm really generalizing here, this is I'm really generalizing here, but they tend to focus on outward goals. but they tend to focus on outward goals. but they tend to focus on outward goals. You know, things beyond the You know, things beyond the You know, things beyond the boundaries of their skin. And boundaries of their skin. And boundaries of their skin. And testosterone seems to do a bit of the testosterone seems to do a bit of the testosterone seems to do a bit of the same. It tends to put us into a similar same. It tends to put us into a similar same. It tends to put us into a similar mode of perceiving the outside world in mode of perceiving the outside world in mode of perceiving the outside world in ways that we're asking questions like ways that we're asking questions like ways that we're asking questions like how do I relate to this other of my how do I relate to this other of my how do I relate to this other of my species? How do I relate to these goals? species? How do I relate to these goals? species? How do I relate to these goals? Is there anything that Is there anything that Is there anything that we can do to better conceptualize the we can do to better conceptualize the we can do to better conceptualize the relationship between testosterone and relationship between testosterone and relationship between testosterone and dopamine and motivation or would that dopamine and motivation or would that dopamine and motivation or would that just take us down the alleyways of just take us down the alleyways of just take us down the alleyways of neural pathways and the neural pathways and the neural pathways and the hypothalamus, which is fine, too. hypothalamus, which is fine, too. hypothalamus, which is fine, too. Well, I think it's got lots to do with Well, I think it's got lots to do with Well, I think it's got lots to do with sort of this massive revisionism about sort of this massive revisionism about sort of this massive revisionism about dopamine. Everyone since the pharaohs dopamine. Everyone since the pharaohs dopamine. Everyone since the pharaohs got brought up being taught that got brought up being taught that got brought up being taught that dopamine is about pleasure and reward. dopamine is about pleasure and reward. dopamine is about pleasure and reward. Turns out it isn't. It's about Turns out it isn't. It's about Turns out it isn't. It's about anticipation of reward and it's about anticipation of reward and it's about anticipation of reward and it's about generating the motivation, the generating the motivation, the generating the motivation, the goal-directed behavior needed to go get goal-directed behavior needed to go get goal-directed behavior needed to go get that reward. And before you know it, that reward. And before you know it, that reward. And before you know it, you're using like elevated dopamine in you're using like elevated dopamine in you're using like elevated dopamine in your entire life to motivate you to do your entire life to motivate you to do your entire life to motivate you to do whatever is going to get you like entry whatever is going to get you like entry whatever is going to get you like entry into heaven after life kind of, you into heaven after life kind of, you into heaven after life kind of, you know, it's doing that sort of know, it's doing that sort of know, it's doing that sort of thing. So, it's really about the motivation. So, it's really about the motivation. So, it's really about the motivation. And what testosterone does, even in And what testosterone does, even in And what testosterone does, even in individuals who are not aggressive, and individuals who are not aggressive, and individuals who are not aggressive, and why testosterone replacement is often a why testosterone replacement is often a why testosterone replacement is often a very helpful thing for aging males, is very helpful thing for aging males, is very helpful thing for aging males, is it increases energy, it increases a it increases energy, it increases a it increases energy, it increases a sense of sense of sense of there-ness, of presence, of alertness, there-ness, of presence, of alertness, there-ness, of presence, of alertness, it increases motivation. So, that's a it increases motivation. So, that's a it increases motivation. So, that's a whole aspect which then takes us into is whole aspect which then takes us into is whole aspect which then takes us into is your motivation to get up and like go, your motivation to get up and like go, your motivation to get up and like go, you know, hand out lots of soup in a you know, hand out lots of soup in a you know, hand out lots of soup in a soup kitchen for homeless people, or is soup kitchen for homeless people, or is soup kitchen for homeless people, or is it to get up and go ethnically cleanse a it to get up and go ethnically cleanse a it to get up and go ethnically cleanse a village? Um, village? Um, village? Um, it's got much to do with what your it's got much to do with what your it's got much to do with what your makeup was before the testosterone got makeup was before the testosterone got makeup was before the testosterone got on board. So, it's activating in an on board. So, it's activating in an on board. So, it's activating in an energetic sense, testosterone within energetic sense, testosterone within energetic sense, testosterone within minutes increases glucose uptake into minutes increases glucose uptake into minutes increases glucose uptake into skeletal muscle, you're just more awake skeletal muscle, you're just more awake skeletal muscle, you're just more awake and alert and all of that, and that has and alert and all of that, and that has and alert and all of that, and that has a lot to do with what dopamine does. And a lot to do with what dopamine does. And a lot to do with what dopamine does. And as one might predict then, getting just as one might predict then, getting just as one might predict then, getting just the right levels of testosterone the right levels of testosterone the right levels of testosterone infused into your bloodstream feels infused into your bloodstream feels infused into your bloodstream feels great to lab rats. They will lever press great to lab rats. They will lever press great to lab rats. They will lever press to get infused into the range that to get infused into the range that to get infused into the range that optimizes dopamine release. So, there's optimizes dopamine release. So, there's optimizes dopamine release. So, there's you're absolutely right, they're you're absolutely right, they're you're absolutely right, they're deeply intertwined. deeply intertwined. deeply intertwined. Yeah, such beautiful biology there, and Yeah, such beautiful biology there, and Yeah, such beautiful biology there, and I love the way you encapsulate the I love the way you encapsulate the I love the way you encapsulate the relationship. I want to ask about relationship. I want to ask about relationship. I want to ask about estrogen. Um, you know, we don't hear as estrogen. Um, you know, we don't hear as estrogen. Um, you know, we don't hear as about estrogen as often, and it's always about estrogen as often, and it's always about estrogen as often, and it's always interesting to me now doing um some interesting to me now doing um some interesting to me now doing um some public-facing education, you know, that public-facing education, you know, that public-facing education, you know, that testosterone is this very controversial testosterone is this very controversial testosterone is this very controversial molecule. Just to say it is almost molecule. Just to say it is almost molecule. Just to say it is almost controversial. But estrogen uh doesn't controversial. But estrogen uh doesn't controversial. But estrogen uh doesn't seem to hold the same uh seem to hold the same uh seem to hold the same uh controversial weight. And yet estrogen controversial weight. And yet estrogen controversial weight. And yet estrogen has a very powerful effects on both the has a very powerful effects on both the has a very powerful effects on both the animal brain and on the human brain of animal brain and on the human brain of animal brain and on the human brain of males and females. males and females. males and females. Um men uh Um men uh Um men uh do not want their estrogen to go too do not want their estrogen to go too do not want their estrogen to go too low. Terrible things happen. They will low. Terrible things happen. They will low. Terrible things happen. They will lose cognitive function. Libido can lose cognitive function. Libido can lose cognitive function. Libido can drop. Uh so men need estrogen as well, drop. Uh so men need estrogen as well, drop. Uh so men need estrogen as well, but perhaps uh maybe we can put the same perhaps uh maybe we can put the same perhaps uh maybe we can put the same filter on estrogen as we did on filter on estrogen as we did on filter on estrogen as we did on testosterone. Are there any general themes of estrogen Are there any general themes of estrogen Are there any general themes of estrogen that are uh that people should be aware that are uh that people should be aware that are uh that people should be aware of or that you think that are generally of or that you think that are generally of or that you think that are generally misunderstood? Is it really all about misunderstood? Is it really all about misunderstood? Is it really all about feelings and empathy and making us more feelings and empathy and making us more feelings and empathy and making us more sensitive? I sense not. sensitive? I sense not. sensitive? I sense not. No. And it's once again very No. And it's once again very No. And it's once again very context-dependent. And if estrogen after context-dependent. And if estrogen after context-dependent. And if estrogen after giving birth is playing a central role giving birth is playing a central role giving birth is playing a central role in you wanting to shred the face of in you wanting to shred the face of in you wanting to shred the face of somebody getting too close to your somebody getting too close to your somebody getting too close to your kittens kind of thing, we know it's not kittens kind of thing, we know it's not kittens kind of thing, we know it's not just warm, fuzzy, you know, empathic just warm, fuzzy, you know, empathic just warm, fuzzy, you know, empathic kind of stuff. Estrogen, you know, in kind of stuff. Estrogen, you know, in kind of stuff. Estrogen, you know, in lots of ways lots of ways lots of ways could be summarized by if you got a could be summarized by if you got a could be summarized by if you got a choice in the matter between having a choice in the matter between having a choice in the matter between having a lot of estrogen in your bloodstream or lot of estrogen in your bloodstream or lot of estrogen in your bloodstream or not, go for having a lot of estrogen. not, go for having a lot of estrogen. not, go for having a lot of estrogen. It in It enhances cognition exactly as It in It enhances cognition exactly as It in It enhances cognition exactly as you said. It stimulates neurogenesis in you said. It stimulates neurogenesis in you said. It stimulates neurogenesis in the hippocampus. It increases glucose the hippocampus. It increases glucose the hippocampus. It increases glucose and oxygen delivery. It protects you and oxygen delivery. It protects you and oxygen delivery. It protects you from dementia. It decreases inflammatory from dementia. It decreases inflammatory from dementia. It decreases inflammatory oxidative damage to blood vessels, which oxidative damage to blood vessels, which oxidative damage to blood vessels, which is why it's good for protecting from is why it's good for protecting from is why it's good for protecting from cardiovascular disease in contrast to cardiovascular disease in contrast to cardiovascular disease in contrast to testosterone, which is making every one testosterone, which is making every one testosterone, which is making every one of those things worse. of those things worse. of those things worse. Um This brings up this mind fuel of the This brings up this mind fuel of the This brings up this mind fuel of the question, which is so what about question, which is so what about question, which is so what about postmenopausal estrogen? postmenopausal estrogen? postmenopausal estrogen? And all sorts of lab studies with And all sorts of lab studies with And all sorts of lab studies with non-human primates suggested that you non-human primates suggested that you non-human primates suggested that you keep estrogen levels high after a keep estrogen levels high after a keep estrogen levels high after a monkey's equivalent of menopause, and monkey's equivalent of menopause, and monkey's equivalent of menopause, and you're going to keep brain health a lot you're going to keep brain health a lot you're going to keep brain health a lot better, decreasing the risk of dementia, better, decreasing the risk of dementia, better, decreasing the risk of dementia, stroke, every such thing. Estrogen is a stroke, every such thing. Estrogen is a stroke, every such thing. Estrogen is a great antioxidant, all of that. So, in great antioxidant, all of that. So, in great antioxidant, all of that. So, in the '90s, I think, when the '90s, I think, when the '90s, I think, when Healy, I'm forgetting her name, but when Healy, I'm forgetting her name, but when Healy, I'm forgetting her name, but when there was the first female head of the there was the first female head of the there was the first female head of the NIH, uh Bernadine Healy, NIH, uh Bernadine Healy, NIH, uh Bernadine Healy, uh set up this massive prospective human set up this massive prospective human set up this massive prospective human study, what was going to be the biggest study, what was going to be the biggest study, what was going to be the biggest one of all times, looking at the plusses one of all times, looking at the plusses one of all times, looking at the plusses and minuses of postmenopausal estrogen. and minuses of postmenopausal estrogen. and minuses of postmenopausal estrogen. And tens of thousands of women, this was And tens of thousands of women, this was And tens of thousands of women, this was going to be and they had to cut the going to be and they had to cut the going to be and they had to cut the short study short because what they were short study short because what they were short study short because what they were seeing was estrogen was not only doing seeing was estrogen was not only doing seeing was estrogen was not only doing the normal bad stuff that you expect in the normal bad stuff that you expect in the normal bad stuff that you expect in terms of some decalcification stuff, but terms of some decalcification stuff, but terms of some decalcification stuff, but it was increasing the risk of it was increasing the risk of it was increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease and it was cardiovascular disease and it was cardiovascular disease and it was increasing the risk of stroke and it was increasing the risk of stroke and it was increasing the risk of stroke and it was increasing the risk of dementia and this increasing the risk of dementia and this increasing the risk of dementia and this ground to a halt and everybody they ground to a halt and everybody they ground to a halt and everybody they stopped the study and front-page news stopped the study and front-page news stopped the study and front-page news and everybody panicked at that point. and everybody panicked at that point. and everybody panicked at that point. And nobody could make sense of it who And nobody could make sense of it who And nobody could make sense of it who had been spending the last 20 years had been spending the last 20 years had been spending the last 20 years studying the exact same thing in studying the exact same thing in studying the exact same thing in primates and seeing all the protective primates and seeing all the protective primates and seeing all the protective effects. And the explanation turned out effects. And the explanation turned out effects. And the explanation turned out to be one of those things where like law to be one of those things where like law to be one of those things where like law of unexpected consequences. of unexpected consequences. of unexpected consequences. Okay, menopause in women that last Okay, menopause in women that last Okay, menopause in women that last different lengths of time, that may be a different lengths of time, that may be a different lengths of time, that may be a factor, that's going to come. You know factor, that's going to come. You know factor, that's going to come. You know what? Let's not start giving our study what? Let's not start giving our study what? Let's not start giving our study subjects more estrogen until they're subjects more estrogen until they're subjects more estrogen until they're totally past menopause. totally past menopause. totally past menopause. And when you've got that lag time in And when you've got that lag time in And when you've got that lag time in between, you shift all sorts of estrogen between, you shift all sorts of estrogen between, you shift all sorts of estrogen receptor patterns, and that's where all receptor patterns, and that's where all receptor patterns, and that's where all of the bad effects come from. All of the of the bad effects come from. All of the of the bad effects come from. All of the monkey studies had involved just monkey studies had involved just monkey studies had involved just maintaining ovulatory levels into postmenopausal ovulatory levels into postmenopausal ovulatory levels into postmenopausal period. And you do that, and you get period. And you do that, and you get period. And you do that, and you get great effects. Estrogen is one of the great effects. Estrogen is one of the great effects. Estrogen is one of the greatest predictors of protection from greatest predictors of protection from greatest predictors of protection from Alzheimer's disease, all of that, but it Alzheimer's disease, all of that, but it Alzheimer's disease, all of that, but it needs to be physiological. needs to be physiological. needs to be physiological. Just keep going what keep continuing Just keep going what keep continuing Just keep going what keep continuing what your body has been doing for a long what your body has been doing for a long what your body has been doing for a long time versus let the whole thing shut time versus let the whole thing shut time versus let the whole thing shut down and suddenly like try to fire up down and suddenly like try to fire up down and suddenly like try to fire up the coal stoves at the bottom of the coal stoves at the bottom of the coal stoves at the bottom of the basement kind of thing, and get that basement kind of thing, and get that basement kind of thing, and get that going. There you get utterly different going. There you get utterly different going. There you get utterly different outcomes, and that caused a lot of human outcomes, and that caused a lot of human outcomes, and that caused a lot of human health consequences when people suddenly health consequences when people suddenly health consequences when people suddenly decided that estrogen is in fact decided that estrogen is in fact decided that estrogen is in fact neurologically endangering neurologically endangering neurologically endangering postmenopausally. Wow, that's fascinating. And I never Wow, that's fascinating. And I never Wow, that's fascinating. And I never thought that these uh steroid hormone thought that these uh steroid hormone thought that these uh steroid hormone receptors could receptors could receptors could you know, by not binding estrogen have you know, by not binding estrogen have you know, by not binding estrogen have being devoid of estrogen binding, I being devoid of estrogen binding, I being devoid of estrogen binding, I should say, uh could then set off a should say, uh could then set off a should say, uh could then set off a opposite biochemical cascades. opposite biochemical cascades. opposite biochemical cascades. Fascinating. I guess it raises the Fascinating. I guess it raises the Fascinating. I guess it raises the question about testosterone replacement question about testosterone replacement question about testosterone replacement too, whether or not uh people should uh too, whether or not uh people should uh too, whether or not uh people should uh talk to their doctor before too long. Uh talk to their doctor before too long. Uh talk to their doctor before too long. Uh men and women talk to your physicians men and women talk to your physicians men and women talk to your physicians before too long uh to avoid these uh before too long uh to avoid these uh before too long uh to avoid these uh whatever is happening in these periods whatever is happening in these periods whatever is happening in these periods where there isn't sufficient where there isn't sufficient where there isn't sufficient testosterone and or estrogen. Sounds testosterone and or estrogen. Sounds testosterone and or estrogen. Sounds like it um cause longer-term problems like it um cause longer-term problems like it um cause longer-term problems even when therapies are introduced. even when therapies are introduced. even when therapies are introduced. Two two additional misery {slash} Two two additional misery {slash} Two two additional misery {slash} complications. So, okay, you're trying complications. So, okay, you're trying complications. So, okay, you're trying to understand. You look at women with a to understand. You look at women with a to understand. You look at women with a history with or without postmenopausal history with or without postmenopausal history with or without postmenopausal estrogen replacement where it's done estrogen replacement where it's done estrogen replacement where it's done right and you're seeing 20 years later right and you're seeing 20 years later right and you're seeing 20 years later estrogen is predictive of a decreased estrogen is predictive of a decreased estrogen is predictive of a decreased risk of Alzheimer's. Then you got to risk of Alzheimer's. Then you got to risk of Alzheimer's. Then you got to start trying to do the unpacking start trying to do the unpacking start trying to do the unpacking prospective type studies. prospective type studies. prospective type studies. How much estrogen? At which times? How much estrogen? At which times? How much estrogen? At which times? Estrogen is just a is a catch-all term Estrogen is just a is a catch-all term Estrogen is just a is a catch-all term for a bunch of hormones, estrone, for a bunch of hormones, estrone, for a bunch of hormones, estrone, estradiol, estriol. How much of each one estradiol, estriol. How much of each one estradiol, estriol. How much of each one of them? Natural or synthetic? Go try to of them? Natural or synthetic? Go try to of them? Natural or synthetic? Go try to figure all of that out. And the second figure all of that out. And the second figure all of that out. And the second complication is it's often hard to say complication is it's often hard to say complication is it's often hard to say anything about what estrogen does anything about what estrogen does anything about what estrogen does outside the context of what progesterone outside the context of what progesterone outside the context of what progesterone is doing. And often it's not the is doing. And often it's not the is doing. And often it's not the absolute levels of either, it's the absolute levels of either, it's the absolute levels of either, it's the ratio of the two. This is such a more ratio of the two. This is such a more ratio of the two. This is such a more complicated endocrine system than complicated endocrine system than complicated endocrine system than testosterone. And you know, because you have to And you know, because you have to And you know, because you have to generate dramatic cyclicity that like no generate dramatic cyclicity that like no generate dramatic cyclicity that like no male hypothalamus ever has to dream of. male hypothalamus ever has to dream of. male hypothalamus ever has to dream of. It's a much more complicated It's a much more complicated It's a much more complicated system. Thus it's a lot more complicated to Thus it's a lot more complicated to Thus it's a lot more complicated to understand, let alone understand, let alone understand, let alone like figure out what the ideal benefits like figure out what the ideal benefits like figure out what the ideal benefits are of it. are of it. are of it. Yeah. Can um I don't know what to make Yeah. Can um I don't know what to make Yeah. Can um I don't know what to make of the literature on of the literature on of the literature on uh dropping rates of testosterone and uh dropping rates of testosterone and uh dropping rates of testosterone and dis- and endocrine disruptors. You know, dis- and endocrine disruptors. You know, dis- and endocrine disruptors. You know, I was at Berkeley when Tyrone Hayes I was at Berkeley when Tyrone Hayes I was at Berkeley when Tyrone Hayes published his data on these frogs that published his data on these frogs that published his data on these frogs that were drinking water from various were drinking water from various were drinking water from various locations throughout the United States, locations throughout the United States, locations throughout the United States, not just in California, and um seeing not just in California, and um seeing not just in California, and um seeing very severe endocrine disruption uh very severe endocrine disruption uh very severe endocrine disruption uh through blockade or and of androgen through blockade or and of androgen through blockade or and of androgen receptors and all sorts of issues. And receptors and all sorts of issues. And receptors and all sorts of issues. And you hear this all the time now that you hear this all the time now that you hear this all the time now that sperm counts are dropping, that there sperm counts are dropping, that there sperm counts are dropping, that there are all these endocrine disruptors, that are all these endocrine disruptors, that are all these endocrine disruptors, that there's birth control in the water in there's birth control in the water in there's birth control in the water in the drinking water. It all sounds starts the drinking water. It all sounds starts the drinking water. It all sounds starts to sound a little crazy and yet, to sound a little crazy and yet, to sound a little crazy and yet, um, I've also been fooled before by, you I've also been fooled before by, you I've also been fooled before by, you know, I guess, uh, a good example would know, I guess, uh, a good example would know, I guess, uh, a good example would be there's a lot of crazy stuff in the be there's a lot of crazy stuff in the be there's a lot of crazy stuff in the world online about all the terrible world online about all the terrible world online about all the terrible stuff in highly processed foods and yet stuff in highly processed foods and yet stuff in highly processed foods and yet you've got very respectable people, you've got very respectable people, you've got very respectable people, endocrinologists at UCSF like Robert endocrinologists at UCSF like Robert endocrinologists at UCSF like Robert Lustig saying, "Yeah, these a lot of Lustig saying, "Yeah, these a lot of Lustig saying, "Yeah, these a lot of these hidden sugars and these hidden sugars and these hidden sugars and these emulsifiers, they're causing real emulsifiers, they're causing real emulsifiers, they're causing real problems." So, I've become more problems." So, I've become more problems." So, I've become more open-minded about the question. Um, open-minded about the question. Um, open-minded about the question. Um, and so, and so, and so, are we suffering from drops in sperm are we suffering from drops in sperm are we suffering from drops in sperm counts and testosterone and estrogen and counts and testosterone and estrogen and counts and testosterone and estrogen and fertility as a consequence of endocrine fertility as a consequence of endocrine fertility as a consequence of endocrine disruptors in the in the environment and disruptors in the in the environment and disruptors in the in the environment and food or because of social reasons? Is food or because of social reasons? Is food or because of social reasons? Is there anything that we can hang our hat there anything that we can hang our hat there anything that we can hang our hat on like real data that you're confident on like real data that you're confident on like real data that you're confident in or is it just a mess? Um, no, the in or is it just a mess? Um, no, the in or is it just a mess? Um, no, the phenomenon does appear to be quite real. phenomenon does appear to be quite real. phenomenon does appear to be quite real. Uh, cross-sectional studies, human Uh, cross-sectional studies, human Uh, cross-sectional studies, human populations, or I still don't understand populations, or I still don't understand populations, or I still don't understand why this was one of the first things why this was one of the first things why this was one of the first things that Hayes spotted, decreasing testicle that Hayes spotted, decreasing testicle that Hayes spotted, decreasing testicle size in crocodiles. size in crocodiles. size in crocodiles. Go figure why that was one of the first Go figure why that was one of the first Go figure why that was one of the first contributions to this. And I think the contributions to this. And I think the contributions to this. And I think the phenomenon is absolutely real and what phenomenon is absolutely real and what phenomenon is absolutely real and what you're then left with is it's two you're then left with is it's two you're then left with is it's two classic challenges, which is this is classic challenges, which is this is classic challenges, which is this is correlated with something broad, correlated with something broad, correlated with something broad, environmental toxins, environmental toxins, environmental toxins, which ones, how much, when, et cetera. which ones, how much, when, et cetera. which ones, how much, when, et cetera. And the other one always being, well, And the other one always being, well, And the other one always being, well, okay, dropping, is it dropping enough to okay, dropping, is it dropping enough to okay, dropping, is it dropping enough to make a difference? How big of an effect make a difference? How big of an effect make a difference? How big of an effect is this? And is this? And is this? And those are where the juries are still those are where the juries are still those are where the juries are still out. Yeah, it's an area that I know out. Yeah, it's an area that I know out. Yeah, it's an area that I know there's a lot of interest in and, um, there's a lot of interest in and, um, there's a lot of interest in and, um, you've got groups of people who won't you've got groups of people who won't you've got groups of people who won't touch a receipt at a store because of touch a receipt at a store because of touch a receipt at a store because of the BPAs that are on the inks of the and the BPAs that are on the inks of the and the BPAs that are on the inks of the and then you got, uh, people who don't then you got, uh, people who don't then you got, uh, people who don't care about those things. It's It is a care about those things. It's It is a care about those things. It's It is a fascinating area and I hope that more fascinating area and I hope that more fascinating area and I hope that more biology will be done out there soon. I'd biology will be done out there soon. I'd biology will be done out there soon. I'd like to briefly return to stress. Um like to briefly return to stress. Um like to briefly return to stress. Um you described a study uh once about two you described a study uh once about two you described a study uh once about two rats. Um One running on a wheel voluntarily. One running on a wheel voluntarily. One running on a wheel voluntarily. One who's basically stuck in a running wheel who's basically stuck in a running wheel who's basically stuck in a running wheel and is forced to run anytime rat number and is forced to run anytime rat number and is forced to run anytime rat number one runs. So, in one case, the rat is one runs. So, in one case, the rat is one runs. So, in one case, the rat is voluntarily exercising, and in the other voluntarily exercising, and in the other voluntarily exercising, and in the other case, the rat is being forced to go case, the rat is being forced to go case, the rat is being forced to go to PE class, so to speak. But really and to PE class, so to speak. But really and to PE class, so to speak. But really and seeing divergent effects on biology. And I'd divergent effects on biology. And I'd divergent effects on biology. And I'd like to just touch into this and use it like to just touch into this and use it like to just touch into this and use it as kind of a case study for stress as kind of a case study for stress as kind of a case study for stress mitigation in general. mitigation in general. mitigation in general. I'm rather obsessed and our colleague I'm rather obsessed and our colleague I'm rather obsessed and our colleague David Spiegel, associate chair of David Spiegel, associate chair of David Spiegel, associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford, is obsessed with psychiatry at Stanford, is obsessed with psychiatry at Stanford, is obsessed with this question of how humans can this question of how humans can this question of how humans can start to mitigate their own stress. start to mitigate their own stress. start to mitigate their own stress. What do you think about stress What do you think about stress What do you think about stress mitigation? And what should we do as mitigation? And what should we do as mitigation? And what should we do as individuals and as families and as a individuals and as families and as a individuals and as families and as a culture to try and encourage people to culture to try and encourage people to culture to try and encourage people to mitigate their stress, but in ways that mitigate their stress, but in ways that mitigate their stress, but in ways that are not going to turn us into rat number are not going to turn us into rat number are not going to turn us into rat number two, where we're being forced to two, where we're being forced to two, where we're being forced to mitigate our own stress, and therefore mitigate our own stress, and therefore mitigate our own stress, and therefore becomes more stressful? becomes more stressful? becomes more stressful? And what you see is rat number one gets And what you see is rat number one gets And what you see is rat number one gets all the benefits of exercise. Rat number all the benefits of exercise. Rat number all the benefits of exercise. Rat number two gets all the downsides of severe two gets all the downsides of severe two gets all the downsides of severe stress. With the same exact muscle expenditure With the same exact muscle expenditure With the same exact muscle expenditure and movements going on, perfectly yoked, and movements going on, perfectly yoked, and movements going on, perfectly yoked, great example that it's the great example that it's the great example that it's the interpretation in your head. And I interpretation in your head. And I interpretation in your head. And I haven't kept up with that literature, haven't kept up with that literature, haven't kept up with that literature, but I'll bet you rat number two is but I'll bet you rat number two is but I'll bet you rat number two is having a whole lot more activity in its having a whole lot more activity in its having a whole lot more activity in its amygdala than is rat number one. amygdala than is rat number one. amygdala than is rat number one. Okay, so stress mitigation. Okay, so stress mitigation. Okay, so stress mitigation. Um anything I should say here I should Um anything I should say here I should Um anything I should say here I should preface with um preface with um preface with um reasonably good at telling people what's reasonably good at telling people what's reasonably good at telling people what's going to happen if they don't manage going to happen if they don't manage going to happen if they don't manage their stress, but I'm terrible at their stress, but I'm terrible at their stress, but I'm terrible at actually like managing stress or actually like managing stress or actually like managing stress or advising how to manage it. I'm much advising how to manage it. I'm much advising how to manage it. I'm much better with the bad news aspect of it. better with the bad news aspect of it. better with the bad news aspect of it. Um but what you see is by now just a Um but what you see is by now just a Um but what you see is by now just a classic literature half a century old classic literature half a century old classic literature half a century old sort of showing what are the building sort of showing what are the building sort of showing what are the building blocks of stress. blocks of stress. blocks of stress. Not Oh, you step outside and you've been Not Oh, you step outside and you've been Not Oh, you step outside and you've been gored by an elephant and can you gored by an elephant and can you gored by an elephant and can you grow from your experience and what grow from your experience and what grow from your experience and what doesn't kill you makes you stronger and doesn't kill you makes you stronger and doesn't kill you makes you stronger and that you could have a stress response, that you could have a stress response, that you could have a stress response, but you're in the realm of the gray zone but you're in the realm of the gray zone but you're in the realm of the gray zone of ambiguous social interactions, that of ambiguous social interactions, that of ambiguous social interactions, that sort of thing. sort of thing. sort of thing. Some people have massive stress Some people have massive stress Some people have massive stress responses, others not at all, in between responses, others not at all, in between responses, others not at all, in between enjoy it. Like what are the building enjoy it. Like what are the building enjoy it. Like what are the building blocks of what makes psychological blocks of what makes psychological blocks of what makes psychological stress stressful? stress stressful? stress stressful? And the first one is exactly what is And the first one is exactly what is And the first one is exactly what is brought up by that running study. Do you brought up by that running study. Do you brought up by that running study. Do you have a sense of control? have a sense of control? have a sense of control? A sense of control makes stressors less A sense of control makes stressors less A sense of control makes stressors less stressful. And the running wheel shows that or And the running wheel shows that or And the running wheel shows that or studies where you lab rat or you studies where you lab rat or you studies where you lab rat or you college freshman volunteer have been college freshman volunteer have been college freshman volunteer have been trained that by pressing a lever you're trained that by pressing a lever you're trained that by pressing a lever you're less likely to get a shock. less likely to get a shock. less likely to get a shock. And today you're at the lever there And today you're at the lever there And today you're at the lever there working away and unbeknownst to you the working away and unbeknownst to you the working away and unbeknownst to you the lever has been turned off and it has no lever has been turned off and it has no lever has been turned off and it has no effect on shock frequency, but because effect on shock frequency, but because effect on shock frequency, but because you think you have some control, you think you have some control, you think you have some control, you have less of a stress response. If have less of a stress response. If have less of a stress response. If you're a rat and doing this day in and you're a rat and doing this day in and you're a rat and doing this day in and day out, you're less likely to get an day out, you're less likely to get an day out, you're less likely to get an ulcer. So sense of control. ulcer. So sense of control. ulcer. So sense of control. Related to that is a sense of Related to that is a sense of Related to that is a sense of predictability. Rat gets shocked, human gets shocked, Rat gets shocked, human gets shocked, Rat gets shocked, human gets shocked, whatever, and the scenario either is the whatever, and the scenario either is the whatever, and the scenario either is the shocks come now and then or the shocks come now and then or the shocks come now and then or the shocks come now and then and 10 seconds before come now and then and 10 seconds before come now and then and 10 seconds before a little warning light comes on. a little warning light comes on. a little warning light comes on. And when you get the warning light, the And when you get the warning light, the And when you get the warning light, the shocks aren't as stressful. shocks aren't as stressful. shocks aren't as stressful. You got predictability because if you're You got predictability because if you're You got predictability because if you're not getting warning lights, any second not getting warning lights, any second not getting warning lights, any second you could be a half second away from the you could be a half second away from the you could be a half second away from the next shock. You get a warning light and next shock. You get a warning light and next shock. You get a warning light and you know that if there isn't one, you've you know that if there isn't one, you've you know that if there isn't one, you've got at least 10 seconds worth of got at least 10 seconds worth of got at least 10 seconds worth of relaxation. You know what's coming. You relaxation. You know what's coming. You relaxation. You know what's coming. You can prepare your coping responses. And can prepare your coping responses. And can prepare your coping responses. And best of all, afterward you know when best of all, afterward you know when best of all, afterward you know when you're finally safe, when you can you're finally safe, when you can you're finally safe, when you can recover from it. And that's enormously recover from it. And that's enormously recover from it. And that's enormously protective. Others, outlet for frustration. You take Others, outlet for frustration. You take Others, outlet for frustration. You take a rat who's getting shocked and if they a rat who's getting shocked and if they a rat who's getting shocked and if they could run on a running wheel, that's a could run on a running wheel, that's a could run on a running wheel, that's a protective thing. It's doing it protective thing. It's doing it protective thing. It's doing it voluntarily. If you've got a rat and it voluntarily. If you've got a rat and it voluntarily. If you've got a rat and it can gnaw on a bar of wood, a stressor is can gnaw on a bar of wood, a stressor is can gnaw on a bar of wood, a stressor is less stressful. Uh unfortunately, if you less stressful. Uh unfortunately, if you less stressful. Uh unfortunately, if you have a rat or primate or human and have a rat or primate or human and have a rat or primate or human and they're stressed, the ability to they're stressed, the ability to they're stressed, the ability to aggressively dump on somebody smaller aggressively dump on somebody smaller aggressively dump on somebody smaller and weaker and weaker and weaker also reduces the stress response. And also reduces the stress response. And also reduces the stress response. And displacement aggression explain and the displacement aggression explain and the displacement aggression explain and the fact that displacement aggression fact that displacement aggression fact that displacement aggression reduces stress accounts for a huge reduces stress accounts for a huge reduces stress accounts for a huge percentage of Earth's like unhappiness. percentage of Earth's like unhappiness. percentage of Earth's like unhappiness. So all those variables get social So all those variables get social So all those variables get social support as well. That's a good one. support as well. That's a good one. support as well. That's a good one. Interpreting circumstances being good Interpreting circumstances being good Interpreting circumstances being good news rather than bad. Hooray. So you've news rather than bad. Hooray. So you've news rather than bad. Hooray. So you've got this very simple sort of like got this very simple sort of like got this very simple sort of like take-home recipe. You go out and get as take-home recipe. You go out and get as take-home recipe. You go out and get as much control and as much predictability much control and as much predictability much control and as much predictability and as many outlets and as much social and as many outlets and as much social and as many outlets and as much social support as possible and you're going to support as possible and you're going to support as possible and you're going to do just fine. And you go out and do that do just fine. And you go out and do that do just fine. And you go out and do that and that's a recipe for total disaster. and that's a recipe for total disaster. and that's a recipe for total disaster. Because it's much, much more subtle than Because it's much, much more subtle than Because it's much, much more subtle than that. One great example. Okay, so you're One great example. Okay, so you're One great example. Okay, so you're getting shocked. You want a warning getting shocked. You want a warning getting shocked. You want a warning beforehand. Get a little warning light beforehand. Get a little warning light beforehand. Get a little warning light 10 seconds before each shock. It's 10 seconds before each shock. It's 10 seconds before each shock. It's wonderfully protective. Get a warning wonderfully protective. Get a warning wonderfully protective. Get a warning shock. Get a warning light 1 second shock. Get a warning light 1 second shock. Get a warning light 1 second before the shock. Doesn't do anything. before the shock. Doesn't do anything. before the shock. Doesn't do anything. There's not enough time for you to get There's not enough time for you to get There's not enough time for you to get the psychological benefits of the psychological benefits of the psychological benefits of the anticipation. Now instead, get the anticipation. Now instead, get the anticipation. Now instead, get the little warning coming on 2 minutes little warning coming on 2 minutes little warning coming on 2 minutes before each shock, and it's going to before each shock, and it's going to before each shock, and it's going to make things worse because you're not make things worse because you're not make things worse because you're not going to be sitting there like going to be sitting there like going to be sitting there like you know, reveling in sort of your sense you know, reveling in sort of your sense you know, reveling in sort of your sense of predictability and it's soon going to of predictability and it's soon going to of predictability and it's soon going to be over. You're going to be sitting be over. You're going to be sitting be over. You're going to be sitting there for 2 minutes saying, "Damn, here there for 2 minutes saying, "Damn, here there for 2 minutes saying, "Damn, here it comes." Predictive information only it comes." Predictive information only it comes." Predictive information only works in a narrow domain. works in a narrow domain. works in a narrow domain. Similarly, control. Do you want to have a sense of control. Do you want to have a sense of control. Do you want to have a sense of control in the face of stress? And the control in the face of stress? And the control in the face of stress? And the answer is only if it is a mild to answer is only if it is a mild to answer is only if it is a mild to moderate stressor. moderate stressor. moderate stressor. Because what's happening then, Because what's happening then, Because what's happening then, your sense of control is completely your sense of control is completely your sense of control is completely independent of the reality of whether independent of the reality of whether independent of the reality of whether you have control or not. But in the face you have control or not. But in the face you have control or not. But in the face of mild to moderate stressors, a sense of mild to moderate stressors, a sense of mild to moderate stressors, a sense of control gets interpreted as, of control gets interpreted as, of control gets interpreted as, "Wow, look how much worse things could "Wow, look how much worse things could "Wow, look how much worse things could have been. Thank God I have control. I'm have been. Thank God I have control. I'm have been. Thank God I have control. I'm on top of this master of my fate." In on top of this master of my fate." In on top of this master of my fate." In contrast, if it's a major stressor, all contrast, if it's a major stressor, all contrast, if it's a major stressor, all that uh, that uh, that uh, you know, arbitrary sense of control you know, arbitrary sense of control you know, arbitrary sense of control does is make you think, "Oh my god, look does is make you think, "Oh my god, look does is make you think, "Oh my god, look how much better it could have been. I how much better it could have been. I how much better it could have been. I could have prevented it." And we all could have prevented it." And we all could have prevented it." And we all know that intuitively. Like we do that know that intuitively. Like we do that know that intuitively. Like we do that in the face of people's worst stressors. in the face of people's worst stressors. in the face of people's worst stressors. Nobody could have stopped the car the Nobody could have stopped the car the Nobody could have stopped the car the way the kid suddenly jumped out. It way the kid suddenly jumped out. It way the kid suddenly jumped out. It wouldn't have mattered if you had gotten wouldn't have mattered if you had gotten wouldn't have mattered if you had gotten them to the doctor a month ago instead them to the doctor a month ago instead them to the doctor a month ago instead of now. It wouldn't have made me You of now. It wouldn't have made me You of now. It wouldn't have made me You didn't actually have any control. didn't actually have any control. didn't actually have any control. And what you see is you absolutely want And what you see is you absolutely want And what you see is you absolutely want to have a huge sense of control over to have a huge sense of control over to have a huge sense of control over mild to moderate stressors and mild to moderate stressors and mild to moderate stressors and especially ones that result in a good especially ones that result in a good especially ones that result in a good outcome. Hooray for me. And in the face outcome. Hooray for me. And in the face outcome. Hooray for me. And in the face of horrible stressors, what you want to of horrible stressors, what you want to of horrible stressors, what you want to do is like do is like do is like self-deception and like truth and beauty don't and like truth and beauty don't and like truth and beauty don't necessarily go hand in hand at that necessarily go hand in hand at that necessarily go hand in hand at that point. And that's why stress management point. And that's why stress management point. And that's why stress management techniques about control and techniques about control and techniques about control and predictability wind up being far worse predictability wind up being far worse predictability wind up being far worse than neutral if you're preaching that to than neutral if you're preaching that to than neutral if you're preaching that to somebody homeless or somebody with somebody homeless or somebody with somebody homeless or somebody with terminal cancer or somebody who's a terminal cancer or somebody who's a terminal cancer or somebody who's a refugee. Tell a neurotic middle-class person that Tell a neurotic middle-class person that Tell a neurotic middle-class person that they have the psychological tools to they have the psychological tools to they have the psychological tools to turn, you know, hell into heaven and turn, you know, hell into heaven and turn, you know, hell into heaven and there's some truth to that. Do the same there's some truth to that. Do the same there's some truth to that. Do the same thing to somebody who's going through a thing to somebody who's going through a thing to somebody who's going through a real hell and that's just privileged, real hell and that's just privileged, real hell and that's just privileged, you know, you know, you know, heartlessness to do that because that doesn't work. to do that because that doesn't work. to do that because that doesn't work. More and more, you know, outlets. If More and more, you know, outlets. If More and more, you know, outlets. If your outlets are damaging, that's not a your outlets are damaging, that's not a your outlets are damaging, that's not a good way to mitigate stress. Social good way to mitigate stress. Social good way to mitigate stress. Social support. If you're confusing mere support. If you're confusing mere support. If you're confusing mere acquaintances for real social support, acquaintances for real social support, acquaintances for real social support, you're going to have the rug pulled out you're going to have the rug pulled out you're going to have the rug pulled out from under you at some point. If you're from under you at some point. If you're from under you at some point. If you're mistaking social support for being going mistaking social support for being going mistaking social support for being going and bitching and moaning and demanding and bitching and moaning and demanding and bitching and moaning and demanding supportive from everyone around you supportive from everyone around you supportive from everyone around you rather than you doing some of that rather than you doing some of that rather than you doing some of that reciprocally, that's not going to work reciprocally, that's not going to work reciprocally, that's not going to work very well, either. So, you know, it's very well, either. So, you know, it's very well, either. So, you know, it's not simple. It's not for nothing that not simple. It's not for nothing that not simple. It's not for nothing that lots of us are really lousy at like lots of us are really lousy at like lots of us are really lousy at like being good friends and things like that being good friends and things like that being good friends and things like that and why and why and why it takes a lot of work to like do it takes a lot of work to like do it takes a lot of work to like do it right because, you know, you do it wrong right because, you know, you do it wrong right because, you know, you do it wrong and it may temporarily seem like a great and it may temporarily seem like a great and it may temporarily seem like a great thing, but when it turns out to be thing, but when it turns out to be thing, but when it turns out to be completely misplaced faith, you're going completely misplaced faith, you're going completely misplaced faith, you're going to be feeling worse than before you to be feeling worse than before you to be feeling worse than before you started. Interesting that these days there's a Interesting that these days there's a Interesting that these days there's a lot of interest in using physical lot of interest in using physical lot of interest in using physical practices to mitigate stress, you know, practices to mitigate stress, you know, practices to mitigate stress, you know, trying to get out of the ruminating and trying to get out of the ruminating and trying to get out of the ruminating and to some extent take control of neural to some extent take control of neural to some extent take control of neural circuits in the brain by using exercise circuits in the brain by using exercise circuits in the brain by using exercise and using breathing and hypnosis and using breathing and hypnosis and using breathing and hypnosis and of course hypnosis has a mental and of course hypnosis has a mental and of course hypnosis has a mental component as well. component as well. component as well. What are your thoughts on What are your thoughts on What are your thoughts on stress mitigation from the standpoint of stress mitigation from the standpoint of stress mitigation from the standpoint of okay, so we don't want to be rat number okay, so we don't want to be rat number okay, so we don't want to be rat number two. We want to select something for two. We want to select something for two. We want to select something for ourselves. So we have to ourselves. So we have to ourselves. So we have to take the initiative for ourselves. take the initiative for ourselves. take the initiative for ourselves. Being forced into Being forced into Being forced into exercising is not it could actually have exercising is not it could actually have exercising is not it could actually have negative health effects perhaps. So we negative health effects perhaps. So we negative health effects perhaps. So we need to pick something that we like. We need to pick something that we like. We need to pick something that we like. We need to take control of it. Um need to take control of it. Um need to take control of it. Um in terms of supporting other people, you in terms of supporting other people, you in terms of supporting other people, you touched on that a bit. What is the best touched on that a bit. What is the best touched on that a bit. What is the best way to support other people? Is it to way to support other people? Is it to way to support other people? Is it to talk about the stressful thing? I mean, talk about the stressful thing? I mean, talk about the stressful thing? I mean, I'm not asking you to play psychologist I'm not asking you to play psychologist I'm not asking you to play psychologist here, but here, but here, but I find divergent data on this. You know, I find divergent data on this. You know, I find divergent data on this. You know, we can spin ourselves up into a lather we can spin ourselves up into a lather we can spin ourselves up into a lather by ruminating on something and language by ruminating on something and language by ruminating on something and language seems to me like a seems to me like a seems to me like a it's a wonderful tool, but it's also a it's a wonderful tool, but it's also a it's a wonderful tool, but it's also a fairly deprived tool because it doesn't really deprived tool because it doesn't really deprived tool because it doesn't really get into the core of our physiology like get into the core of our physiology like get into the core of our physiology like something like breathing would. So what something like breathing would. So what something like breathing would. So what are your thoughts on more are your thoughts on more are your thoughts on more uh for lack of a better way to put it, more for lack of a better way to put it, more for lack of a better way to put it, more head-centered cognitive approaches to head-centered cognitive approaches to head-centered cognitive approaches to stress mitigation versus kind of uh stress mitigation versus kind of uh stress mitigation versus kind of uh going at the core physiology. Cold going at the core physiology. Cold going at the core physiology. Cold showers uh now are even a thing to some showers uh now are even a thing to some showers uh now are even a thing to some extent, you know, just to get people extent, you know, just to get people extent, you know, just to get people stress acclimated. Voluntarily taking stress acclimated. Voluntarily taking stress acclimated. Voluntarily taking cold showers, you know. Um that makes cold showers, you know. Um that makes cold showers, you know. Um that makes some sense physiologically some sense physiologically some sense physiologically preconditioning for when the real stresses come. for when the real stresses come. for when the real stresses come. In terms of what you bring up, In terms of what you bring up, In terms of what you bring up, uh transcendental meditation, uh transcendental meditation, uh transcendental meditation, mindfulness, exercise, prayer, mindfulness, exercise, prayer, mindfulness, exercise, prayer, sort of reflecting on gratitude, sort of reflecting on gratitude, sort of reflecting on gratitude, all that sort of thing, collectively all that sort of thing, collectively all that sort of thing, collectively they work on the average. They work in they work on the average. They work in they work on the average. They work in terms of they can lower heart rate and terms of they can lower heart rate and terms of they can lower heart rate and cholesterol levels and have all sorts of cholesterol levels and have all sorts of cholesterol levels and have all sorts of good outcomes. Um but they come with good outcomes. Um but they come with good outcomes. Um but they come with provisos. One is exactly the caveat that provisos. One is exactly the caveat that provisos. One is exactly the caveat that comes out of the grinding wheel study is comes out of the grinding wheel study is comes out of the grinding wheel study is it doesn't matter how many of your it doesn't matter how many of your it doesn't matter how many of your friends swear by the stress management friends swear by the stress management friends swear by the stress management technique if doing it makes you want to technique if doing it makes you want to technique if doing it makes you want to scream your head off after 10 seconds, scream your head off after 10 seconds, scream your head off after 10 seconds, that's not the one that's going to work that's not the one that's going to work that's not the one that's going to work for you. So, you know, read the fine for you. So, you know, read the fine for you. So, you know, read the fine print in the testimonials, but it's got print in the testimonials, but it's got print in the testimonials, but it's got to be something that works for you. to be something that works for you. to be something that works for you. Another one is Another one is Another one is the stress management type techniques the stress management type techniques the stress management type techniques that work, you can't save them for the work, you can't save them for the work, you can't save them for the weekend. You can't save them for when weekend. You can't save them for when weekend. You can't save them for when you're stuck on hold on the phone with you're stuck on hold on the phone with you're stuck on hold on the phone with Muzak for 2 minutes. It's got to be Muzak for 2 minutes. It's got to be Muzak for 2 minutes. It's got to be something where you something where you something where you stop what you're doing and do it a stop what you're doing and do it a stop what you're doing and do it a virtually daily or every other day and virtually daily or every other day and virtually daily or every other day and spend 20-30 minutes doing it. And what spend 20-30 minutes doing it. And what spend 20-30 minutes doing it. And what you see coming out of that is this like you see coming out of that is this like you see coming out of that is this like 80/20 rule from economics. 80/20 rule from economics. 80/20 rule from economics. 80/20, 80% of the complaints in the 80/20, 80% of the complaints in the 80/20, 80% of the complaints in the store come from 20% of the customers, store come from 20% of the customers, store come from 20% of the customers, things like that. What you see is if things like that. What you see is if things like that. What you see is if your entire life consists of every your entire life consists of every your entire life consists of every single thing single thing single thing on your shoulders that you can't say no on your shoulders that you can't say no on your shoulders that you can't say no to 24/7, to 24/7, to 24/7, if you've stopped that and finally said if you've stopped that and finally said if you've stopped that and finally said my well-being is important enough that my well-being is important enough that my well-being is important enough that I'm finally going to say no to some of I'm finally going to say no to some of I'm finally going to say no to some of the stuff that I can't say no to and I'm the stuff that I can't say no to and I'm the stuff that I can't say no to and I'm going to do it every day for 20 minutes, going to do it every day for 20 minutes, going to do it every day for 20 minutes, whatever stress management technique you whatever stress management technique you whatever stress management technique you then do in those 20 minutes short of who then do in those 20 minutes short of who then do in those 20 minutes short of who knows what, you're already 80% of the knows what, you're already 80% of the knows what, you're already 80% of the way there simply by having decided your way there simply by having decided your way there simply by having decided your well-being is important enough that well-being is important enough that well-being is important enough that you're going to stop every single day you're going to stop every single day you're going to stop every single day and have that as priority. And that's and have that as priority. And that's and have that as priority. And that's the exactly the same finding that you the exactly the same finding that you the exactly the same finding that you find people with chronic depression find people with chronic depression find people with chronic depression untreated that merely calling and untreated that merely calling and untreated that merely calling and getting an appointment to see a mental getting an appointment to see a mental getting an appointment to see a mental health professional, people start health professional, people start health professional, people start feeling better already because it's feeling better already because it's feeling better already because it's evidence that you've been activated and evidence that you've been activated and evidence that you've been activated and you matter enough to do this and you matter enough to do this and you matter enough to do this and you could conceive that this would actually could conceive that this would actually could conceive that this would actually have a good outcome rather than a have a good outcome rather than a have a good outcome rather than a hopeless one. hopeless one. hopeless one. Just doing something meditative or Just doing something meditative or Just doing something meditative or reflective every day or so, and it reflective every day or so, and it reflective every day or so, and it hardly even matters hardly even matters hardly even matters which one you're doing. which one you're doing. which one you're doing. And what comes out of that is thus And what comes out of that is thus And what comes out of that is thus another warning, which is do not trust another warning, which is do not trust another warning, which is do not trust anybody who says it has been anybody who says it has been anybody who says it has been scientifically proven that their brand scientifically proven that their brand scientifically proven that their brand of stress management works better than of stress management works better than of stress management works better than the other ones. Just watch your wallet the other ones. Just watch your wallet the other ones. Just watch your wallet at that point. Yeah, amen. I think one at that point. Yeah, amen. I think one at that point. Yeah, amen. I think one of the core goals of my lab and David of the core goals of my lab and David of the core goals of my lab and David Spiegel's lab, and I know you've worked Spiegel's lab, and I know you've worked Spiegel's lab, and I know you've worked with David and published papers with David and published papers with David and published papers with David as well, is to really try and find David as well, is to really try and find David as well, is to really try and find out what are the various entry points to out what are the various entry points to out what are the various entry points to this thing that we call the autonomic this thing that we call the autonomic this thing that we call the autonomic nervous system and the stress system and nervous system and the stress system and nervous system and the stress system and these systems that when gone unchecked these systems that when gone unchecked these systems that when gone unchecked really can take us down a dark path. You really can take us down a dark path. You really can take us down a dark path. You know, and the idea that there are so many and the idea that there are so many and the idea that there are so many entry points is really the one that entry points is really the one that entry points is really the one that keeps what the data keep telling us over keeps what the data keep telling us over keeps what the data keep telling us over and over again. So, there's no magic and over again. So, there's no magic and over again. So, there's no magic breathing tool or exercise. It's any breathing tool or exercise. It's any breathing tool or exercise. It's any variety of those or one of those. And variety of those or one of those. And variety of those or one of those. And again, we come back to this idea that again, we come back to this idea that again, we come back to this idea that it's the one that you select and the one it's the one that you select and the one it's the one that you select and the one that you make space for, and it's the that you make space for, and it's the that you make space for, and it's the one that one that one that you hopefully enjoy that's going to work you hopefully enjoy that's going to work you hopefully enjoy that's going to work best in terms of physiology. best in terms of physiology. best in terms of physiology. And one of the benign for those people And one of the benign for those people And one of the benign for those people who are stuck around you. Right. Right, who are stuck around you. Right. Right, who are stuck around you. Right. Right, absolutely. And you know, that brings me absolutely. And you know, that brings me absolutely. And you know, that brings me to this question of I find it amazing to this question of I find it amazing to this question of I find it amazing that how we perceive an event and whether or how we perceive an event and whether or how we perceive an event and whether or not we chose to be in that event or not we chose to be in that event or not we chose to be in that event or not can have such incredible different can have such incredible different can have such incredible different effects on circuitry of the brain and effects on circuitry of the brain and effects on circuitry of the brain and circuitry of the body and biology of circuitry of the body and biology of circuitry of the body and biology of cells. And in some ways it boggles my mind. And in some ways it boggles my mind. And in some ways it boggles my mind. Like how can a decision made presumably Like how can a decision made presumably Like how can a decision made presumably with the prefrontal cortex, although with the prefrontal cortex, although with the prefrontal cortex, although other parts of the brain as well, how other parts of the brain as well, how other parts of the brain as well, how can that change essentially the polarity can that change essentially the polarity can that change essentially the polarity of a response in the body? And I mean of a response in the body? And I mean of a response in the body? And I mean you've talked before about type A you've talked before about type A you've talked before about type A personalities and that we don't have to personalities and that we don't have to personalities and that we don't have to go into all the detail there for sake of go into all the detail there for sake of go into all the detail there for sake of time, but it is interesting that the time, but it is interesting that the time, but it is interesting that the effects of endothelial cells, I mean effects of endothelial cells, I mean effects of endothelial cells, I mean literally of the size of the portals literally of the size of the portals literally of the size of the portals for blood are in opposite direction for blood are in opposite direction for blood are in opposite direction depending on whether or not somebody depending on whether or not somebody depending on whether or not somebody wants to be in a situation as a highly wants to be in a situation as a highly wants to be in a situation as a highly motivated person. Maybe you could just motivated person. Maybe you could just motivated person. Maybe you could just give us the top contour of that give us the top contour of that give us the top contour of that because I think it really illustrates because I think it really illustrates because I think it really illustrates this principle so beautifully. And then this principle so beautifully. And then this principle so beautifully. And then maybe if you would, you could just maybe if you would, you could just maybe if you would, you could just speculate on how the brain might have speculate on how the brain might have speculate on how the brain might have this switch to turn one experience from this switch to turn one experience from this switch to turn one experience from terrible to beneficial or from terrible to beneficial or from terrible to beneficial or from beneficial to terrible. It's really beneficial to terrible. It's really beneficial to terrible. It's really fascinating. Well, I mean all you need to do is like Well, I mean all you need to do is like Well, I mean all you need to do is like tonight before you're going to sleep and tonight before you're going to sleep and tonight before you're going to sleep and you're lying in bed and you're nice and you're lying in bed and you're nice and you're lying in bed and you're nice and drowsy and your heart's beating nice and drowsy and your heart's beating nice and drowsy and your heart's beating nice and slow, you'll start thinking about the slow, you'll start thinking about the slow, you'll start thinking about the fact that, you know, that heart isn't fact that, you know, that heart isn't fact that, you know, that heart isn't going to beat forever. And imagine your going to beat forever. And imagine your going to beat forever. And imagine your toes getting cold afterward and imagine toes getting cold afterward and imagine toes getting cold afterward and imagine the flow of blood coming to a halt and the flow of blood coming to a halt and the flow of blood coming to a halt and all of you clotting and if you really all of you clotting and if you really all of you clotting and if you really you're going to be doing something with you're going to be doing something with you're going to be doing something with your physiology at that point that 99% your physiology at that point that 99% your physiology at that point that 99% of mammals out there only do if they're of mammals out there only do if they're of mammals out there only do if they're running frantically. And you're going to running frantically. And you're going to running frantically. And you're going to be turning on your sympathetic stress be turning on your sympathetic stress be turning on your sympathetic stress response with thought, with emotions, response with thought, with emotions, response with thought, with emotions, with memory. And the measure of that is with memory. And the measure of that is with memory. And the measure of that is just how much the cortex and the limbic just how much the cortex and the limbic just how much the cortex and the limbic system sends projections down to all the system sends projections down to all the system sends projections down to all the autonomic regulators in the brain. Um autonomic regulators in the brain. Um autonomic regulators in the brain. Um you can think you can think you can think autonomic regulatory neurons into action autonomic regulatory neurons into action autonomic regulatory neurons into action in ways that only other animals can do in ways that only other animals can do in ways that only other animals can do with like extremes of environmental with like extremes of environmental with like extremes of environmental circumstances. And given that and the autonomic rule, I And given that and the autonomic rule, I And given that and the autonomic rule, I mean the other big challenge in mean the other big challenge in mean the other big challenge in understanding it is gigantic individual understanding it is gigantic individual understanding it is gigantic individual differences. And that's, you know, And that's, you know, And that's, you know, you we talk about the optimal amount of you we talk about the optimal amount of you we talk about the optimal amount of stress that counts as stimulation, and stress that counts as stimulation, and stress that counts as stimulation, and in general that's stress that's not too in general that's stress that's not too in general that's stress that's not too severe and doesn't go on for too long severe and doesn't go on for too long severe and doesn't go on for too long and is overall in a benevolent setting, and is overall in a benevolent setting, and is overall in a benevolent setting, and under those conditions we love being and under those conditions we love being and under those conditions we love being stressed by something unexpected and had stressed by something unexpected and had stressed by something unexpected and had a control and predictability like a control and predictability like a control and predictability like a really interesting plot turn in the really interesting plot turn in the really interesting plot turn in the movie you're watching. That's great, but movie you're watching. That's great, but movie you're watching. That's great, but you get the individual differences that you get the individual differences that you get the individual differences that somehow has to accommodate the fact that somehow has to accommodate the fact that somehow has to accommodate the fact that for some people the perfect stimulatory for some people the perfect stimulatory for some people the perfect stimulatory amount of stress is like getting up amount of stress is like getting up amount of stress is like getting up early for an Audubon bird watching walk early for an Audubon bird watching walk early for an Audubon bird watching walk next Sunday morning, and for somebody next Sunday morning, and for somebody next Sunday morning, and for somebody else it's signing up to be like a else it's signing up to be like a else it's signing up to be like a mercenary in Yemen. mercenary in Yemen. mercenary in Yemen. And tremendous individual differences And tremendous individual differences And tremendous individual differences that swamp any simple, that swamp any simple, that swamp any simple, you know, you know, you know, prescriptions. Yeah, the prefrontal cortex, this Yeah, the prefrontal cortex, this Yeah, the prefrontal cortex, this thinking machinery that we all harbor, thinking machinery that we all harbor, thinking machinery that we all harbor, it's such a double-edged sword. Uh and it's such a double-edged sword. Uh and it's such a double-edged sword. Uh and uh what's uh remarkable to me is how the uh what's uh remarkable to me is how the uh what's uh remarkable to me is how the areas of the brain like the hypothalamus areas of the brain like the hypothalamus areas of the brain like the hypothalamus and the amygdala, they're sort of like and the amygdala, they're sort of like and the amygdala, they're sort of like switches. I mean they there's switches. I mean they there's switches. I mean they there's context and there's gain control. You context and there's gain control. You context and there's gain control. You talked about the gain control talked about the gain control talked about the gain control by testosterone, etc., but they're by testosterone, etc., but they're by testosterone, etc., but they're really like switches. I mean if you really like switches. I mean if you really like switches. I mean if you stimulate ventromedial hypothalamus, you stimulate ventromedial hypothalamus, you stimulate ventromedial hypothalamus, you get the right neurons and an animal will get the right neurons and an animal will get the right neurons and an animal will try and kill even an object that's try and kill even an object that's try and kill even an object that's sitting next to it. You tickle some sitting next to it. You tickle some sitting next to it. You tickle some other neurons, it'll try and mate with other neurons, it'll try and mate with other neurons, it'll try and mate with that same object. I mean it's really that same object. I mean it's really that same object. I mean it's really wild. The I think there are probably wild. The I think there are probably wild. The I think there are probably rules to prefrontal cortex also, but it rules to prefrontal cortex also, but it rules to prefrontal cortex also, but it sounds like the context sounds like the context sounds like the context plural from which prefrontal cortex can plural from which prefrontal cortex can plural from which prefrontal cortex can draw from are probably infinite. draw from are probably infinite. draw from are probably infinite. Um so that we could probably learn to Um so that we could probably learn to Um so that we could probably learn to perceive threat in anything, whether or perceive threat in anything, whether or perceive threat in anything, whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's um science or whether or not it's um science or whether or not it's um science or whether or not it's uh somebody's version of the shape of uh somebody's version of the shape of uh somebody's version of the shape of the earth versus another. I mean, it's the earth versus another. I mean, it's the earth versus another. I mean, it's like you can plug in anything to it's like you can plug in anything to it's like you can plug in anything to this system and give it enough data and this system and give it enough data and this system and give it enough data and I think it sounds like you could drive a I think it sounds like you could drive a I think it sounds like you could drive a fear response or a love response. Is fear response or a love response. Is fear response or a love response. Is that overstepping? Or a mixed, horribly that overstepping? Or a mixed, horribly that overstepping? Or a mixed, horribly ambivalent one that is changing by the ambivalent one that is changing by the ambivalent one that is changing by the millisecond and like mutually millisecond and like mutually millisecond and like mutually contradictory. No, that's absolutely the contradictory. No, that's absolutely the contradictory. No, that's absolutely the case. And the prefrontal cortex, I case. And the prefrontal cortex, I case. And the prefrontal cortex, I more than once have more than once have more than once have regretted having like wasted 30 years of regretted having like wasted 30 years of regretted having like wasted 30 years of my life studying the hippocampus when I my life studying the hippocampus when I my life studying the hippocampus when I should have been studying the prefrontal should have been studying the prefrontal should have been studying the prefrontal cortex cuz it's so much more interesting cortex cuz it's so much more interesting cortex cuz it's so much more interesting what it does and it's all this what it does and it's all this what it does and it's all this contextual stuff. It's all the ways in contextual stuff. It's all the ways in contextual stuff. It's all the ways in which it's not okay to lie in this which it's not okay to lie in this which it's not okay to lie in this setting, but it's a great thing in setting, but it's a great thing in setting, but it's a great thing in another. It's not okay to kill unless another. It's not okay to kill unless another. It's not okay to kill unless you do it to them and then you get a you do it to them and then you get a you do it to them and then you get a medal. It's not all of this social medal. It's not all of this social medal. It's not all of this social context and moral relativity and context and moral relativity and context and moral relativity and situational ethics stuff. That's the situational ethics stuff. That's the situational ethics stuff. That's the prefrontal cortex that's got to master prefrontal cortex that's got to master prefrontal cortex that's got to master that and that winds up meaning that's that and that winds up meaning that's that and that winds up meaning that's the place in your brain more than the place in your brain more than the place in your brain more than anywhere where you say your perception anywhere where you say your perception anywhere where you say your perception of things of things of things uh can powerfully influence the reality uh can powerfully influence the reality uh can powerfully influence the reality of what's coming into you. of what's coming into you. of what's coming into you. I mean, I mean, I mean, great example just harking back to great example just harking back to great example just harking back to testosterone. Okay, so exercise boosts testosterone. Okay, so exercise boosts testosterone. Okay, so exercise boosts up testosterone levels. Does exercise up testosterone levels. Does exercise up testosterone levels. Does exercise and success do it more than exercise and success do it more than exercise and success do it more than exercise and failure? A literature back in the '80s failure? A literature back in the '80s failure? A literature back in the '80s or so looking at outcomes of marathons. or so looking at outcomes of marathons. or so looking at outcomes of marathons. Did testosterone rise more in the people Did testosterone rise more in the people Did testosterone rise more in the people who win than the losers? who win than the losers? who win than the losers? Wrestling matches, things of that sort Wrestling matches, things of that sort Wrestling matches, things of that sort with a simple prediction. And the answer with a simple prediction. And the answer with a simple prediction. And the answer wound up being you didn't see a simple wound up being you didn't see a simple wound up being you didn't see a simple answer. Okay, you win the marathon, that's not Okay, you win the marathon, that's not Okay, you win the marathon, that's not necessarily an increase a predictor of necessarily an increase a predictor of necessarily an increase a predictor of increased testosterone. What's that increased testosterone. What's that increased testosterone. What's that about? And then you find like about? And then you find like about? And then you find like you know, the winner testosterone you know, the winner testosterone you know, the winner testosterone decreases. And you find out the guy who decreases. And you find out the guy who decreases. And you find out the guy who came in 73rd is having a massive came in 73rd is having a massive came in 73rd is having a massive testosterone increase. Whoa, what's that testosterone increase. Whoa, what's that testosterone increase. Whoa, what's that about? What's that about is far more about? What's that about is far more about? What's that about is far more human subtlety. The first The guy who human subtlety. The first The guy who human subtlety. The first The guy who won the race has a decline in won the race has a decline in won the race has a decline in testosterone because he came in 3 testosterone because he came in 3 testosterone because he came in 3 minutes later than he really was minutes later than he really was minutes later than he really was expecting. And everybody now is going to expecting. And everybody now is going to expecting. And everybody now is going to be writing it up about how he's over the be writing it up about how he's over the be writing it up about how he's over the hill. And the guy who came in 73rd is hill. And the guy who came in 73rd is hill. And the guy who came in 73rd is having a boost of testosterone because having a boost of testosterone because having a boost of testosterone because he was assuming he'd be dead from a he was assuming he'd be dead from a he was assuming he'd be dead from a heart attack by the third mile and heart attack by the third mile and heart attack by the third mile and instead he managed to finish. instead he managed to finish. instead he managed to finish. It's this interpretive stuff going on in It's this interpretive stuff going on in It's this interpretive stuff going on in there and that's what prefrontal cortex there and that's what prefrontal cortex there and that's what prefrontal cortex is about. is about. is about. Amazing. It I raises this question of Amazing. It I raises this question of Amazing. It I raises this question of cognitive flexibility. You know, can cognitive flexibility. You know, can cognitive flexibility. You know, can uh can we tell ourselves uh can we tell ourselves uh can we tell ourselves that something is good for us even if that something is good for us even if that something is good for us even if we're not enjoying it? And can we can we we're not enjoying it? And can we can we we're not enjoying it? And can we can we wriggle around these corners of wriggle around these corners of wriggle around these corners of choosing the exercise or doing the choosing the exercise or doing the choosing the exercise or doing the you know, I personally I'm not a the you know, I personally I'm not a the you know, I personally I'm not a big fan of um long bouts of big fan of um long bouts of big fan of um long bouts of meditation, but I've benefited meditation, but I've benefited meditation, but I've benefited tremendously from things like dedicated tremendously from things like dedicated tremendously from things like dedicated breathing and shorter rounds of breathing and shorter rounds of breathing and shorter rounds of meditation. Um can I tell myself that meditation. Um can I tell myself that meditation. Um can I tell myself that it's good for me and wriggle around the it's good for me and wriggle around the it's good for me and wriggle around the corner and get my physiology working the corner and get my physiology working the corner and get my physiology working the way I want? Do we have cognitive way I want? Do we have cognitive way I want? Do we have cognitive flexibility? Can I be that um third flexibility? Can I be that um third flexibility? Can I be that um third place runner and tell myself, "Well, at place runner and tell myself, "Well, at place runner and tell myself, "Well, at least I'm least I'm least I'm uh I came in uh I wanted to win so uh I came in uh I wanted to win so uh I came in uh I wanted to win so badly. That was my primary goal, but badly. That was my primary goal, but badly. That was my primary goal, but another goal was to beat my previous another goal was to beat my previous another goal was to beat my previous time and I did do that." And so uh I time and I did do that." And so uh I time and I did do that." And so uh I mean it's mean it's mean it's what To what extent can we toggle this what To what extent can we toggle this what To what extent can we toggle this relationship between the prefrontal relationship between the prefrontal relationship between the prefrontal cortex and these other more cortex and these other more cortex and these other more primitive systems. primitive systems. primitive systems. Oh, and an enormous amount. Oh, and an enormous amount. Oh, and an enormous amount. Um You know, for example, being low in a You know, for example, being low in a You know, for example, being low in a hierarchy um is generally bad for health in like um is generally bad for health in like um is generally bad for health in like every mammal out there including us. But every mammal out there including us. But every mammal out there including us. But we do something special which is we can we do something special which is we can we do something special which is we can be part of multiple hierarchies at the be part of multiple hierarchies at the be part of multiple hierarchies at the same time. And while you may be low same time. And while you may be low same time. And while you may be low ranking in one of them, you could be ranking in one of them, you could be ranking in one of them, you could be extremely high ranking in another. extremely high ranking in another. extremely high ranking in another. You're like have the crappiest job in You're like have the crappiest job in You're like have the crappiest job in your corporation, but you're the captain your corporation, but you're the captain your corporation, but you're the captain of the team softball of the softball of the team softball of the softball of the team softball of the softball team this year for the company. And you team this year for the company. And you team this year for the company. And you better bet that's somebody who's going better bet that's somebody who's going better bet that's somebody who's going to find all sorts of ways to decide that to find all sorts of ways to decide that to find all sorts of ways to decide that 9:00 to 5:00 Monday to Friday is just 9:00 to 5:00 Monday to Friday is just 9:00 to 5:00 Monday to Friday is just stupid paying the bills. And what really stupid paying the bills. And what really stupid paying the bills. And what really matters is, you know, the prestige on matters is, you know, the prestige on matters is, you know, the prestige on the weekend. You're poorer, but you're the weekend. You're poorer, but you're the weekend. You're poorer, but you're the deacon of your church. You're And so the deacon of your church. You're And so the deacon of your church. You're And so we can play all sorts of psychological we can play all sorts of psychological we can play all sorts of psychological games with that. One of the most like games with that. One of the most like games with that. One of the most like consistent reliable ones that we do and consistent reliable ones that we do and consistent reliable ones that we do and need to use the frontal cortex like need to use the frontal cortex like need to use the frontal cortex like crazy is somebody does something rotten crazy is somebody does something rotten crazy is somebody does something rotten and you need to attribute it. And the and you need to attribute it. And the and you need to attribute it. And the answer is they did something rotten answer is they did something rotten answer is they did something rotten because they're rotten. Always have because they're rotten. Always have because they're rotten. Always have been, always will be this constitutional been, always will be this constitutional been, always will be this constitutional explanation. You do something rotten to explanation. You do something rotten to explanation. You do something rotten to somebody and how do you explain it somebody and how do you explain it somebody and how do you explain it afterward? A situational one. I was afterward? A situational one. I was afterward? A situational one. I was tired. I was stressed. In this sort of tired. I was stressed. In this sort of tired. I was stressed. In this sort of setting I misunderstood this. Um we're setting I misunderstood this. Um we're setting I misunderstood this. Um we're best at excusing ourselves from bad best at excusing ourselves from bad best at excusing ourselves from bad things because we have access to our things because we have access to our things because we have access to our inner lives and we've got prefrontal inner lives and we've got prefrontal inner lives and we've got prefrontal cortexes that are great at coming up cortexes that are great at coming up cortexes that are great at coming up with a situational explanation rather with a situational explanation rather with a situational explanation rather than, "Hey, maybe you're just like a than, "Hey, maybe you're just like a than, "Hey, maybe you're just like a selfish rotten human and you need to selfish rotten human and you need to selfish rotten human and you need to change." And that's all prefrontal cortex and we And that's all prefrontal cortex and we And that's all prefrontal cortex and we do that every time we don't let do that every time we don't let do that every time we don't let somebody, you know, merge in the lane in somebody, you know, merge in the lane in somebody, you know, merge in the lane in front of us even though you curse front of us even though you curse front of us even though you curse somebody who does the same thing to you somebody who does the same thing to you somebody who does the same thing to you and you know, you know, you know, endlessly. Your I love it. Your statement about uh Your I love it. Your statement about uh Your I love it. Your statement about uh the fact that we can select multiple the fact that we can select multiple the fact that we can select multiple hierarchies to participate in hierarchies to participate in hierarchies to participate in um to me seems like a particularly um to me seems like a particularly um to me seems like a particularly important one nowadays with social media important one nowadays with social media important one nowadays with social media being so prevalent. I know you're not being so prevalent. I know you're not being so prevalent. I know you're not particularly active on social media, particularly active on social media, particularly active on social media, although uh you might be um pleasantly although uh you might be um pleasantly although uh you might be um pleasantly or I don't know, unpleasantly surprised or I don't know, unpleasantly surprised or I don't know, unpleasantly surprised to find out that there's a there's a lot to find out that there's a there's a lot to find out that there's a there's a lot of positive discussion about you and of positive discussion about you and of positive discussion about you and your work. Uh so you don't even need to your work. Uh so you don't even need to your work. Uh so you don't even need to be on there. We'll just continue to be on there. We'll just continue to be on there. We'll just continue to discuss your work. But the but what's discuss your work. But the but what's discuss your work. But the but what's interesting about social media interesting about social media interesting about social media I've found is that the context is very, I've found is that the context is very, I've found is that the context is very, very broad. I mean, one could argue that very broad. I mean, one could argue that very broad. I mean, one could argue that who one selects to follow and which news who one selects to follow and which news who one selects to follow and which news articles you're reading, etc. can create articles you're reading, etc. can create articles you're reading, etc. can create of kind of a funneling of information of kind of a funneling of information of kind of a funneling of information that itself can be dangerous. You know, that itself can be dangerous. You know, that itself can be dangerous. You know, more verification of crazy ideas or more verification of crazy ideas or more verification of crazy ideas or even just less exposure to new ideas. Um even just less exposure to new ideas. Um even just less exposure to new ideas. Um but there's also this idea that but there's also this idea that but there's also this idea that social media is an incredibly broad social media is an incredibly broad social media is an incredibly broad context. So as you scroll through a context. So as you scroll through a context. So as you scroll through a feed, it's no longer like being in your feed, it's no longer like being in your feed, it's no longer like being in your eighth grade classroom or your office or eighth grade classroom or your office or eighth grade classroom or your office or your faculty meeting. You are being your faculty meeting. You are being your faculty meeting. You are being exposed to exposed to exposed to thousands, if not millions of contexts. thousands, if not millions of contexts. thousands, if not millions of contexts. This meal, that soccer game, this This meal, that soccer game, this This meal, that soccer game, this person's body, this person's intellect. person's body, this person's intellect. person's body, this person's intellect. Uh YouTube is another example. It's a uh Uh YouTube is another example. It's a uh Uh YouTube is another example. It's a uh it's a vast, vast landscape and it's a vast, vast landscape and it's a vast, vast landscape and it's so the context is completely so the context is completely so the context is completely mishmash. Whereas I'm assuming we mishmash. Whereas I'm assuming we mishmash. Whereas I'm assuming we evolved, uh I think we did evolve under evolved, uh I think we did evolve under evolved, uh I think we did evolve under context that were much more constrained. context that were much more constrained. context that were much more constrained. We interacted with a limited number of We interacted with a limited number of We interacted with a limited number of individuals and in a limited number of individuals and in a limited number of individuals and in a limited number of different domains. Seasons tended be different domains. Seasons tended be different domains. Seasons tended be constrain us all and um of course then constrain us all and um of course then constrain us all and um of course then we got phones and televisions and this we got phones and televisions and this we got phones and televisions and this started to expand, but now more than started to expand, but now more than started to expand, but now more than ever our brain, our prefrontal cortex and our brain, our prefrontal cortex and our brain, our prefrontal cortex and our sense of where we exist in these sense of where we exist in these sense of where we exist in these multiple hierarchies has essentially multiple hierarchies has essentially multiple hierarchies has essentially wicked out into infinity. How do you wicked out into infinity. How do you wicked out into infinity. How do you think this might be interacting with think this might be interacting with think this might be interacting with some of these more some of these more some of these more primitive systems and other aspects primitive systems and other aspects primitive systems and other aspects of our of our biology? of our of our biology? of our of our biology? Well, I think what you get is in some Well, I think what you get is in some Well, I think what you get is in some ways the punchline of what's most ways the punchline of what's most ways the punchline of what's most human about humans, which is over and human about humans, which is over and human about humans, which is over and over we use the exact same blueprint, over we use the exact same blueprint, over we use the exact same blueprint, the same hormones, the same kinases, the same hormones, the same kinases, the same hormones, the same kinases, the same receptors, the same everything. same receptors, the same everything. same receptors, the same everything. We're built out of the exact same stuff We're built out of the exact same stuff We're built out of the exact same stuff as all these other species out there, as all these other species out there, as all these other species out there, and then we go and use it in a and then we go and use it in a and then we go and use it in a completely novel way. completely novel way. completely novel way. And usually in terms of being able to And usually in terms of being able to And usually in terms of being able to abstract stuff over space and time in abstract stuff over space and time in abstract stuff over space and time in dramatic ways. dramatic ways. dramatic ways. So, okay, you're a low-ranking baboon So, okay, you're a low-ranking baboon So, okay, you're a low-ranking baboon and you can feel badly because you just and you can feel badly because you just and you can feel badly because you just like killed a rabbit and you're about to like killed a rabbit and you're about to like killed a rabbit and you're about to eat and some higher-ranking guy boots eat and some higher-ranking guy boots eat and some higher-ranking guy boots you off and takes it away from you. And you off and takes it away from you. And you off and takes it away from you. And you feel crummy and it's stressful and you feel crummy and it's stressful and you feel crummy and it's stressful and you're unhappy. you're unhappy. you're unhappy. We are doing the exact same things with We are doing the exact same things with We are doing the exact same things with like our brain and bodies when we're like our brain and bodies when we're like our brain and bodies when we're losing a sense of self-esteem, but we losing a sense of self-esteem, but we losing a sense of self-esteem, but we can do it by watching a movie character can do it by watching a movie character can do it by watching a movie character on the screen and feeling inadequate on the screen and feeling inadequate on the screen and feeling inadequate compared to like how wonderful or compared to like how wonderful or compared to like how wonderful or attractive they are. We can do it by attractive they are. We can do it by attractive they are. We can do it by somebody driving past us in an expensive somebody driving past us in an expensive somebody driving past us in an expensive car and we don't even see their face and car and we don't even see their face and car and we don't even see their face and you can feel belittled by your own you can feel belittled by your own you can feel belittled by your own socioeconomic status. Um, you can watch socioeconomic status. Um, you can watch socioeconomic status. Um, you can watch like the lifestyles of the rich and like the lifestyles of the rich and like the lifestyles of the rich and famous or read about what Bezos is up to famous or read about what Bezos is up to famous or read about what Bezos is up to and for some reason decide your and for some reason decide your and for some reason decide your life is less fulfilling because you life is less fulfilling because you life is less fulfilling because you didn't fly into space for 11 minutes and didn't fly into space for 11 minutes and didn't fly into space for 11 minutes and so you can feel miserable about yourself so you can feel miserable about yourself so you can feel miserable about yourself in ways that no other organism can, in ways that no other organism can, in ways that no other organism can, simply because simply because simply because we can have our meaningful social we can have our meaningful social we can have our meaningful social networks include like the party you're networks include like the party you're networks include like the party you're reading about on Facebook that you reading about on Facebook that you reading about on Facebook that you weren't invited to, because it's taking weren't invited to, because it's taking weren't invited to, because it's taking place in Singapore and you don't know place in Singapore and you don't know place in Singapore and you don't know any of those people, but nonetheless, any of those people, but nonetheless, any of those people, but nonetheless, somehow that could be a means for you to somehow that could be a means for you to somehow that could be a means for you to feel less content with who you've turned feel less content with who you've turned feel less content with who you've turned out to be. out to be. out to be. Do you take steps in your own life to Do you take steps in your own life to Do you take steps in your own life to actively restrict the contexts in which actively restrict the contexts in which actively restrict the contexts in which you think and live and you think and live and you think and live and um and contemplate uh in you know in order and contemplate uh in you know in order and contemplate uh in you know in order to enhance your creative life, your enhance your creative life, your enhance your creative life, your intellectual life? Uh intellectual life? Uh intellectual life? Uh are those are those steps that you are those are those steps that you are those are those steps that you actively take? actively take? actively take? Um well, I very actively don't know how Um well, I very actively don't know how Um well, I very actively don't know how to make use of anything with social to make use of anything with social to make use of anything with social media. Um so, I guess that counts as my media. Um so, I guess that counts as my media. Um so, I guess that counts as my having thus actively chosen not to learn having thus actively chosen not to learn having thus actively chosen not to learn how. Um how. Um how. Um So, that's the case certainly for the So, that's the case certainly for the So, that's the case certainly for the last year and a half like lots of last year and a half like lots of last year and a half like lots of people. Um I've gone through stretches people. Um I've gone through stretches people. Um I've gone through stretches where I've managed to sort of enforce a where I've managed to sort of enforce a where I've managed to sort of enforce a moratorium on looking at the news, and moratorium on looking at the news, and moratorium on looking at the news, and that was wonderfully freeing. that was wonderfully freeing. that was wonderfully freeing. Um I think in the larger sense though, Um I think in the larger sense though, Um I think in the larger sense though, um you know, in addition to me being a you know, in addition to me being a you know, in addition to me being a neurobiologist, I've sort of spent neurobiologist, I've sort of spent neurobiologist, I've sort of spent decades spending part of each year decades spending part of each year decades spending part of each year studying wild baboons out in a national studying wild baboons out in a national studying wild baboons out in a national park in East Africa, park in East Africa, park in East Africa, and I'd spend 3 months a year without and I'd spend 3 months a year without and I'd spend 3 months a year without electricity, without phone calls, with electricity, without phone calls, with electricity, without phone calls, with you know, going 12 hours a day without you know, going 12 hours a day without you know, going 12 hours a day without saying a word to somebody, and when I saying a word to somebody, and when I saying a word to somebody, and when I finally would, it would be somebody finally would, it would be somebody finally would, it would be somebody a nomadic pastoralist guy in a different a nomadic pastoralist guy in a different a nomadic pastoralist guy in a different language. Yeah, I did 90% of my like insightful Yeah, I did 90% of my like insightful Yeah, I did 90% of my like insightful thinking about anything in the thinking about anything in the thinking about anything in the laboratory during those 3 months each laboratory during those 3 months each laboratory during those 3 months each year, and not when in the lab, and not year, and not when in the lab, and not year, and not when in the lab, and not when inundated with stuff. when inundated with stuff. when inundated with stuff. Well, I think there's uh Well, I think there's uh Well, I think there's uh there's a shifting trend towards trying there's a shifting trend towards trying there's a shifting trend towards trying to create a narrowing of context. Uh to create a narrowing of context. Uh to create a narrowing of context. Uh that and I like what I see. I have a that and I like what I see. I have a that and I like what I see. I have a niece, she's 14 years old, and uh she niece, she's 14 years old, and uh she niece, she's 14 years old, and uh she and her friends are very good at putting and her friends are very good at putting and her friends are very good at putting their phones away. They say, "We're not their phones away. They say, "We're not their phones away. They say, "We're not going to have our phones for this going to have our phones for this going to have our phones for this interaction." Especially after and I interaction." Especially after and I interaction." Especially after and I realize we're still somewhat in this uh realize we're still somewhat in this uh realize we're still somewhat in this uh it's unclear where it's headed, it's unclear where it's headed, it's unclear where it's headed, but after 2020 was so restrictive and but after 2020 was so restrictive and but after 2020 was so restrictive and she was so separated from her friends, she was so separated from her friends, she was so separated from her friends, now it's let's really focus on being now it's let's really focus on being now it's let's really focus on being together and not bring in all these together and not bring in all these together and not bring in all these other elements from our phones. And I other elements from our phones. And I other elements from our phones. And I have that brings me great hope for that have that brings me great hope for that have that brings me great hope for that generation. Maybe they will uh that generation. Maybe they will uh that generation. Maybe they will uh you know, or who knows, maybe they'll you know, or who knows, maybe they'll you know, or who knows, maybe they'll run off and study baboons. We need more run off and study baboons. We need more run off and study baboons. We need more uh field researchers. uh field researchers. uh field researchers. Uh So, along the lines of choice, uh I'd Uh So, along the lines of choice, uh I'd Uh So, along the lines of choice, uh I'd like to shift gears slightly and talk like to shift gears slightly and talk like to shift gears slightly and talk about free will, about our ability to about free will, about our ability to about free will, about our ability to make choices at all. make choices at all. make choices at all. Well, my personal Well, my personal Well, my personal way out and left-field inflammatory way out and left-field inflammatory way out and left-field inflammatory stance is I don't think we have a shred stance is I don't think we have a shred stance is I don't think we have a shred of free will. Um despite of free will. Um despite of free will. Um despite you know, 95% of philosophers and I you know, 95% of philosophers and I you know, 95% of philosophers and I think probably the majority of think probably the majority of think probably the majority of neuroscientists saying that we have free neuroscientists saying that we have free neuroscientists saying that we have free will in at least some circumstances, I will in at least some circumstances, I will in at least some circumstances, I don't think there's any at all. don't think there's any at all. don't think there's any at all. Um and the reason for this is Um and the reason for this is Um and the reason for this is you do something, you behave, you make a you do something, you behave, you make a you do something, you behave, you make a choice, whatever, and to understand why choice, whatever, and to understand why choice, whatever, and to understand why you did that, where did that intention you did that, where did that intention you did that, where did that intention come from, um part of it was due to like come from, um part of it was due to like come from, um part of it was due to like the sensory environment you were in the sensory environment you were in the sensory environment you were in the previous minute. Some of it is from the previous minute. Some of it is from the previous minute. Some of it is from the hormone levels in your bloodstream the hormone levels in your bloodstream the hormone levels in your bloodstream that morning. Some of it is from whether that morning. Some of it is from whether that morning. Some of it is from whether you had a wonderful or stressful last 3 you had a wonderful or stressful last 3 you had a wonderful or stressful last 3 months and what sort of neuroplasticity months and what sort of neuroplasticity months and what sort of neuroplasticity happened. Part of it is what hormone happened. Part of it is what hormone happened. Part of it is what hormone levels you were exposed to as a fetus. levels you were exposed to as a fetus. levels you were exposed to as a fetus. Part of it is what culture your Part of it is what culture your Part of it is what culture your ancestors came up with and thus how you ancestors came up with and thus how you ancestors came up with and thus how you were parented when you were a kid. were parented when you were a kid. were parented when you were a kid. All of those are in there and you can't All of those are in there and you can't All of those are in there and you can't understand where behavior is coming from understand where behavior is coming from understand where behavior is coming from without incorporating all of those. without incorporating all of those. without incorporating all of those. And at that point And at that point And at that point not only are there all of these not only are there all of these not only are there all of these relevant factors relevant factors relevant factors but they're ultimately all one factor. but they're ultimately all one factor. but they're ultimately all one factor. If you're talking about what evolution If you're talking about what evolution If you're talking about what evolution has to do with your behavior, by has to do with your behavior, by has to do with your behavior, by definition you're also talking about definition you're also talking about definition you're also talking about genetics. If you're talking about what your genes If you're talking about what your genes If you're talking about what your genes have to do with behavior, by definition have to do with behavior, by definition have to do with behavior, by definition you're talking about how your brain was you're talking about how your brain was you're talking about how your brain was constructed or what proteins are coded constructed or what proteins are coded constructed or what proteins are coded for. If you're talking about like your for. If you're talking about like your for. If you're talking about like your mood disorder now, you're talking about mood disorder now, you're talking about mood disorder now, you're talking about the sense of efficacy you were getting the sense of efficacy you were getting the sense of efficacy you were getting as a five-year-old. They're all as a five-year-old. They're all as a five-year-old. They're all intertwined and when you look at all intertwined and when you look at all intertwined and when you look at all those influences those influences those influences basically like the challenge is show me basically like the challenge is show me basically like the challenge is show me a neuron that just caused that behavior a neuron that just caused that behavior a neuron that just caused that behavior or show me a network of neurons that or show me a network of neurons that or show me a network of neurons that just caused that behavior and show me just caused that behavior and show me just caused that behavior and show me that nothing about what they just did that nothing about what they just did that nothing about what they just did was influenced by anything from the was influenced by anything from the was influenced by anything from the century environment one second ago to century environment one second ago to century environment one second ago to the evolution of your species. And the evolution of your species. And the evolution of your species. And there's no space in there to fit in a there's no space in there to fit in a there's no space in there to fit in a free will concept that winds up being free will concept that winds up being free will concept that winds up being you know in your brain but not of your you know in your brain but not of your you know in your brain but not of your brain. There's simply no wiggle room for brain. There's simply no wiggle room for brain. There's simply no wiggle room for it there. it there. it there. So I can appreciate that our behaviors and I can appreciate that our behaviors and I can appreciate that our behaviors and our choices are the consequence of a our choices are the consequence of a our choices are the consequence of a long line of dominoes that fell prior to long line of dominoes that fell prior to long line of dominoes that fell prior to that behavior. that behavior. that behavior. But is it possible that I can intervene in is it possible that I can intervene in is it possible that I can intervene in the domino effect so to speak, you know the domino effect so to speak, you know the domino effect so to speak, you know in other words, can my recognition in other words, can my recognition in other words, can my recognition of the fact that genes have heredity, of the fact that genes have heredity, of the fact that genes have heredity, there's an epigenome that there's a there's an epigenome that there's a there's an epigenome that there's a hormonal context, there's a historical hormonal context, there's a historical hormonal context, there's a historical context can the knowledge of that give me some can the knowledge of that give me some can the knowledge of that give me some small shard of free will? Meaning, small shard of free will? Meaning, small shard of free will? Meaning, does it allow me to say, "Ah, okay, I does it allow me to say, "Ah, okay, I does it allow me to say, "Ah, okay, I accept that my choices are somewhat accept that my choices are somewhat accept that my choices are somewhat predetermined and yet knowing that gives predetermined and yet knowing that gives predetermined and yet knowing that gives me some additional layer of control?" Is is some additional layer of control?" Is is some additional layer of control?" Is is there any philosophical or biological there any philosophical or biological there any philosophical or biological universe in which that universe in which that universe in which that works? Nah. Um all of that all of that all of that can produce the wonderfully positive can produce the wonderfully positive can produce the wonderfully positive belief that change can happen. belief that change can happen. belief that change can happen. Even dramatic change, even in the worst Even dramatic change, even in the worst Even dramatic change, even in the worst of circumstances, most unlikely people, of circumstances, most unlikely people, of circumstances, most unlikely people, and change can happen. Things can and change can happen. Things can and change can happen. Things can change. Uh don't be fatalistic, don't decide Uh don't be fatalistic, don't decide Uh don't be fatalistic, don't decide because we're mechanistic biological because we're mechanistic biological because we're mechanistic biological machines that nothing can ever Change machines that nothing can ever Change machines that nothing can ever Change can happen. But where people go off the can happen. But where people go off the can happen. But where people go off the rails is translating that into is translating that into is translating that into we can change ourselves. we can change ourselves. we can change ourselves. We don't. We can't cuz there's no free We don't. We can't cuz there's no free We don't. We can't cuz there's no free will. However, we can be changed by However, we can be changed by However, we can be changed by circumstance. And the point of it is the point of it is the point of it is like you look at an Aplysia, a sea slug like you look at an Aplysia, a sea slug like you look at an Aplysia, a sea slug that has learned to retract its gill in that has learned to retract its gill in that has learned to retract its gill in response to a shock on its tail, you can response to a shock on its tail, you can response to a shock on its tail, you can do like conditioning, Pavlovian do like conditioning, Pavlovian do like conditioning, Pavlovian conditioning on it, and it has learned, conditioning on it, and it has learned, conditioning on it, and it has learned, its behavior has been changed by its behavior has been changed by its behavior has been changed by its environment. And you hear news about something like And you hear news about something like And you hear news about something like horrifically depressing going on, and horrifically depressing going on, and horrifically depressing going on, and you know, you know, you know, you and in wherever and as a result, you and in wherever and as a result, you and in wherever and as a result, you feel a little bit more helpless and a feel a little bit more helpless and a feel a little bit more helpless and a less of a sense of efficacy in the world less of a sense of efficacy in the world less of a sense of efficacy in the world and both of your behaviors have been and both of your behaviors have been and both of your behaviors have been changed. Okay, okay, yeah, I guess that but the Okay, okay, yeah, I guess that but the Okay, okay, yeah, I guess that but the remarkable thing is it's the exact same remarkable thing is it's the exact same remarkable thing is it's the exact same neurobiology. The signal transduction pathways that The signal transduction pathways that The signal transduction pathways that were happening in that sea snail were happening in that sea snail were happening in that sea snail incorporate the exact same kinases and incorporate the exact same kinases and incorporate the exact same kinases and proteases and phosphatases that we do proteases and phosphatases that we do proteases and phosphatases that we do when you're having mammalian fear when you're having mammalian fear when you're having mammalian fear conditioning or when you're learn conditioning or when you're learn conditioning or when you're learn it's conserved. It's the exact same it's conserved. It's the exact same it's conserved. It's the exact same thing. It's simply playing out in thing. It's simply playing out in thing. It's simply playing out in obviously a much fancier domain. obviously a much fancier domain. obviously a much fancier domain. And because And because And because you have learned you have learned you have learned that change is possible that change is possible that change is possible despite understanding mechanistically despite understanding mechanistically despite understanding mechanistically that we can't change ourselves that we can't change ourselves that we can't change ourselves volitionally, um but because you volitionally, um but because you volitionally, um but because you understand change is possible, you have understand change is possible, you have understand change is possible, you have just changed the ability of your brain just changed the ability of your brain just changed the ability of your brain to respond to optimistic stimuli. to respond to optimistic stimuli. to respond to optimistic stimuli. And you have changed the ability of your And you have changed the ability of your And you have changed the ability of your brain to now send you in the direction brain to now send you in the direction brain to now send you in the direction of being exposed to more information of being exposed to more information of being exposed to more information that will seem cheerful rather than that will seem cheerful rather than that will seem cheerful rather than depressing. Oh my god, that's amazing. depressing. Oh my god, that's amazing. depressing. Oh my god, that's amazing. What Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther What Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther What Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther King and all these folks did. Wow, under King and all these folks did. Wow, under King and all these folks did. Wow, under the most adverse of circumstances, they the most adverse of circumstances, they the most adverse of circumstances, they were able to do maybe I can also. Maybe were able to do maybe I can also. Maybe were able to do maybe I can also. Maybe I can go read more about people like I can go read more about people like I can go read more about people like them to get even more data points of them to get even more data points of them to get even more data points of changed neurochemistry changed neurochemistry changed neurochemistry so that your responses are different so that your responses are different so that your responses are different now. And you know, you're tilted a now. And you know, you're tilted a now. And you know, you're tilted a little bit more in that direction of little bit more in that direction of little bit more in that direction of feeling like you can make a difference feeling like you can make a difference feeling like you can make a difference instead of it's all damn hopeless. Um so instead of it's all damn hopeless. Um so instead of it's all damn hopeless. Um so enormous change can happen, but the last enormous change can happen, but the last enormous change can happen, but the last thing that can come out of a view of we thing that can come out of a view of we thing that can come out of a view of we are nothing more or less than the sum of are nothing more or less than the sum of are nothing more or less than the sum of our biology and its interactions with our biology and its interactions with our biology and its interactions with environment is to throw up your hands environment is to throw up your hands environment is to throw up your hands and say, "And thus it's no use trying to and say, "And thus it's no use trying to and say, "And thus it's no use trying to change anything." change anything." change anything." So, we can acknowledge that change is So, we can acknowledge that change is So, we can acknowledge that change is extremely hard to impossible, that extremely hard to impossible, that extremely hard to impossible, that circumstances can change, and yet that circumstances can change, and yet that circumstances can change, and yet that striving to be better human beings is striving to be better human beings is striving to be better human beings is still a worthwhile endeavor. Do I have still a worthwhile endeavor. Do I have still a worthwhile endeavor. Do I have that correct? Absolutely. Because simply that correct? Absolutely. Because simply that correct? Absolutely. Because simply the knowledge either from experience or the knowledge either from experience or the knowledge either from experience or making it to the end of the right making it to the end of the right making it to the end of the right neurobiology class um has taught you neurobiology class um has taught you neurobiology class um has taught you that change can happen within a that change can happen within a that change can happen within a framework of a mechanistic neurobiology, framework of a mechanistic neurobiology, framework of a mechanistic neurobiology, you are now more open to being made you are now more open to being made you are now more open to being made optimistic by the good news in the world optimistic by the good news in the world optimistic by the good news in the world around you. You are more likely to be around you. You are more likely to be around you. You are more likely to be inspired by this or that. You are more inspired by this or that. You are more inspired by this or that. You are more resistant to getting discouraged by bad resistant to getting discouraged by bad resistant to getting discouraged by bad news simply cuz you now understand it's news simply cuz you now understand it's news simply cuz you now understand it's possible. Mhm. Yeah, somebody who spent much of his Yeah, somebody who spent much of his Yeah, somebody who spent much of his career working on the hippocampus, I career working on the hippocampus, I career working on the hippocampus, I have to assume that you are a believer have to assume that you are a believer have to assume that you are a believer in neural plasticity, that neural in neural plasticity, that neural in neural plasticity, that neural circuits can change in response to circuits can change in response to circuits can change in response to experience, and that some of the same experience, and that some of the same experience, and that some of the same so-called top-down mechanisms of so-called top-down mechanisms of so-called top-down mechanisms of prefrontal cortex that we were talking prefrontal cortex that we were talking prefrontal cortex that we were talking about before can play a role there, that about before can play a role there, that about before can play a role there, that the decision to try and change and the decision to try and change and the decision to try and change and the pursuit of knowledge and the pursuit of pursuit of knowledge and the pursuit of pursuit of knowledge and the pursuit of experience can shape our circuitry and experience can shape our circuitry and experience can shape our circuitry and therefore make us different machines, so therefore make us different machines, so therefore make us different machines, so to speak. Yeah. And not only can say to speak. Yeah. And not only can say to speak. Yeah. And not only can say prenatal hormone exposure change the way prenatal hormone exposure change the way prenatal hormone exposure change the way your brain is being constructed, your brain is being constructed, your brain is being constructed, but learning that prenatal hormone but learning that prenatal hormone but learning that prenatal hormone exposure can change the construction of exposure can change the construction of exposure can change the construction of your brain will change your brain right your brain will change your brain right your brain will change your brain right now and how you think about where your now and how you think about where your now and how you think about where your intentions came from. Wow, maybe that intentions came from. Wow, maybe that intentions came from. Wow, maybe that had something to do with it. The had something to do with it. The had something to do with it. The knowledge of the knowledge is an effect knowledge of the knowledge is an effect knowledge of the knowledge is an effect or in and of itself. or in and of itself. or in and of itself. That's such an important and powerful That's such an important and powerful That's such an important and powerful statement to hear. I think that many statement to hear. I think that many statement to hear. I think that many people think that if a tool people think that if a tool people think that if a tool it is doesn't involve a pill or a it is doesn't involve a pill or a it is doesn't involve a pill or a or a protocol or a protocol or a protocol that it's useless. And certainly there that it's useless. And certainly there that it's useless. And certainly there are pills and protocols that are very are pills and protocols that are very are pills and protocols that are very useful in a variety of context for a useful in a variety of context for a useful in a variety of context for a variety of things, but the idea that variety of things, but the idea that variety of things, but the idea that knowledge itself or as you put it knowledge itself or as you put it knowledge itself or as you put it knowledge of knowledge is itself a tool knowledge of knowledge is itself a tool knowledge of knowledge is itself a tool I think is a very important concept for I think is a very important concept for I think is a very important concept for people to embed in their minds. And people to embed in their minds. And people to embed in their minds. And listen, I I'm so grateful for this listen, I I'm so grateful for this listen, I I'm so grateful for this discussion and for you raising these discussion and for you raising these discussion and for you raising these topics. I think that people topics. I think that people topics. I think that people you know, many people know your work on you know, many people know your work on you know, many people know your work on testosterone, on stress, and we've testosterone, on stress, and we've testosterone, on stress, and we've covered some of that today. The work on covered some of that today. The work on covered some of that today. The work on free will and this idea that we are free will and this idea that we are free will and this idea that we are hopeless or that we are in total control. or that we are in total control. or that we are in total control. I think I'm realizing in listening to I think I'm realizing in listening to I think I'm realizing in listening to you that it's neither is true you that it's neither is true you that it's neither is true and that the solution resides in and that the solution resides in and that the solution resides in understanding more about free will and understanding more about free will and understanding more about free will and lack of it lack of it lack of it and also neuroplasticity. and also neuroplasticity. and also neuroplasticity. You're working on a book about free You're working on a book about free You're working on a book about free will. Are you willing to tell us a little bit Are you willing to tell us a little bit Are you willing to tell us a little bit about that book and where you are in about that book and where you are in about that book and where you are in that process and what we can look that process and what we can look that process and what we can look forward to? forward to? forward to? Yeah, it's going really slow. Yeah, it's going really slow. Yeah, it's going really slow. Um, title is determined. title is determined. title is determined. A science of life without free will. A science of life without free will. A science of life without free will. And essentially the first half of the And essentially the first half of the And essentially the first half of the book is trying to convince a reader, book is trying to convince a reader, book is trying to convince a reader, okay, if not that there's no free will okay, if not that there's no free will okay, if not that there's no free will whatsoever, but at least there's a lot whatsoever, but at least there's a lot whatsoever, but at least there's a lot less than is normally assumed. And I'm less than is normally assumed. And I'm less than is normally assumed. And I'm going through all the standard arguments going through all the standard arguments going through all the standard arguments for free will and why for free will and why for free will and why that doesn't make sense with 21st that doesn't make sense with 21st that doesn't make sense with 21st century science century science century science Um, and that has led to leading reading Um, and that has led to leading reading Um, and that has led to leading reading a lot of very frustrating philosophers a lot of very frustrating philosophers a lot of very frustrating philosophers who basically are willing to admit that basically are willing to admit that basically are willing to admit that stuff is made out of like atoms and stuff is made out of like atoms and stuff is made out of like atoms and molecules and like there's a physical molecules and like there's a physical molecules and like there's a physical reality to the world. They're not just reality to the world. They're not just reality to the world. They're not just relying on magic but that they believe relying on magic but that they believe relying on magic but that they believe in free will for magical reasons. And in free will for magical reasons. And in free will for magical reasons. And where it doesn't make sense. Okay, so where it doesn't make sense. Okay, so where it doesn't make sense. Okay, so the first half of the book is to the first half of the book is to the first half of the book is to hopefully convince people that there's hopefully convince people that there's hopefully convince people that there's much less free will than we used to much less free will than we used to much less free will than we used to think. And then the second half is this think. And then the second half is this think. And then the second half is this gigantic juncture built around the fact gigantic juncture built around the fact gigantic juncture built around the fact that I haven't thought there's any free that I haven't thought there's any free that I haven't thought there's any free will since I was like an adolescent will since I was like an adolescent will since I was like an adolescent and despite thinking that way I still and despite thinking that way I still and despite thinking that way I still have absolutely no idea how you're have absolutely no idea how you're have absolutely no idea how you're supposed to function with that belief. supposed to function with that belief. supposed to function with that belief. How are you supposed to like go about How are you supposed to like go about How are you supposed to like go about everyday life if anything you feel everyday life if anything you feel everyday life if anything you feel entitled to isn't true, if any angers entitled to isn't true, if any angers entitled to isn't true, if any angers and hatreds you feel aren't justified, and hatreds you feel aren't justified, and hatreds you feel aren't justified, if there's no such thing as appropriate, if there's no such thing as appropriate, if there's no such thing as appropriate, you know, blame or punishment or praise you know, blame or punishment or praise you know, blame or punishment or praise or reward and none of it makes any sense or reward and none of it makes any sense or reward and none of it makes any sense and somebody like even compliments you and somebody like even compliments you and somebody like even compliments you on your haircut and you've been on your haircut and you've been on your haircut and you've been conditioned to like say oh thanks as if conditioned to like say oh thanks as if conditioned to like say oh thanks as if you had something to do. How are we you had something to do. How are we you had something to do. How are we supposed to function with that? Um supposed to function with that? Um supposed to function with that? Um and so the second half is wrestling with and so the second half is wrestling with and so the second half is wrestling with that. And what the punchline there is what the punchline there is what the punchline there is it's going to be incredibly hard is it's going to be incredibly hard is it's going to be incredibly hard and if you think it's going to be hard and if you think it's going to be hard and if you think it's going to be hard to subtract a notion of free will to subtract a notion of free will to subtract a notion of free will out of making sense of like serial out of making sense of like serial out of making sense of like serial murders, it's going to be a thousand murders, it's going to be a thousand murders, it's going to be a thousand times harder of making sense of when times harder of making sense of when times harder of making sense of when somebody says good job to you. somebody says good job to you. somebody says good job to you. And cuz it's the exact same And cuz it's the exact same And cuz it's the exact same unreality of sort of our unreality of sort of our unreality of sort of our interpretations. It's going to be interpretations. It's going to be interpretations. It's going to be incredibly hard, but nonetheless, when incredibly hard, but nonetheless, when incredibly hard, but nonetheless, when you look at the history you look at the history you look at the history of how we have subtracted the notion of how we have subtracted the notion of how we have subtracted the notion of agency out of all sorts of realms of agency out of all sorts of realms of agency out of all sorts of realms of blame, starting with thinking that witches starting with thinking that witches starting with thinking that witches caused hailstorms 500 years ago to the caused hailstorms 500 years ago to the caused hailstorms 500 years ago to the notion that psychodynamically screwed up notion that psychodynamically screwed up notion that psychodynamically screwed up mothers cause schizophrenia, mothers cause schizophrenia, mothers cause schizophrenia, we've done it. We've done it endless we've done it. We've done it endless we've done it. We've done it endless number of times. We've been able to number of times. We've been able to number of times. We've been able to subtract out a sense of volition and subtract out a sense of volition and subtract out a sense of volition and understanding how the world works around understanding how the world works around understanding how the world works around us, and we don't have murderers running us, and we don't have murderers running us, and we don't have murderers running amok on the street, and society hasn't amok on the street, and society hasn't amok on the street, and society hasn't collapsed into a puddle, and in fact, collapsed into a puddle, and in fact, collapsed into a puddle, and in fact, it's a more humane society. it's a more humane society. it's a more humane society. So, the good news is it's possible So, the good news is it's possible So, the good news is it's possible because we've done it repeatedly in the because we've done it repeatedly in the because we've done it repeatedly in the past, but it's going to be hard as hell. past, but it's going to be hard as hell. past, but it's going to be hard as hell. And it's hard as hell to try to write And it's hard as hell to try to write And it's hard as hell to try to write about that coherently, I'm discovering. about that coherently, I'm discovering. about that coherently, I'm discovering. So, it's going slowly. So, it's going slowly. So, it's going slowly. Well, I speak uh for many, many people Well, I speak uh for many, many people Well, I speak uh for many, many people when I say that we're really excited for when I say that we're really excited for when I say that we're really excited for the book when it's done, and we will the book when it's done, and we will the book when it's done, and we will patiently wait, uh but with great patiently wait, uh but with great patiently wait, uh but with great excitement for the book Determined, you excitement for the book Determined, you excitement for the book Determined, you said is the title, correct? Yeah. said is the title, correct? Yeah. said is the title, correct? Yeah. Determined: The Science of Life Without Determined: The Science of Life Without Determined: The Science of Life Without Free Will. Seems like you can't publish Free Will. Seems like you can't publish Free Will. Seems like you can't publish a book these days without a subtitle, so a book these days without a subtitle, so a book these days without a subtitle, so that's it. Fantastic. Well, very that's it. Fantastic. Well, very that's it. Fantastic. Well, very excited to read the book. Um very excited to read the book. Um very excited to read the book. Um very grateful to you for this conversation grateful to you for this conversation grateful to you for this conversation today. I learned a ton. Um every time today. I learned a ton. Um every time today. I learned a ton. Um every time you speak, I learn, and for me, it's you speak, I learn, and for me, it's you speak, I learn, and for me, it's really been a pleasure and a delight to really been a pleasure and a delight to really been a pleasure and a delight to interact with you interact with you interact with you today and over the previous uh today and over the previous uh today and over the previous uh years, um I should say as colleagues, years, um I should say as colleagues, years, um I should say as colleagues, and um thank you again, Robert, for and um thank you again, Robert, for and um thank you again, Robert, for everything that you do and all the hard, everything that you do and all the hard, everything that you do and all the hard, hard work and thinking that you put into hard work and thinking that you put into hard work and thinking that you put into your work because it's clear that you your work because it's clear that you your work because it's clear that you put a lot of hard work and thinking, and put a lot of hard work and thinking, and put a lot of hard work and thinking, and we all benefit as a consequence. we all benefit as a consequence. we all benefit as a consequence. Thanks, and Thanks, and Thanks, and thanks for having me. This was a blast. thanks for having me. This was a blast. thanks for having me. This was a blast. Thank you for joining me for my Thank you for joining me for my Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. If you're enjoying this podcast and If you're enjoying this podcast and If you're enjoying this podcast and learning from it, please subscribe to learning from it, please subscribe to learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. In addition, you our YouTube channel. In addition, you our YouTube channel. In addition, you can leave us comments and suggestions can leave us comments and suggestions can leave us comments and suggestions for future episodes and guests in the for future episodes and guests in the for future episodes and guests in the comment section on YouTube. Please also comment section on YouTube. Please also comment section on YouTube. Please also subscribe on Apple and on Spotify. And subscribe on Apple and on Spotify. And subscribe on Apple and on Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to on Apple, you have the opportunity to on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review and a leave us up to a five-star review and a leave us up to a five-star review and a comment. In addition, please check out the In addition, please check out the In addition, please check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the sponsors that we mentioned at the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of this podcast. That's a beginning of this podcast. That's a beginning of this podcast. That's a terrific way to support us. And for terrific way to support us. And for terrific way to support us. And for those of you that are interested in those of you that are interested in those of you that are interested in supporting research on stress, on sleep, supporting research on stress, on sleep, supporting research on stress, on sleep, and how to better access sleep and how to better access sleep and how to better access sleep and combat stress, combat stress, combat stress, you can do that by supporting the you can do that by supporting the you can do that by supporting the research being done on those topics in research being done on those topics in research being done on those topics in my laboratory. You can go to my laboratory. You can go to my laboratory. You can go to hubermanlab.stanford.edu, and there you'll see a tab entitled and there you'll see a tab entitled and there you'll see a tab entitled support research in the Huberman Lab. support research in the Huberman Lab. support research in the Huberman Lab. So, that's for work at the Huberman Lab So, that's for work at the Huberman Lab So, that's for work at the Huberman Lab at Stanford, not the Huberman Lab at Stanford, not the Huberman Lab at Stanford, not the Huberman Lab podcast. And there's a make a donation podcast. And there's a make a donation podcast. And there's a make a donation tab where you can make a tax-deductible tab where you can make a tax-deductible tab where you can make a tax-deductible donation. And if you're not already donation. And if you're not already donation. And if you're not already following the Huberman Lab on Instagram, following the Huberman Lab on Instagram, following the Huberman Lab on Instagram, please check out Huberman Lab on please check out Huberman Lab on please check out Huberman Lab on Instagram and on Twitter. Instagram and on Twitter. Instagram and on Twitter. On both those channels, I post On both those channels, I post On both those channels, I post information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools, anywhere from 1 science-related tools, anywhere from 1 science-related tools, anywhere from 1 to 5 minutes. Some of that information to 5 minutes. Some of that information to 5 minutes. Some of that information overlaps with the podcast, but a lot of overlaps with the podcast, but a lot of overlaps with the podcast, but a lot of it is unique and different from the it is unique and different from the it is unique and different from the information on this podcast. And last information on this podcast. And last information on this podcast. And last but not least, thank you for your but not least, thank you for your but not least, thank you for your interest in science.