I had a lot of emotional stuff happen to I had a lot of emotional stuff happen to I had a lot of emotional stuff happen to me in that second deployment. You know, me in that second deployment. You know, me in that second deployment. You know, my idol, Mattie Roberts, I've talked my idol, Mattie Roberts, I've talked my idol, Mattie Roberts, I've talked about him a couple times. I really about him a couple times. I really about him a couple times. I really hung on to that dude. Like he was really hung on to that dude. Like he was really hung on to that dude. Like he was my true north. Like he was the guy. And my true north. Like he was the guy. And my true north. Like he was the guy. And when he got shot up, when he got shot up, when he got shot up, when you see it happen, you know, I when you see it happen, you know, I when you see it happen, you know, I think that was the uh the closest call think that was the uh the closest call think that was the uh the closest call for fire mission the entire Iraq war for fire mission the entire Iraq war for fire mission the entire Iraq war like inside a 15 m. I mean, Cy Mike from like inside a 15 m. I mean, Cy Mike from like inside a 15 m. I mean, Cy Mike from AC130 gunship. I mean, it was on top of AC130 gunship. I mean, it was on top of AC130 gunship. I mean, it was on top of you. A bellfed machine gun just chewing you. A bellfed machine gun just chewing you. A bellfed machine gun just chewing us up. Everybody shot up except for me us up. Everybody shot up except for me us up. Everybody shot up except for me and one other guy. And we're all crowded and one other guy. And we're all crowded and one other guy. And we're all crowded behind this tractor tire. Just you felt behind this tractor tire. Just you felt behind this tractor tire. Just you felt like a victim. Like I felt helpless, you like a victim. Like I felt helpless, you like a victim. Like I felt helpless, you know? I'm getting rounds poured all over know? I'm getting rounds poured all over know? I'm getting rounds poured all over me and at a certain point you just go, me and at a certain point you just go, me and at a certain point you just go, I'd rather run back into the front of I'd rather run back into the front of I'd rather run back into the front of this thing and get killed with all of this thing and get killed with all of this thing and get killed with all of them than be the lone survivor. them than be the lone survivor. them than be the lone survivor. &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is DJ Shipley. DJ Shipley is a today is DJ Shipley. DJ Shipley is a today is DJ Shipley. DJ Shipley is a retired Navy Seal who served for 17 retired Navy Seal who served for 17 retired Navy Seal who served for 17 years, much of that time as a tier 1 years, much of that time as a tier 1 years, much of that time as a tier 1 operator, meaning part of an elite, operator, meaning part of an elite, operator, meaning part of an elite, highly selective special operation unit highly selective special operation unit highly selective special operation unit within the SEALs. In recent years, DJ within the SEALs. In recent years, DJ within the SEALs. In recent years, DJ has emerged as a top public educator on has emerged as a top public educator on has emerged as a top public educator on the topics of how to structure your days the topics of how to structure your days the topics of how to structure your days to maximize your mindset for sake of to maximize your mindset for sake of to maximize your mindset for sake of physical and mental health, as well as physical and mental health, as well as physical and mental health, as well as performance in work or school, and to performance in work or school, and to performance in work or school, and to best support and build your closest best support and build your closest best support and build your closest relationships. As you'll soon learn from relationships. As you'll soon learn from relationships. As you'll soon learn from DJ, there are key points in your day DJ, there are key points in your day DJ, there are key points in your day when you can take specific physical when you can take specific physical when you can take specific physical steps, including but not limited to steps, including but not limited to steps, including but not limited to physical exercise to shift your mind physical exercise to shift your mind physical exercise to shift your mind away from rumination, distraction, and away from rumination, distraction, and away from rumination, distraction, and frustration to a state of immense frustration to a state of immense frustration to a state of immense clarity, focus, and drive. Through trial clarity, focus, and drive. Through trial clarity, focus, and drive. Through trial and error, DJ has figured out and he and error, DJ has figured out and he and error, DJ has figured out and he shares with us how that process is done shares with us how that process is done shares with us how that process is done and how you can do it, too, right down and how you can do it, too, right down and how you can do it, too, right down to the details. What he describes goes to the details. What he describes goes to the details. What he describes goes way beyond a standard morning routine or way beyond a standard morning routine or way beyond a standard morning routine or evening routine and most importantly is evening routine and most importantly is evening routine and most importantly is accessible to all of us. You also won't accessible to all of us. You also won't accessible to all of us. You also won't hear any cliches or fluff in today's hear any cliches or fluff in today's hear any cliches or fluff in today's discussion. DJ is very specific about discussion. DJ is very specific about discussion. DJ is very specific about what to do and when and how in order to what to do and when and how in order to what to do and when and how in order to become the best possible version of become the best possible version of become the best possible version of yourself. You'll often hear those words yourself. You'll often hear those words yourself. You'll often hear those words out there, how to become the best out there, how to become the best out there, how to become the best version of yourself or reach your version of yourself or reach your version of yourself or reach your potential. But what DJ does so potential. But what DJ does so potential. But what DJ does so beautifully is he explains exactly how beautifully is he explains exactly how beautifully is he explains exactly how to do that. and he shares his story of to do that. and he shares his story of to do that. and he shares his story of how he joined and moved through the SEAL how he joined and moved through the SEAL how he joined and moved through the SEAL teams and the victories, but of course teams and the victories, but of course teams and the victories, but of course also the immense challenges and losses also the immense challenges and losses also the immense challenges and losses that he and his teammates experienced. that he and his teammates experienced. that he and his teammates experienced. We also discuss addiction, PTSD, and We also discuss addiction, PTSD, and We also discuss addiction, PTSD, and depression and new paths for overcoming depression and new paths for overcoming depression and new paths for overcoming those. In particular, a new medical those. In particular, a new medical those. In particular, a new medical treatment, IBA gain, followed by DMT, treatment, IBA gain, followed by DMT, treatment, IBA gain, followed by DMT, and how that's being used to help and how that's being used to help and how that's being used to help veterans overcome addiction, PTSD, and veterans overcome addiction, PTSD, and veterans overcome addiction, PTSD, and suicidality. I've paid close attention suicidality. I've paid close attention suicidality. I've paid close attention to that work over the last 5 years to that work over the last 5 years to that work over the last 5 years because the brain imaging aspect is because the brain imaging aspect is because the brain imaging aspect is being done by my colleague Dr. Nolan being done by my colleague Dr. Nolan being done by my colleague Dr. Nolan Williams at Stanford. I should mention Williams at Stanford. I should mention Williams at Stanford. I should mention that the ibeain DMT process we discuss that the ibeain DMT process we discuss that the ibeain DMT process we discuss is not a recreational one. Rather, it's is not a recreational one. Rather, it's is not a recreational one. Rather, it's being done as part of clinical trials being done as part of clinical trials being done as part of clinical trials and dedicated research studies. DJ and dedicated research studies. DJ and dedicated research studies. DJ explains that process firsthand. And at explains that process firsthand. And at explains that process firsthand. And at the same time, I should mention that the same time, I should mention that the same time, I should mention that Ibigane and DMT are still illegal in the Ibigane and DMT are still illegal in the Ibigane and DMT are still illegal in the United States. They are not FDA United States. They are not FDA United States. They are not FDA approved. So, no one should explore approved. So, no one should explore approved. So, no one should explore their use outside of these clinical their use outside of these clinical their use outside of these clinical trials. However, the FDA is looking trials. However, the FDA is looking trials. However, the FDA is looking seriously at these compounds, and seriously at these compounds, and seriously at these compounds, and approval for them seems quite likely in approval for them seems quite likely in approval for them seems quite likely in the next 12 months or so. Today's the next 12 months or so. Today's the next 12 months or so. Today's discussion is one that anybody, male, discussion is one that anybody, male, discussion is one that anybody, male, female, young, or old, can benefit from. female, young, or old, can benefit from. female, young, or old, can benefit from. DJ has immense knowledge. He has immense DJ has immense knowledge. He has immense DJ has immense knowledge. He has immense experience, and he has an incredible experience, and he has an incredible experience, and he has an incredible ability to take what he's learned and ability to take what he's learned and ability to take what he's learned and turn it into actionable steps so you can turn it into actionable steps so you can turn it into actionable steps so you can improve your mental health, physical improve your mental health, physical improve your mental health, physical health, and performance and become the health, and performance and become the health, and performance and become the best possible version of yourself. best possible version of yourself. best possible version of yourself. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with DJ Shipley. DJ Shipley, discussion with DJ Shipley. DJ Shipley, discussion with DJ Shipley. DJ Shipley, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me, man. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me, man. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for having me, man. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about mental health, physical &gt;&gt; Let's talk about mental health, physical &gt;&gt; Let's talk about mental health, physical health, and spiritual health, but not health, and spiritual health, but not health, and spiritual health, but not all at once. all at once. all at once. You talk a lot about and you post a lot You talk a lot about and you post a lot You talk a lot about and you post a lot about mental health, but I've noticed about mental health, but I've noticed about mental health, but I've noticed that a lot of that takes on a sort of that a lot of that takes on a sort of that a lot of that takes on a sort of a protocoly approach where you use a protocoly approach where you use a protocoly approach where you use physical steps to approach mental health physical steps to approach mental health physical steps to approach mental health and vice versa. and vice versa. and vice versa. &gt;&gt; So what's your framework on this thing &gt;&gt; So what's your framework on this thing &gt;&gt; So what's your framework on this thing that we call mental health? I'm not that we call mental health? I'm not that we call mental health? I'm not asking you to solve the mental health asking you to solve the mental health asking you to solve the mental health crisis in one swoop, but when you think crisis in one swoop, but when you think crisis in one swoop, but when you think about your own mental health, the people about your own mental health, the people about your own mental health, the people close to you, people you've worked with close to you, people you've worked with close to you, people you've worked with and the teams, you know, how do you and the teams, you know, how do you and the teams, you know, how do you approach mental health as a concept and approach mental health as a concept and approach mental health as a concept and as an actionable thing? as an actionable thing? as an actionable thing? I've lived so many different stages of I've lived so many different stages of I've lived so many different stages of my life, high points and low points and my life, high points and low points and my life, high points and low points and everything in between. And at my lowest everything in between. And at my lowest everything in between. And at my lowest point, I had no physical connection. I point, I had no physical connection. I point, I had no physical connection. I was either down hard with an injury was either down hard with an injury was either down hard with an injury coming back from surgery and then my coming back from surgery and then my coming back from surgery and then my mental health rapid declined right after mental health rapid declined right after mental health rapid declined right after that. And for someone who never suffered that. And for someone who never suffered that. And for someone who never suffered from mental health issues, it's shocking from mental health issues, it's shocking from mental health issues, it's shocking and you feel like you're the only person and you feel like you're the only person and you feel like you're the only person going through it. Especially when you going through it. Especially when you going through it. Especially when you come from a subculture of special come from a subculture of special come from a subculture of special operations, nobody ever talks about it. operations, nobody ever talks about it. operations, nobody ever talks about it. So when you find yourself in that dark So when you find yourself in that dark So when you find yourself in that dark room alone, really contemplating some room alone, really contemplating some room alone, really contemplating some terrible things, it's hard to wrap your terrible things, it's hard to wrap your terrible things, it's hard to wrap your head around because you're the only head around because you're the only head around because you're the only person that's ever gone through it. and person that's ever gone through it. and person that's ever gone through it. and you know had some really good strength you know had some really good strength you know had some really good strength coaches and coming back from injuries coaches and coming back from injuries coaches and coming back from injuries and the better I got physically my and the better I got physically my and the better I got physically my mental health naturally just started to mental health naturally just started to mental health naturally just started to pull out of it and but everything we did pull out of it and but everything we did pull out of it and but everything we did was for the group so all my physical was for the group so all my physical was for the group so all my physical attributes everything I'm training is attributes everything I'm training is attributes everything I'm training is for the betterment of the group now it's for the betterment of the group now it's for the betterment of the group now it's betterment of my family of my tribe of betterment of my family of my tribe of betterment of my family of my tribe of whatever I have but you know I talk whatever I have but you know I talk whatever I have but you know I talk about this thing stacking up micro wins about this thing stacking up micro wins about this thing stacking up micro wins my morning routine is structured in a my morning routine is structured in a my morning routine is structured in a way to where I can do that same routine way to where I can do that same routine way to where I can do that same routine everywhere I everywhere I everywhere I everywhere. At any point of day, I can everywhere. At any point of day, I can everywhere. At any point of day, I can lock that thing in. But it all starts lock that thing in. But it all starts lock that thing in. But it all starts with an evening routine. So, when my with an evening routine. So, when my with an evening routine. So, when my phone goes off at 5:00 a.m. and I spring phone goes off at 5:00 a.m. and I spring phone goes off at 5:00 a.m. and I spring feet out of bed, I know exactly what I'm feet out of bed, I know exactly what I'm feet out of bed, I know exactly what I'm going to do for the next 12 minutes to going to do for the next 12 minutes to going to do for the next 12 minutes to put myself in position to not be put myself in position to not be put myself in position to not be stressed. So, I've got to power down my stressed. So, I've got to power down my stressed. So, I've got to power down my home life, and I've just got to think home life, and I've just got to think home life, and I've just got to think about what's coming next. So, laying out about what's coming next. So, laying out about what's coming next. So, laying out the clothes night before, my bottle of the clothes night before, my bottle of the clothes night before, my bottle of water is filled, my pills are out, my water is filled, my pills are out, my water is filled, my pills are out, my toothbrush is out, everything is set. toothbrush is out, everything is set. toothbrush is out, everything is set. So, as soon as I get up, by the time I So, as soon as I get up, by the time I So, as soon as I get up, by the time I get to making my morning cup of coffee, get to making my morning cup of coffee, get to making my morning cup of coffee, I've done 25 things inside of my I've done 25 things inside of my I've done 25 things inside of my control. &gt;&gt; Do you know off the top of your head &gt;&gt; Do you know off the top of your head &gt;&gt; Do you know off the top of your head what those things are right now that what those things are right now that what those things are right now that maybe you could just list them off? You maybe you could just list them off? You maybe you could just list them off? You said your alarm clock goes off 5:00 a.m. said your alarm clock goes off 5:00 a.m. said your alarm clock goes off 5:00 a.m. &gt;&gt; And that's regardless of when you went &gt;&gt; And that's regardless of when you went &gt;&gt; And that's regardless of when you went to sleep. to sleep. to sleep. &gt;&gt; Regardless of when I went to sleep, &gt;&gt; Regardless of when I went to sleep, &gt;&gt; Regardless of when I went to sleep, typically. I mean, if I'm out here, I'm typically. I mean, if I'm out here, I'm typically. I mean, if I'm out here, I'm on a different time zone and I can on a different time zone and I can on a different time zone and I can change it, but change it, but change it, but &gt;&gt; if you get to bed at midnight or you get &gt;&gt; if you get to bed at midnight or you get &gt;&gt; if you get to bed at midnight or you get to bed at 9:00 p.m. or you get to bed at to bed at 9:00 p.m. or you get to bed at to bed at 9:00 p.m. or you get to bed at 2 a.m., alarm goes off at 5:00 a.m., 2 a.m., alarm goes off at 5:00 a.m., 2 a.m., alarm goes off at 5:00 a.m., you're up. you're up. you're up. &gt;&gt; You know, my wife gave me this the other &gt;&gt; You know, my wife gave me this the other &gt;&gt; You know, my wife gave me this the other day. I came home on a red eye. I didn't day. I came home on a red eye. I didn't day. I came home on a red eye. I didn't walk through the door until 2:30 in the walk through the door until 2:30 in the walk through the door until 2:30 in the morning. And alarm clock goes off at morning. And alarm clock goes off at morning. And alarm clock goes off at 5:00 and she rolls over and she's like, 5:00 and she rolls over and she's like, 5:00 and she rolls over and she's like, "What are you doing? I'm going to work." "What are you doing? I'm going to work." "What are you doing? I'm going to work." And she's like, "You can take a day And she's like, "You can take a day And she's like, "You can take a day off." I'm like, "No, I'm not taking a off." I'm like, "No, I'm not taking a off." I'm like, "No, I'm not taking a day off. This last 5 days is the first day off. This last 5 days is the first day off. This last 5 days is the first time in time in time in as long as I can 20 years that I've as long as I can 20 years that I've as long as I can 20 years that I've actually taken 5 days of not working out actually taken 5 days of not working out actually taken 5 days of not working out when I had the physical ability to do when I had the physical ability to do when I had the physical ability to do it. I've never taken 5 days off because it. I've never taken 5 days off because it. I've never taken 5 days off because I'm so afraid my mental health will I'm so afraid my mental health will I'm so afraid my mental health will drop. &gt;&gt; Something will happen if I leave that &gt;&gt; Something will happen if I leave that &gt;&gt; Something will happen if I leave that routine." So, I wake up, unplug my routine." So, I wake up, unplug my routine." So, I wake up, unplug my phone, shut off the alarm, I walk in, phone, shut off the alarm, I walk in, phone, shut off the alarm, I walk in, toothpaste on, toothbrush. I go to the toothpaste on, toothbrush. I go to the toothpaste on, toothbrush. I go to the bathroom while I'm brushing my teeth, bathroom while I'm brushing my teeth, bathroom while I'm brushing my teeth, spit it out, all the pills I got to take spit it out, all the pills I got to take spit it out, all the pills I got to take in the morning, you know, vitamin D, all in the morning, you know, vitamin D, all in the morning, you know, vitamin D, all the stuff I take. And then I get the stuff I take. And then I get the stuff I take. And then I get dressed. Left sock, right, right shoe. dressed. Left sock, right, right shoe. dressed. Left sock, right, right shoe. Everything I do, I do in a very specific Everything I do, I do in a very specific Everything I do, I do in a very specific order. Even the way I put on my order. Even the way I put on my order. Even the way I put on my bracelets, if I put them on in the wrong bracelets, if I put them on in the wrong bracelets, if I put them on in the wrong order, I'll stop and I'll dejock them order, I'll stop and I'll dejock them order, I'll stop and I'll dejock them all and I'll redawn them just because all and I'll redawn them just because all and I'll redawn them just because that's one simple thing. I'm not rushed. that's one simple thing. I'm not rushed. that's one simple thing. I'm not rushed. I'm not under duress. I'm in control I'm not under duress. I'm in control I'm not under duress. I'm in control this entire timeline. And that way when this entire timeline. And that way when this entire timeline. And that way when I get to the kitchen, I don't feel like I get to the kitchen, I don't feel like I get to the kitchen, I don't feel like I'm frantic. Where are my keys? Where's I'm frantic. Where are my keys? Where's I'm frantic. Where are my keys? Where's my wallet? Where's my bag? Everything's my wallet? Where's my bag? Everything's my wallet? Where's my bag? Everything's in a system right now to where I can in a system right now to where I can in a system right now to where I can step in that car. I'm not stuck behind a step in that car. I'm not stuck behind a step in that car. I'm not stuck behind a school bus. My car has gas in it. My school bus. My car has gas in it. My school bus. My car has gas in it. My phone's at 100%. Cuz we've all been phone's at 100%. Cuz we've all been phone's at 100%. Cuz we've all been there. Everybody's a normal person. I there. Everybody's a normal person. I there. Everybody's a normal person. I wake up, my wife wants to have a wake up, my wife wants to have a wake up, my wife wants to have a 15-minute conversation that puts me 15-minute conversation that puts me 15-minute conversation that puts me behind that school bus and I'm typically behind that school bus and I'm typically behind that school bus and I'm typically not behind. Now I'm late for my first not behind. Now I'm late for my first not behind. Now I'm late for my first meeting. I've got to rush through my meeting. I've got to rush through my meeting. I've got to rush through my workout. I don't have time to take a workout. I don't have time to take a workout. I don't have time to take a shower. All that is going to cascade. shower. All that is going to cascade. shower. All that is going to cascade. and it's going to put me to be the and it's going to put me to be the and it's going to put me to be the person I don't want to be when I have to person I don't want to be when I have to person I don't want to be when I have to walk into that first meeting. It's like walk into that first meeting. It's like walk into that first meeting. It's like I'm trying to optimize everything that's I'm trying to optimize everything that's I'm trying to optimize everything that's within my control. So when I step within my control. So when I step within my control. So when I step through the threshold, this is a DJ that through the threshold, this is a DJ that through the threshold, this is a DJ that I'm purposely presenting to you right I'm purposely presenting to you right I'm purposely presenting to you right now under my control. And that really now under my control. And that really now under my control. And that really sets the entire framework for the whole sets the entire framework for the whole sets the entire framework for the whole day of being in a good headsp space. I'm day of being in a good headsp space. I'm day of being in a good headsp space. I'm controlling the things that are controlling the things that are controlling the things that are controllable. And the things that I controllable. And the things that I controllable. And the things that I can't control, I don't think about them can't control, I don't think about them can't control, I don't think about them anymore. I block them out. anymore. I block them out. anymore. I block them out. &gt;&gt; I love the regimen um and your adherence &gt;&gt; I love the regimen um and your adherence &gt;&gt; I love the regimen um and your adherence to it. I'm curious about your mindset to it. I'm curious about your mindset to it. I'm curious about your mindset when the alarm goes off. when the alarm goes off. when the alarm goes off. &gt;&gt; Meaning, &gt;&gt; Meaning, &gt;&gt; Meaning, &gt;&gt; where is your head? I guess I know &gt;&gt; where is your head? I guess I know &gt;&gt; where is your head? I guess I know you're human and I understand enough you're human and I understand enough you're human and I understand enough about the brain to make an assumption, about the brain to make an assumption, about the brain to make an assumption, which is that you don't wake up every which is that you don't wake up every which is that you don't wake up every morning with the alarm going off at 5 morning with the alarm going off at 5 morning with the alarm going off at 5 thinking, great, I'm going to get up and thinking, great, I'm going to get up and thinking, great, I'm going to get up and just roll right into the day. That there just roll right into the day. That there just roll right into the day. That there may be times when you consider, you may be times when you consider, you may be times when you consider, you know, going into fetal position. you know, going into fetal position. you know, going into fetal position. you know, it's warm under those covers, know, it's warm under those covers, know, it's warm under those covers, &gt;&gt; but also that your mind, like anyone &gt;&gt; but also that your mind, like anyone &gt;&gt; but also that your mind, like anyone else's, probably starts spinning. It else's, probably starts spinning. It else's, probably starts spinning. It leaps to the past, leaps to even a leaps to the past, leaps to even a leaps to the past, leaps to even a little more stress than you'd like, a little more stress than you'd like, a little more stress than you'd like, a little a little more uh lethargy, little a little more uh lethargy, little a little more uh lethargy, this kind of thing. Do you purposfully this kind of thing. Do you purposfully this kind of thing. Do you purposfully stack up to-dos so that you stay out of stack up to-dos so that you stay out of stack up to-dos so that you stay out of all of that? And if some of that all of that? And if some of that all of that? And if some of that persists as you're brushing your teeth, persists as you're brushing your teeth, persists as you're brushing your teeth, what's the way of dealing with what's the way of dealing with what's the way of dealing with that? &gt;&gt; I just keep pushing. I just keep myself &gt;&gt; I just keep pushing. I just keep myself &gt;&gt; I just keep pushing. I just keep myself in motion the entire time. And I talk in motion the entire time. And I talk in motion the entire time. And I talk about dials, not switches a lot with about dials, not switches a lot with about dials, not switches a lot with people, and it sounds selfish, but I people, and it sounds selfish, but I people, and it sounds selfish, but I have to be selfish right now in order to have to be selfish right now in order to have to be selfish right now in order to be selfless later. So, I tell guys, you be selfless later. So, I tell guys, you be selfless later. So, I tell guys, you know, as soon as that alarm clock goes off, as soon as that alarm clock goes off, as soon as that alarm clock goes off, I'm not thinking about my wife. I'm not I'm not thinking about my wife. I'm not I'm not thinking about my wife. I'm not thinking about my kids. I'm thinking about my kids. I'm thinking about my kids. I'm thinking about being as efficient as humanly about being as efficient as humanly about being as efficient as humanly possible. And I'm trying to hit that gym possible. And I'm trying to hit that gym possible. And I'm trying to hit that gym so I unrackck at 07 the best version of so I unrackck at 07 the best version of so I unrackck at 07 the best version of me. And I can't do it if I'm thinking me. And I can't do it if I'm thinking me. And I can't do it if I'm thinking about a fight or an argument we had with about a fight or an argument we had with about a fight or an argument we had with the wife the night before, the kids, and the wife the night before, the kids, and the wife the night before, the kids, and this and that. I have to be selfish this and that. I have to be selfish this and that. I have to be selfish right now because this is the only block right now because this is the only block right now because this is the only block I'm going to have for me to optimize I'm going to have for me to optimize I'm going to have for me to optimize myself because at 10 a.m. I'm going to myself because at 10 a.m. I'm going to myself because at 10 a.m. I'm going to get pulled from 50 different directions. get pulled from 50 different directions. get pulled from 50 different directions. It's the exact same thing when I go It's the exact same thing when I go It's the exact same thing when I go home. So now between the hours of 10 home. So now between the hours of 10 home. So now between the hours of 10 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. I'm only thinking a.m. and 6:00 p.m. I'm only thinking a.m. and 6:00 p.m. I'm only thinking about work. I don't think about my wife. about work. I don't think about my wife. about work. I don't think about my wife. Don't think about my kids. I only think Don't think about my kids. I only think Don't think about my kids. I only think about the team and everything we're about the team and everything we're about the team and everything we're trying to do. At 6, you can watch and I trying to do. At 6, you can watch and I trying to do. At 6, you can watch and I tell everybody if you would put a hidden tell everybody if you would put a hidden tell everybody if you would put a hidden camera in my car and break the internet. camera in my car and break the internet. camera in my car and break the internet. I do it every day. I slam that car in I do it every day. I slam that car in I do it every day. I slam that car in the park. I put my phone on do not the park. I put my phone on do not the park. I put my phone on do not disturb. I check social. I check all my disturb. I check social. I check all my disturb. I check social. I check all my textes. I'm good. There's no phone textes. I'm good. There's no phone textes. I'm good. There's no phone calls. And I've got a 12-minute drive calls. And I've got a 12-minute drive calls. And I've got a 12-minute drive from door to door. Those 12 minutes, I from door to door. Those 12 minutes, I from door to door. Those 12 minutes, I put on Chris Stapleton. Something that put on Chris Stapleton. Something that put on Chris Stapleton. Something that makes me feel good. It calms me down. makes me feel good. It calms me down. makes me feel good. It calms me down. And I pre-rehearse everything that's And I pre-rehearse everything that's And I pre-rehearse everything that's going to happen the moment I hit that going to happen the moment I hit that going to happen the moment I hit that garage door opener. garage door opener. garage door opener. &gt;&gt; Really, &gt;&gt; Really, &gt;&gt; Really, &gt;&gt; I do it every single day. &gt;&gt; I do it every single day. &gt;&gt; I do it every single day. &gt;&gt; I realize it's personal, but to the &gt;&gt; I realize it's personal, but to the &gt;&gt; I realize it's personal, but to the extent that you're willing, maybe share extent that you're willing, maybe share extent that you're willing, maybe share a couple of the what you're a couple of the what you're a couple of the what you're rehearsing. &gt;&gt; I pull into the driveway. I slam it back &gt;&gt; I pull into the driveway. I slam it back &gt;&gt; I pull into the driveway. I slam it back in park. I check my phone one more time in park. I check my phone one more time in park. I check my phone one more time and I tell myself, "You're only going to and I tell myself, "You're only going to and I tell myself, "You're only going to have 3 hours from 6:00 to 9:00 to be the have 3 hours from 6:00 to 9:00 to be the have 3 hours from 6:00 to 9:00 to be the person they need you to be. You got to person they need you to be. You got to person they need you to be. You got to be a full-time dad right now. You can be a full-time dad right now. You can be a full-time dad right now. You can be a full-time husband." And I don't get it a full-time husband." And I don't get it a full-time husband." And I don't get it right every time. Some days I drag that right every time. Some days I drag that right every time. Some days I drag that stuff home with me two hand texting stuff home with me two hand texting stuff home with me two hand texting frantically, but I really try not to. frantically, but I really try not to. frantically, but I really try not to. And before I hit that garage door, I And before I hit that garage door, I And before I hit that garage door, I tell myself like they don't know what's tell myself like they don't know what's tell myself like they don't know what's going on. They don't know the stress going on. They don't know the stress going on. They don't know the stress you're out at work. She's had her own you're out at work. She's had her own you're out at work. She's had her own day. They've had their own day. I mean, day. They've had their own day. I mean, day. They've had their own day. I mean, I've got a I've got a daughter in I've got a I've got a daughter in I've got a I've got a daughter in seventh grade. I've got another one uh seventh grade. I've got another one uh seventh grade. I've got another one uh second grade. like, you know, we got to second grade. like, you know, we got to second grade. like, you know, we got to work through this whole thing together. work through this whole thing together. work through this whole thing together. And it's like, what version of me do I And it's like, what version of me do I And it's like, what version of me do I want to present to them right now? I'm want to present to them right now? I'm want to present to them right now? I'm going to walk in, bags over my right going to walk in, bags over my right going to walk in, bags over my right shoulder. I'm going to clear the shoulder. I'm going to clear the shoulder. I'm going to clear the threshold, make an immediate 90° turn, threshold, make an immediate 90° turn, threshold, make an immediate 90° turn, and there's going to be that and there's going to be that and there's going to be that seven-year-old. And she's a huge ball of seven-year-old. And she's a huge ball of seven-year-old. And she's a huge ball of energy. She gets all shaken. She runs at energy. She gets all shaken. She runs at energy. She gets all shaken. She runs at me at full blast. And I pick her up, me at full blast. And I pick her up, me at full blast. And I pick her up, shake her, kiss her like 100% love. Take shake her, kiss her like 100% love. Take shake her, kiss her like 100% love. Take an immediate right in the kitchen. an immediate right in the kitchen. an immediate right in the kitchen. There's my oldest, usually eating There's my oldest, usually eating There's my oldest, usually eating something before homework's about to something before homework's about to something before homework's about to start. Give her a kiss, give her a hug, start. Give her a kiss, give her a hug, start. Give her a kiss, give her a hug, ask her how her day was. straight to the ask her how her day was. straight to the ask her how her day was. straight to the room to see my wife cuz she's got a she room to see my wife cuz she's got a she room to see my wife cuz she's got a she gets like a 30-minute buffer before she gets like a 30-minute buffer before she gets like a 30-minute buffer before she has to go upstairs and lock in with has to go upstairs and lock in with has to go upstairs and lock in with seventh grade homework. Check her. What seventh grade homework. Check her. What seventh grade homework. Check her. What do you need? If you can fold the towels, do you need? If you can fold the towels, do you need? If you can fold the towels, if you can start dinner, done. Boom, if you can start dinner, done. Boom, if you can start dinner, done. Boom, boom, boom. So, my last boom, boom. So, my last boom, boom. So, my last interaction in the morning was positive. interaction in the morning was positive. interaction in the morning was positive. I left on a positive note. The first I left on a positive note. The first I left on a positive note. The first interaction you're getting at the end of interaction you're getting at the end of interaction you're getting at the end of the day is in a positive note. And the day is in a positive note. And the day is in a positive note. And regardless of how I'm feeling, if I have regardless of how I'm feeling, if I have regardless of how I'm feeling, if I have to fake it, I'll fake it. to fake it, I'll fake it. to fake it, I'll fake it. &gt;&gt; I got three hours. And if you space over &gt;&gt; I got three hours. And if you space over &gt;&gt; I got three hours. And if you space over the course of the five days, I don't the course of the five days, I don't the course of the five days, I don't have a lot of time to make positive have a lot of time to make positive have a lot of time to make positive memories just because of work and stress memories just because of work and stress memories just because of work and stress and everything else. I'm trying to and everything else. I'm trying to and everything else. I'm trying to maximize those three hours. And then maximize those three hours. And then maximize those three hours. And then when I do, it feels like you can do no when I do, it feels like you can do no when I do, it feels like you can do no wrong. But every night after we finish wrong. But every night after we finish wrong. But every night after we finish dinner, me and my wife do a 20-minute dinner, me and my wife do a 20-minute dinner, me and my wife do a 20-minute walk. 10 minutes for her. So as soon as we 10 minutes for her. So as soon as we 10 minutes for her. So as soon as we start it, tell me about your day. start it, tell me about your day. start it, tell me about your day. Everything she wants to vent through, Everything she wants to vent through, Everything she wants to vent through, everything we got to get caught up on. everything we got to get caught up on. everything we got to get caught up on. We hit the halfway mark right around We hit the halfway mark right around We hit the halfway mark right around this park. And then it's my turn for 10 this park. And then it's my turn for 10 this park. And then it's my turn for 10 minutes. Average human can walk a mile minutes. Average human can walk a mile minutes. Average human can walk a mile in 20 minutes. Helps circadian rhythm. in 20 minutes. Helps circadian rhythm. in 20 minutes. Helps circadian rhythm. Helps digestion. I mean, mental clarity. Helps digestion. I mean, mental clarity. Helps digestion. I mean, mental clarity. I'm not on my phone. There's no I'm not on my phone. There's no I'm not on my phone. There's no stimulus. I mean, I'm watching the stimulus. I mean, I'm watching the stimulus. I mean, I'm watching the sunset. It's But now it's 20 minutes sunset. It's But now it's 20 minutes sunset. It's But now it's 20 minutes just for us to reconnect. And we do it just for us to reconnect. And we do it just for us to reconnect. And we do it every single day. Unless it's a every single day. Unless it's a every single day. Unless it's a torrential downpour. torrential downpour. torrential downpour. &gt;&gt; We're doing it every single night. And &gt;&gt; We're doing it every single night. And &gt;&gt; We're doing it every single night. And our marriage has never been better. My our marriage has never been better. My our marriage has never been better. My physical health has never been better. physical health has never been better. physical health has never been better. And then my time with my kids. I can be And then my time with my kids. I can be And then my time with my kids. I can be accountable for every single minute in accountable for every single minute in accountable for every single minute in my day. Did I maximize that opportunity? my day. Did I maximize that opportunity? my day. Did I maximize that opportunity? No. Why? because I drug that dude home No. Why? because I drug that dude home No. Why? because I drug that dude home with me from, you know, 2:30 in the with me from, you know, 2:30 in the with me from, you know, 2:30 in the afternoon. I drug him all the way home afternoon. I drug him all the way home afternoon. I drug him all the way home till 6. That's not who they need. They till 6. That's not who they need. They till 6. That's not who they need. They don't need a commando. They don't need a don't need a commando. They don't need a don't need a commando. They don't need a business owner. They don't need an business owner. They don't need an business owner. They don't need an entrepreneur. They need a dude that's entrepreneur. They need a dude that's entrepreneur. They need a dude that's going to have a tea party right now or a going to have a tea party right now or a going to have a tea party right now or a guy that's going to talk about how guy that's going to talk about how guy that's going to talk about how difficult navigating 7th grade is. Like, difficult navigating 7th grade is. Like, difficult navigating 7th grade is. Like, she really needs a husband that's going she really needs a husband that's going she really needs a husband that's going to be fully present because I haven't to be fully present because I haven't to be fully present because I haven't been for the majority of our marriage. been for the majority of our marriage. been for the majority of our marriage. I've been gone, you know, 300 days out I've been gone, you know, 300 days out I've been gone, you know, 300 days out of the year. She really just needs a of the year. She really just needs a of the year. She really just needs a buddy who's going to help parent. And if buddy who's going to help parent. And if buddy who's going to help parent. And if I'm not mentally there, I'm never going I'm not mentally there, I'm never going I'm not mentally there, I'm never going to get there. So, I set conditions to get there. So, I set conditions to get there. So, I set conditions to where I can be the person I need to be where I can be the person I need to be where I can be the person I need to be no matter what threshold I'm walking no matter what threshold I'm walking no matter what threshold I'm walking through. And it's been hugely beneficial through. And it's been hugely beneficial through. And it's been hugely beneficial for me. for me. for me. &gt;&gt; Perhaps one of the most underestimated &gt;&gt; Perhaps one of the most underestimated &gt;&gt; Perhaps one of the most underestimated but powerful tools to improve your but powerful tools to improve your but powerful tools to improve your mental health, your physical mental health, your physical mental health, your physical performance, and your cognitive performance, and your cognitive performance, and your cognitive performance is ensuring you get enough performance is ensuring you get enough performance is ensuring you get enough hydration every day. The unfortunate hydration every day. The unfortunate hydration every day. The unfortunate reality, however, is that tap water reality, however, is that tap water reality, however, is that tap water often contains contaminants that often contains contaminants that often contains contaminants that negatively impact our health. So, while negatively impact our health. So, while negatively impact our health. So, while we're trying to get great hydration, we're trying to get great hydration, we're trying to get great hydration, that can cause serious problems. In that can cause serious problems. In that can cause serious problems. In fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental Working Group estimated that more than Working Group estimated that more than Working Group estimated that more than 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, through drinking tap water. chemicals, through drinking tap water. chemicals, through drinking tap water. These forever chemicals are linked to These forever chemicals are linked to These forever chemicals are linked to serious health issues such as hormone serious health issues such as hormone serious health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health problems, some of which are just now problems, some of which are just now problems, some of which are just now coming to light. For all these reasons, coming to light. For all these reasons, coming to light. For all these reasons, I was thrilled when I came across Aurora I was thrilled when I came across Aurora I was thrilled when I came across Aurora water filters, and now they're a sponsor water filters, and now they're a sponsor water filters, and now they're a sponsor of this podcast. Aurora makes what I of this podcast. Aurora makes what I of this podcast. Aurora makes what I believe are the best water filters on believe are the best water filters on believe are the best water filters on the market. I've been using the Aurora the market. I've been using the Aurora the market. I've been using the Aurora countertop system for almost a year now. countertop system for almost a year now. countertop system for almost a year now. Rurora's filtration technology removes Rurora's filtration technology removes Rurora's filtration technology removes harmful substances, including endocrine harmful substances, including endocrine harmful substances, including endocrine disruptors and disinfection byproducts disruptors and disinfection byproducts disruptors and disinfection byproducts while preserving beneficial minerals while preserving beneficial minerals while preserving beneficial minerals like magnesium and calcium. It requires like magnesium and calcium. It requires like magnesium and calcium. It requires no installation or plumbing, so it's no installation or plumbing, so it's no installation or plumbing, so it's extremely convenient. It's built from extremely convenient. It's built from extremely convenient. It's built from medical grade stainless steel, and it medical grade stainless steel, and it medical grade stainless steel, and it fits beautifully on your countertop. fits beautifully on your countertop. fits beautifully on your countertop. It's something that you would want to It's something that you would want to It's something that you would want to have in your kitchen. What's have in your kitchen. What's have in your kitchen. What's additionally impressive to me is Rora's additionally impressive to me is Rora's additionally impressive to me is Rora's transparency. You can find all of their transparency. You can find all of their transparency. You can find all of their independent thirdparty test results independent thirdparty test results independent thirdparty test results right on their website and they report right on their website and they report right on their website and they report reduction data over the full life of the reduction data over the full life of the reduction data over the full life of the filter. If you'd like to try Rora, you filter. If you'd like to try Rora, you filter. If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman can go to roora.com/huberman can go to roora.com/huberman and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I therapist carried out entirely online. I therapist carried out entirely online. I personally have been doing therapy for personally have been doing therapy for personally have been doing therapy for well over 35 years. I find it to be an well over 35 years. I find it to be an well over 35 years. I find it to be an extremely important component to overall extremely important component to overall extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I consider doing health. In fact, I consider doing health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as important as regular therapy just as important as regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise, including getting regular exercise, including getting regular exercise, including cardiovascular exercise and resistance cardiovascular exercise and resistance cardiovascular exercise and resistance training, which of course I also do training, which of course I also do training, which of course I also do every week. There are essentially three every week. There are essentially three every week. There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. things that great therapy provides. things that great therapy provides. First of all, great therapy provides First of all, great therapy provides First of all, great therapy provides good rapport with somebody that you can good rapport with somebody that you can good rapport with somebody that you can really trust and discuss any issues really trust and discuss any issues really trust and discuss any issues with. Second of all, it can provide with. Second of all, it can provide with. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional guidance or directed guidance toward guidance or directed guidance toward guidance or directed guidance toward specific actions you want to take in specific actions you want to take in specific actions you want to take in your life. And third, expert therapy can your life. And third, expert therapy can your life. And third, expert therapy can provide you with useful insights. provide you with useful insights. provide you with useful insights. Insights that can allow you to make Insights that can allow you to make Insights that can allow you to make changes to improve your life, not just changes to improve your life, not just changes to improve your life, not just at the emotional level, but also your at the emotional level, but also your at the emotional level, but also your relationship life, your professional relationship life, your professional relationship life, your professional life, and on and on. With BetterHel, life, and on and on. With BetterHel, life, and on and on. With BetterHel, they make it very easy to find an expert they make it very easy to find an expert they make it very easy to find an expert therapist that can help provide these therapist that can help provide these therapist that can help provide these benefits that come through expert benefits that come through expert benefits that come through expert therapy. And it's carried out entirely therapy. And it's carried out entirely therapy. And it's carried out entirely online. So, it's extremely convenient. online. So, it's extremely convenient. online. So, it's extremely convenient. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman go to betterhelp.com/huberman go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. &gt;&gt; What an awesome example. And and the &gt;&gt; What an awesome example. And and the &gt;&gt; What an awesome example. And and the todos are super impressive. I wonder if todos are super impressive. I wonder if todos are super impressive. I wonder if we could just explore a little bit of we could just explore a little bit of we could just explore a little bit of the uh to not do. Uh a lot of what you the uh to not do. Uh a lot of what you the uh to not do. Uh a lot of what you described, it's clear requires having described, it's clear requires having described, it's clear requires having the phone away. I mean, I could go on the phone away. I mean, I could go on the phone away. I mean, I could go on and on about phones, but the incoming is and on about phones, but the incoming is and on about phones, but the incoming is incessant, right? You know, and the incessant, right? You know, and the incessant, right? You know, and the temptation is really tough to deal with. temptation is really tough to deal with. temptation is really tough to deal with. So when you walk in the door because So when you walk in the door because So when you walk in the door because you're with family, phone is in the car you're with family, phone is in the car you're with family, phone is in the car or it's just shut off or it's just shut off or it's just shut off &gt;&gt; during the day uh when you're going &gt;&gt; during the day uh when you're going &gt;&gt; during the day uh when you're going about your work. Is it understood that about your work. Is it understood that about your work. Is it understood that if your wife wants to get a hold of you, if your wife wants to get a hold of you, if your wife wants to get a hold of you, she can, but that it's there's a high she can, but that it's there's a high she can, but that it's there's a high threshold for that? Cuz I think a lot of threshold for that? Cuz I think a lot of threshold for that? Cuz I think a lot of couples get into, you know, like just couples get into, you know, like just couples get into, you know, like just pinging each other here and there, this pinging each other here and there, this pinging each other here and there, this and that. Um even in business teams, and that. Um even in business teams, and that. Um even in business teams, there's a lot of unnecessary there's a lot of unnecessary there's a lot of unnecessary communication. I'm fortunate now that my communication. I'm fortunate now that my communication. I'm fortunate now that my wife actually works inside the business, wife actually works inside the business, wife actually works inside the business, so she gets it and she knows that once I so she gets it and she knows that once I so she gets it and she knows that once I lock in, when that camera turns on, that lock in, when that camera turns on, that lock in, when that camera turns on, that microphone goes on, you got to leave me microphone goes on, you got to leave me microphone goes on, you got to leave me alone. And I tell people like, I'm not alone. And I tell people like, I'm not alone. And I tell people like, I'm not trained to do this. I'm a normal dude, trained to do this. I'm a normal dude, trained to do this. I'm a normal dude, so I'm really susceptible to negative so I'm really susceptible to negative so I'm really susceptible to negative energy. And they know better. Don't slam energy. And they know better. Don't slam energy. And they know better. Don't slam me with something negative before I have me with something negative before I have me with something negative before I have to turn that microphone on cuz I'm not to turn that microphone on cuz I'm not to turn that microphone on cuz I'm not going to be able to compartmentalize it going to be able to compartmentalize it going to be able to compartmentalize it all the way. I need to be the best all the way. I need to be the best all the way. I need to be the best version of me right now. So, wait till version of me right now. So, wait till version of me right now. So, wait till I'm done and then deliver the bad news. I'm done and then deliver the bad news. I'm done and then deliver the bad news. And she's the same way. She's she's an And she's the same way. She's she's an And she's the same way. She's she's an absolute gangster. and she knows. She's absolute gangster. and she knows. She's absolute gangster. and she knows. She's like, "Hey, when you get done today, we like, "Hey, when you get done today, we like, "Hey, when you get done today, we got to talk." I'm like, "What is it?" got to talk." I'm like, "What is it?" got to talk." I'm like, "What is it?" And she's like, "It's nothing bad. It'll And she's like, "It's nothing bad. It'll And she's like, "It's nothing bad. It'll definitely be something bad." But she definitely be something bad." But she definitely be something bad." But she doesn't even give me an inkling because doesn't even give me an inkling because doesn't even give me an inkling because she knows it'll rob me of bandwidth. she knows it'll rob me of bandwidth. she knows it'll rob me of bandwidth. She's like, "Go do what you do. As soon She's like, "Go do what you do. As soon She's like, "Go do what you do. As soon as you get done, we'll talk." And on as you get done, we'll talk." And on as you get done, we'll talk." And on that 20-minute walk, she'll drop it. But that 20-minute walk, she'll drop it. But that 20-minute walk, she'll drop it. But now we're here. I'm in a clear head now we're here. I'm in a clear head now we're here. I'm in a clear head space. I've had a productive day. We've space. I've had a productive day. We've space. I've had a productive day. We've had a great 10 minutes into this. Now, had a great 10 minutes into this. Now, had a great 10 minutes into this. Now, he the bad news. Last 10 minutes, we'll he the bad news. Last 10 minutes, we'll he the bad news. Last 10 minutes, we'll solve it together. solve it together. solve it together. &gt;&gt; But not getting on that social media &gt;&gt; But not getting on that social media &gt;&gt; But not getting on that social media first thing in the morning. I used to be first thing in the morning. I used to be first thing in the morning. I used to be the guy. I'd roll over. I immediately the guy. I'd roll over. I immediately the guy. I'd roll over. I immediately open up Instagram and I'm checking it. open up Instagram and I'm checking it. open up Instagram and I'm checking it. What are the comments? How's the posting What are the comments? How's the posting What are the comments? How's the posting doing? How's this? How's that? doing? How's this? How's that? doing? How's this? How's that? &gt;&gt; You'll stay there for 40 minutes. &gt;&gt; You'll stay there for 40 minutes. &gt;&gt; You'll stay there for 40 minutes. &gt;&gt; And then if you see something negative, &gt;&gt; And then if you see something negative, &gt;&gt; And then if you see something negative, I'll ride that. I'll wear that jacket I'll ride that. I'll wear that jacket I'll ride that. I'll wear that jacket all day long. I can't get it away from all day long. I can't get it away from all day long. I can't get it away from me. &gt;&gt; So, I don't take a Zoom call. I don't &gt;&gt; So, I don't take a Zoom call. I don't &gt;&gt; So, I don't take a Zoom call. I don't take a phone call. There's nothing that take a phone call. There's nothing that take a phone call. There's nothing that happens inside of my orbit before 10:00 happens inside of my orbit before 10:00 happens inside of my orbit before 10:00 a.m. From 7 to 10, that's my morning a.m. From 7 to 10, that's my morning a.m. From 7 to 10, that's my morning block. I've got the whole team in there. block. I've got the whole team in there. block. I've got the whole team in there. We do fitness from 7:00 to 9:00. I make We do fitness from 7:00 to 9:00. I make We do fitness from 7:00 to 9:00. I make them all do a 20-minute walk. I make the them all do a 20-minute walk. I make the them all do a 20-minute walk. I make the whole team protein shakes. I take a whole team protein shakes. I take a whole team protein shakes. I take a shower. And at 10 a.m., I walk out. Hit shower. And at 10 a.m., I walk out. Hit shower. And at 10 a.m., I walk out. Hit me with it. What do we got to do? We're me with it. What do we got to do? We're me with it. What do we got to do? We're going to range and my training and we going to range and my training and we going to range and my training and we shooting content. What are we doing shooting content. What are we doing shooting content. What are we doing right now? You have full bandwidth until right now? You have full bandwidth until right now? You have full bandwidth until I leave here. And if I run till I leave here. And if I run till I leave here. And if I run till midnight, we run till midnight. But you midnight, we run till midnight. But you midnight, we run till midnight. But you have both barrels with me at 100% have both barrels with me at 100% have both barrels with me at 100% because I've controlled that entire because I've controlled that entire because I've controlled that entire morning routine. And it's been the best morning routine. And it's been the best morning routine. And it's been the best thing that's ever happened to us. But thing that's ever happened to us. But thing that's ever happened to us. But you got to be consistent. It's like you got to be consistent. It's like you got to be consistent. It's like everything else. What's the best diet? everything else. What's the best diet? everything else. What's the best diet? The one you'll stick to. The one you'll stick to. The one you'll stick to. &gt;&gt; And that morning routine has been the &gt;&gt; And that morning routine has been the &gt;&gt; And that morning routine has been the biggest game changer I've had. biggest game changer I've had. biggest game changer I've had. &gt;&gt; That's awesome. Uh I feel like um the &gt;&gt; That's awesome. Uh I feel like um the &gt;&gt; That's awesome. Uh I feel like um the teams and I've been fortunate to know teams and I've been fortunate to know teams and I've been fortunate to know and work with some folks in from the and work with some folks in from the and work with some folks in from the teams uh seem to have what I call kind teams uh seem to have what I call kind teams uh seem to have what I call kind of an unconscious genius like the uh as of an unconscious genius like the uh as of an unconscious genius like the uh as a whole as a system. We could talk about a whole as a system. We could talk about a whole as a system. We could talk about buds, we could talk about selection for buds, we could talk about selection for buds, we could talk about selection for tier one stuff. We could talk about any tier one stuff. We could talk about any tier one stuff. We could talk about any of that and we and we will. But seems to of that and we and we will. But seems to of that and we and we will. But seems to me that a lot of the practices that are me that a lot of the practices that are me that a lot of the practices that are built up in the teams and in team guys built up in the teams and in team guys built up in the teams and in team guys who are successful when they transition who are successful when they transition who are successful when they transition out uh are built around this notion I out uh are built around this notion I out uh are built around this notion I just call unconscious genius where they just call unconscious genius where they just call unconscious genius where they weren't thinking about like what's the weren't thinking about like what's the weren't thinking about like what's the underlying neural circuitry or this and underlying neural circuitry or this and underlying neural circuitry or this and that. And everything you describe by the that. And everything you describe by the that. And everything you describe by the way is extremely actionable for anybody. way is extremely actionable for anybody. way is extremely actionable for anybody. I love that you told us and I'm I love that you told us and I'm I love that you told us and I'm going to underscore this highlight it going to underscore this highlight it going to underscore this highlight it and bold it right now is that doesn't and bold it right now is that doesn't and bold it right now is that doesn't matter if you went to bed at 2:30 a.m. matter if you went to bed at 2:30 a.m. matter if you went to bed at 2:30 a.m. or you went to bed at midnight. you're or you went to bed at midnight. you're or you went to bed at midnight. you're getting up at the same time is you're getting up at the same time is you're getting up at the same time is actually critical for keeping sleep actually critical for keeping sleep actually critical for keeping sleep rhythms healthy. And one thing from the rhythms healthy. And one thing from the rhythms healthy. And one thing from the literature I'll just share is that it's literature I'll just share is that it's literature I'll just share is that it's clear that um if people have the same clear that um if people have the same clear that um if people have the same wake up time each day that whatever wake up time each day that whatever wake up time each day that whatever sleep they get prior to that wake up sleep they get prior to that wake up sleep they get prior to that wake up time, you get the maximum amount of time, you get the maximum amount of time, you get the maximum amount of growth hormone release that's possible, growth hormone release that's possible, growth hormone release that's possible, which is of course crucial for recovery, which is of course crucial for recovery, which is of course crucial for recovery, not just growing muscles, but recovery, not just growing muscles, but recovery, not just growing muscles, but recovery, etc. So, um so there's that. you guys etc. So, um so there's that. you guys etc. So, um so there's that. you guys came to that there's that kind of you came to that there's that kind of you came to that there's that kind of you didn't need to know the science you just didn't need to know the science you just didn't need to know the science you just arrived at it but also the brain is so arrived at it but also the brain is so arrived at it but also the brain is so context dependent and throughout context dependent and throughout context dependent and throughout your description I'm keep hearing that your description I'm keep hearing that your description I'm keep hearing that you know if there's you'll wear that you know if there's you'll wear that you know if there's you'll wear that jacket all day long like it can pull you jacket all day long like it can pull you jacket all day long like it can pull you in I mean you're a strong-minded in I mean you're a strong-minded in I mean you're a strong-minded individual you know how to control your individual you know how to control your individual you know how to control your own behavior clearly but you are own behavior clearly but you are own behavior clearly but you are susceptible like anybody else and I susceptible like anybody else and I susceptible like anybody else and I always think of mental states as that always think of mental states as that always think of mental states as that you know we can either be like a ball you know we can either be like a ball you know we can either be like a ball bearing on a flat surface where that bearing on a flat surface where that bearing on a flat surface where that ball bearing can go anywhere with even ball bearing can go anywhere with even ball bearing can go anywhere with even just the slightest tilt or even a breeze just the slightest tilt or even a breeze just the slightest tilt or even a breeze um versus you know little dimples in um versus you know little dimples in um versus you know little dimples in that surface where it can kind of reside that surface where it can kind of reside that surface where it can kind of reside but it could get blown out or pushed out but it could get blown out or pushed out but it could get blown out or pushed out easily. And ultimately what we're all easily. And ultimately what we're all easily. And ultimately what we're all seeking is to drop like a ball bearing seeking is to drop like a ball bearing seeking is to drop like a ball bearing into a trench and rage bait and numbing into a trench and rage bait and numbing into a trench and rage bait and numbing out which are the two kind of core out which are the two kind of core out which are the two kind of core features of social media except there's features of social media except there's features of social media except there's this other opportunity to learn. I feel this other opportunity to learn. I feel this other opportunity to learn. I feel like uh those are drop us immediately like uh those are drop us immediately like uh those are drop us immediately into that trench. And so I feel like our into that trench. And so I feel like our into that trench. And so I feel like our brain wants to be the ball bearing at brain wants to be the ball bearing at brain wants to be the ball bearing at the bottom of that trench, but it's the bottom of that trench, but it's the bottom of that trench, but it's tempting to not do the work to get tempting to not do the work to get tempting to not do the work to get there. And so there are things in the there. And so there are things in the there. And so there are things in the world, highly processed, highly world, highly processed, highly world, highly processed, highly palatable foods, um you know, certain palatable foods, um you know, certain palatable foods, um you know, certain aspects of social media, cuz I don't aspects of social media, cuz I don't aspects of social media, cuz I don't think all of it is unhealthy that think all of it is unhealthy that think all of it is unhealthy that provide that opportunity to drop into provide that opportunity to drop into provide that opportunity to drop into that trench. So clearly um the that trench. So clearly um the that trench. So clearly um the unconscious genius here uh is that you unconscious genius here uh is that you unconscious genius here uh is that you arrived at it seems an understanding arrived at it seems an understanding arrived at it seems an understanding that you're very context dependent. You that you're very context dependent. You that you're very context dependent. You know it's not that you're so robust know it's not that you're so robust know it's not that you're so robust internally that you can throw anything internally that you can throw anything internally that you can throw anything your way. It's exactly because you're, your way. It's exactly because you're, your way. It's exactly because you're, if I may, you're not that robust if I may, you're not that robust if I may, you're not that robust internally that you understand the brain internally that you understand the brain internally that you understand the brain that you can't let anything come your that you can't let anything come your that you can't let anything come your way. But if you set the context way. But if you set the context way. But if you set the context internally, then the rest of your day is internally, then the rest of your day is internally, then the rest of your day is maybe not a breeze, but it's workable maybe not a breeze, but it's workable maybe not a breeze, but it's workable and you'll stay that ball bearing in the and you'll stay that ball bearing in the and you'll stay that ball bearing in the trench that you're determining. Do I trench that you're determining. Do I trench that you're determining. Do I have that right? have that right? have that right? &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Okay. So I think this is important &gt;&gt; Okay. So I think this is important &gt;&gt; Okay. So I think this is important because I think a lot of people hear because I think a lot of people hear because I think a lot of people hear about um special operators and high about um special operators and high about um special operators and high performers and they're structuring their performers and they're structuring their performers and they're structuring their routine and they assume they wake up and routine and they assume they wake up and routine and they assume they wake up and they're like end of the day nothing's they're like end of the day nothing's they're like end of the day nothing's going to bother me. It's because things going to bother me. It's because things going to bother me. It's because things bo have the potential to bother you that bo have the potential to bother you that bo have the potential to bother you that you have to structure it that way. you have to structure it that way. you have to structure it that way. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; okay uh for me that's very helpful to &gt;&gt; okay uh for me that's very helpful to &gt;&gt; okay uh for me that's very helpful to hear. Um and you I think you're also hear. Um and you I think you're also hear. Um and you I think you're also defining the difference between uh an defining the difference between uh an defining the difference between uh an artist I know a lot of artists who need artist I know a lot of artists who need artist I know a lot of artists who need it they kind of float about their day. it they kind of float about their day. it they kind of float about their day. They're two hours late to things and They're two hours late to things and They're two hours late to things and then the stuff emerges, right? I then the stuff emerges, right? I then the stuff emerges, right? I mean, I can tell you stories about mean, I can tell you stories about mean, I can tell you stories about people in Los Angeles and how meeting people in Los Angeles and how meeting people in Los Angeles and how meeting times and I'm a little guilty of this, times and I'm a little guilty of this, times and I'm a little guilty of this, but it's incredible the way that things but it's incredible the way that things but it's incredible the way that things just kind of orbit around certain people just kind of orbit around certain people just kind of orbit around certain people and then they're but then they bring the and then they're but then they bring the and then they're but then they bring the magic and so the world continues to magic and so the world continues to magic and so the world continues to orbit around them orbit around them orbit around them &gt;&gt; um versus an operator. And I feel like &gt;&gt; um versus an operator. And I feel like &gt;&gt; um versus an operator. And I feel like everything you described is like the everything you described is like the everything you described is like the essence of being an operator. You're essence of being an operator. You're essence of being an operator. You're approaching your civilian life the same approaching your civilian life the same approaching your civilian life the same way presumably you did your operating way presumably you did your operating way presumably you did your operating life. So, um, let's say you have a life. So, um, let's say you have a life. So, um, let's say you have a morning where something goes wrong. morning where something goes wrong. morning where something goes wrong. There's no toothpaste in the toothbrush There's no toothpaste in the toothbrush There's no toothpaste in the toothbrush or something more serious like or something more serious like or something more serious like your wife really needs to talk about your wife really needs to talk about your wife really needs to talk about something. Maybe she's so, you know, you something. Maybe she's so, you know, you something. Maybe she's so, you know, you know, together that never happens. know, together that never happens. know, together that never happens. &gt;&gt; Will you forgo those minutes or do you &gt;&gt; Will you forgo those minutes or do you &gt;&gt; Will you forgo those minutes or do you make or how do you how do you deal with make or how do you how do you deal with make or how do you how do you deal with that? &gt;&gt; The situation really dictates. When I &gt;&gt; The situation really dictates. When I &gt;&gt; The situation really dictates. When I was in, I wouldn't I'd wake up before was in, I wouldn't I'd wake up before was in, I wouldn't I'd wake up before everybody else is in there. And it's a everybody else is in there. And it's a everybody else is in there. And it's a lot of stuff I tell to the new guys in lot of stuff I tell to the new guys in lot of stuff I tell to the new guys in special operations. Like, if you special operations. Like, if you special operations. Like, if you sacrifice your sleep when it doesn't sacrifice your sleep when it doesn't sacrifice your sleep when it doesn't affect anyone else, you can really lay affect anyone else, you can really lay affect anyone else, you can really lay the foundation for greatness, right? the foundation for greatness, right? the foundation for greatness, right? Your first four years, don't rush to Your first four years, don't rush to Your first four years, don't rush to make her your girlfriend. Don't make her make her your girlfriend. Don't make her make her your girlfriend. Don't make her your wife. Don't have a kid. Don't get a your wife. Don't have a kid. Don't get a your wife. Don't have a kid. Don't get a dog. Just focus on being a Green Bray. dog. Just focus on being a Green Bray. dog. Just focus on being a Green Bray. Focus on being a Navy Seal. And just do Focus on being a Navy Seal. And just do Focus on being a Navy Seal. And just do that. Then when that girlfriend turns in that. Then when that girlfriend turns in that. Then when that girlfriend turns in a fiance, you can have the bandwidth to a fiance, you can have the bandwidth to a fiance, you can have the bandwidth to do them both. It's very hard to do that do them both. It's very hard to do that do them both. It's very hard to do that job. You know, build that build that job. You know, build that build that job. You know, build that build that boat to the high seas and now you're boat to the high seas and now you're boat to the high seas and now you're dragging your wife into it. It's hard to dragging your wife into it. It's hard to dragging your wife into it. It's hard to do. But, you know, situation dictates if do. But, you know, situation dictates if do. But, you know, situation dictates if it's something I really have to solve, it's something I really have to solve, it's something I really have to solve, we really have to solve it. But, she we really have to solve it. But, she we really have to solve it. But, she knows no matter what, I'm unrackcking at knows no matter what, I'm unrackcking at knows no matter what, I'm unrackcking at 07. I'm not missing us for you. I'm not I'm not missing us for you. I'm not I'm not missing us for you. I'm not missing for somebody else because she missing for somebody else because she missing for somebody else because she knows what's going to happen. So, she'll knows what's going to happen. So, she'll knows what's going to happen. So, she'll either grab me at lunch. Hey, do you either grab me at lunch. Hey, do you either grab me at lunch. Hey, do you have a block here? We can talk for sure. have a block here? We can talk for sure. have a block here? We can talk for sure. We'll maybe start the initial We'll maybe start the initial We'll maybe start the initial conversation. And if it starts going conversation. And if it starts going conversation. And if it starts going south or I think it's going to take south or I think it's going to take south or I think it's going to take long, I'll look down on my watch like, long, I'll look down on my watch like, long, I'll look down on my watch like, "Honey, I got to go. I got 12 minutes to "Honey, I got to go. I got 12 minutes to "Honey, I got to go. I got 12 minutes to be there." She's like, "Okay, we'll be there." She's like, "Okay, we'll be there." She's like, "Okay, we'll catch up at lunch." Cool. And we'll go. catch up at lunch." Cool. And we'll go. catch up at lunch." Cool. And we'll go. I can't miss morning movement. I can't I can't miss morning movement. I can't I can't miss morning movement. I can't do it. That will ruin my day. do it. That will ruin my day. do it. That will ruin my day. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And if I'm rushed through morning &gt;&gt; And if I'm rushed through morning &gt;&gt; And if I'm rushed through morning movement, if somebody comes in, somebody movement, if somebody comes in, somebody movement, if somebody comes in, somebody beats on the door and they're like, beats on the door and they're like, beats on the door and they're like, "Hey, we were in the neighborhood. Just "Hey, we were in the neighborhood. Just "Hey, we were in the neighborhood. Just wanted to come see you. Can we talk for wanted to come see you. Can we talk for wanted to come see you. Can we talk for 20 minutes?" No, you can't. No. I'm 20 minutes?" No, you can't. No. I'm 20 minutes?" No, you can't. No. I'm sorry. And I know it sounds bad. You sorry. And I know it sounds bad. You sorry. And I know it sounds bad. You can't because I know what happens if I can't because I know what happens if I can't because I know what happens if I miss this day and I'm not willing to miss this day and I'm not willing to miss this day and I'm not willing to take the chance on you right now. You take the chance on you right now. You take the chance on you right now. You can wait an hour. Wait till I'm done. can wait an hour. Wait till I'm done. can wait an hour. Wait till I'm done. But it's hard, you know, and now we've But it's hard, you know, and now we've But it's hard, you know, and now we've kind of restructured the whole day to kind of restructured the whole day to kind of restructured the whole day to where I can get my time in the where I can get my time in the where I can get my time in the morning and I can leave with just enough morning and I can leave with just enough morning and I can leave with just enough time to see my kids wake up now. They're time to see my kids wake up now. They're time to see my kids wake up now. They're pouring cereal. So now I get that little pouring cereal. So now I get that little pouring cereal. So now I get that little dopamine hit of seeing them and I kick dopamine hit of seeing them and I kick dopamine hit of seeing them and I kick off their morning in a positive way. off their morning in a positive way. off their morning in a positive way. Right? I'm doing red light therapy in Right? I'm doing red light therapy in Right? I'm doing red light therapy in the morning. I'm still going to unrackck the morning. I'm still going to unrackck the morning. I'm still going to unrackck at 07. I'm still getting up at 5:00, but at 07. I'm still getting up at 5:00, but at 07. I'm still getting up at 5:00, but now I'm just in the house getting now I'm just in the house getting now I'm just in the house getting everything processed. I'm going to leave everything processed. I'm going to leave everything processed. I'm going to leave on my terms and that way they get to see on my terms and that way they get to see on my terms and that way they get to see me first thing in the morning. I only me first thing in the morning. I only me first thing in the morning. I only get 3 hours at night. Well, if I get 30 get 3 hours at night. Well, if I get 30 get 3 hours at night. Well, if I get 30 minutes in the morning stacked over the minutes in the morning stacked over the minutes in the morning stacked over the course of a year, that's a huge course of a year, that's a huge course of a year, that's a huge difference. &gt;&gt; We've restructured the entire day, but &gt;&gt; We've restructured the entire day, but &gt;&gt; We've restructured the entire day, but the whole team is also on that exact the whole team is also on that exact the whole team is also on that exact same schedule, right? It's not just me. same schedule, right? It's not just me. same schedule, right? It's not just me. It's not just my world and business It's not just my world and business It's not just my world and business partners Cole and everybody else. partners Cole and everybody else. partners Cole and everybody else. Everybody who does that morning block of Everybody who does that morning block of Everybody who does that morning block of fitness, that's why I've been pushing it fitness, that's why I've been pushing it fitness, that's why I've been pushing it this whole time. And if you look at this whole time. And if you look at this whole time. And if you look at anybody in the military, anybody in fire anybody in the military, anybody in fire anybody in the military, anybody in fire department, anybody in special department, anybody in special department, anybody in special operations, the military in general, operations, the military in general, operations, the military in general, everybody's day always starts with everybody's day always starts with everybody's day always starts with fitness. When you're in boot camp, you fitness. When you're in boot camp, you fitness. When you're in boot camp, you wake up, you do a workout, and then you wake up, you do a workout, and then you wake up, you do a workout, and then you eat. When you go to Buds, you wake up, eat. When you go to Buds, you wake up, eat. When you go to Buds, you wake up, you work out essentially all day long, you work out essentially all day long, you work out essentially all day long, go to sleep. It's the same thing. When go to sleep. It's the same thing. When go to sleep. It's the same thing. When you get to the SEAL team, you do the you get to the SEAL team, you do the you get to the SEAL team, you do the same thing. Everybody wakes up, same thing. Everybody wakes up, same thing. Everybody wakes up, everybody does fitness the very first everybody does fitness the very first everybody does fitness the very first thing, and then we start our day. That's thing, and then we start our day. That's thing, and then we start our day. That's been really successful. Why would I ever been really successful. Why would I ever been really successful. Why would I ever break that? You see guys when they break that? You see guys when they break that? You see guys when they transition out, they get away from it. transition out, they get away from it. transition out, they get away from it. They gain a bunch of weight. They start They gain a bunch of weight. They start They gain a bunch of weight. They start drinking. You working out 5 days a week? drinking. You working out 5 days a week? drinking. You working out 5 days a week? No. Why? You've been doing it since you No. Why? You've been doing it since you No. Why? You've been doing it since you were 17 years old. Why would you break were 17 years old. Why would you break were 17 years old. Why would you break it now? Why? it now? Why? it now? Why? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why do you think that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why do you think that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why do you think that happens? &gt;&gt; I think guys use excuses, injuries, &gt;&gt; I think guys use excuses, injuries, &gt;&gt; I think guys use excuses, injuries, limitations, lack of motivation. Like, limitations, lack of motivation. Like, limitations, lack of motivation. Like, oh, there's no reason for me to be in oh, there's no reason for me to be in oh, there's no reason for me to be in shape. Longevity of life. Everybody shape. Longevity of life. Everybody shape. Longevity of life. Everybody says, I take a bullet with my kids. You says, I take a bullet with my kids. You says, I take a bullet with my kids. You won't lose 40 lbs for them. you won't lose 40 lbs for them. you won't lose 40 lbs for them. you won't prolong life. If you think you're a real prolong life. If you think you're a real prolong life. If you think you're a real asset to your family, why wouldn't you asset to your family, why wouldn't you asset to your family, why wouldn't you try to maximize that time? So, I look at try to maximize that time? So, I look at try to maximize that time? So, I look at him alley. It doesn't take a whole lot. him alley. It doesn't take a whole lot. him alley. It doesn't take a whole lot. Like, you don't have to be David Like, you don't have to be David Like, you don't have to be David Gogggins. You don't have to run 100 Gogggins. You don't have to run 100 Gogggins. You don't have to run 100 miles a day. You can wake up and do a miles a day. You can wake up and do a miles a day. You can wake up and do a 20-minute walk every single day, and 20-minute walk every single day, and 20-minute walk every single day, and you'll be better off for it. You could you'll be better off for it. You could you'll be better off for it. You could grab a set of kettle bells, 30 minutes grab a set of kettle bells, 30 minutes grab a set of kettle bells, 30 minutes in your garage. That is something every in your garage. That is something every in your garage. That is something every single day that makes you exponentially single day that makes you exponentially single day that makes you exponentially better just through the repetition of better just through the repetition of better just through the repetition of being there, being present, being a being there, being present, being a being there, being present, being a little selfish right now so you can be little selfish right now so you can be little selfish right now so you can be selfish later. So for me, if I don't get selfish later. So for me, if I don't get selfish later. So for me, if I don't get that workout in, and everybody's got that workout in, and everybody's got that workout in, and everybody's got stuff going on. I do, too. If I don't stuff going on. I do, too. If I don't stuff going on. I do, too. If I don't get that block of fitness in, I will get that block of fitness in, I will get that block of fitness in, I will think about that all day long. I'll think about that all day long. I'll think about that all day long. I'll think about it for weeks. think about it for weeks. think about it for weeks. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; We go back the next time we hit that &gt;&gt; We go back the next time we hit that &gt;&gt; We go back the next time we hit that muscle group. I don't get the same muscle group. I don't get the same muscle group. I don't get the same numbers I thought I would. Well, that's numbers I thought I would. Well, that's numbers I thought I would. Well, that's cuz I took Monday off. I'm never going cuz I took Monday off. I'm never going cuz I took Monday off. I'm never going to put myself in that position. I don't to put myself in that position. I don't to put myself in that position. I don't want to have to have an excuse. So, I want to have to have an excuse. So, I want to have to have an excuse. So, I just I set the foundation. I lay it just I set the foundation. I lay it just I set the foundation. I lay it down. I stamped it on a piece of paper. down. I stamped it on a piece of paper. down. I stamped it on a piece of paper. That's what I'm doing. I'm not That's what I'm doing. I'm not That's what I'm doing. I'm not compromising on it. And it's been it's compromising on it. And it's been it's compromising on it. And it's been it's been great for us. been great for us. been great for us. &gt;&gt; That's awesome. I mean, as somebody who &gt;&gt; That's awesome. I mean, as somebody who &gt;&gt; That's awesome. I mean, as somebody who got into resistance training in his got into resistance training in his got into resistance training in his teens and running, I confess teens and running, I confess teens and running, I confess over the years, I felt some guilt around over the years, I felt some guilt around over the years, I felt some guilt around working out because in my community of working out because in my community of working out because in my community of scientists, I mean, now I have a much scientists, I mean, now I have a much scientists, I mean, now I have a much broader community. You know, you go to broader community. You know, you go to broader community. You know, you go to meetings, everyone's sitting all day and meetings, everyone's sitting all day and meetings, everyone's sitting all day and eating bad food. And then, you know, eating bad food. And then, you know, eating bad food. And then, you know, then it was happy hour. I was never then it was happy hour. I was never then it was happy hour. I was never much of a drinker, but I would much of a drinker, but I would much of a drinker, but I would participate a bit until eventually I participate a bit until eventually I participate a bit until eventually I just stopped. um drinking entirely. And just stopped. um drinking entirely. And just stopped. um drinking entirely. And occasionally I would sneak off during occasionally I would sneak off during occasionally I would sneak off during some of the I'll just be honest that the some of the I'll just be honest that the some of the I'll just be honest that the weak talks. I was like I' I've seen the weak talks. I was like I' I've seen the weak talks. I was like I' I've seen this person speak before. I'm going to this person speak before. I'm going to this person speak before. I'm going to get a workout in. And only once did I get a workout in. And only once did I get a workout in. And only once did I ever run into a colleague in the gym at ever run into a colleague in the gym at ever run into a colleague in the gym at one of these places. And we both were one of these places. And we both were one of these places. And we both were like it was like getting caught doing like it was like getting caught doing like it was like getting caught doing something bad. But then the years went something bad. But then the years went something bad. But then the years went by and I saw my colleague start to die. by and I saw my colleague start to die. by and I saw my colleague start to die. I saw my colleague start to get sick. Uh I saw my colleague start to get sick. Uh I saw my colleague start to get sick. Uh I saw my colleague start to resemble I saw my colleague start to resemble I saw my colleague start to resemble melted candles. And these were people melted candles. And these were people melted candles. And these were people that had a lot of robustness and they that had a lot of robustness and they that had a lot of robustness and they also had a lot to offer and families and also had a lot to offer and families and also had a lot to offer and families and friends. And so um I think nowadays friends. And so um I think nowadays friends. And so um I think nowadays people think about physical fitness a people think about physical fitness a people think about physical fitness a little bit differently. They understand little bit differently. They understand little bit differently. They understand it's an investment and therefore it's an investment and therefore it's an investment and therefore it's beneficial to the people around you. But beneficial to the people around you. But beneficial to the people around you. But I still see a lot of people um kind of I still see a lot of people um kind of I still see a lot of people um kind of couch it especially with respect to couch it especially with respect to couch it especially with respect to anything that relates to muscle as kind anything that relates to muscle as kind anything that relates to muscle as kind of selfish and narcissistic and this of selfish and narcissistic and this of selfish and narcissistic and this kind of thing. And um I think it's so kind of thing. And um I think it's so kind of thing. And um I think it's so important that people understand the important that people understand the important that people understand the mental health benefits but also the mental health benefits but also the mental health benefits but also the benefits that it can bring the people in benefits that it can bring the people in benefits that it can bring the people in your life and not just longevity but your life and not just longevity but your life and not just longevity but just the person that it brings. You just the person that it brings. You just the person that it brings. You really understand yourself. You know in really understand yourself. You know in really understand yourself. You know in the back of my mind I'm thinking about the back of my mind I'm thinking about the back of my mind I'm thinking about you know the oracle know thyself. It's you know the oracle know thyself. It's you know the oracle know thyself. It's like so important. If you don't get that like so important. If you don't get that like so important. If you don't get that workout you you're going to have to workout you you're going to have to workout you you're going to have to force out being best husband, best dad, force out being best husband, best dad, force out being best husband, best dad, best teammate. And if you do get that best teammate. And if you do get that best teammate. And if you do get that workout, they still get that best dad, workout, they still get that best dad, workout, they still get that best dad, everything, but it's that much more everything, but it's that much more everything, but it's that much more genuine and it and it comes it genuine and it and it comes it genuine and it and it comes it probably is in abundance. One of the probably is in abundance. One of the probably is in abundance. One of the things that nobody ever talks about is things that nobody ever talks about is things that nobody ever talks about is your body awareness. When you do fitness your body awareness. When you do fitness your body awareness. When you do fitness for a long time, 50 years old, you've for a long time, 50 years old, you've for a long time, 50 years old, you've been doing fitness for a very long time. been doing fitness for a very long time. been doing fitness for a very long time. You are so in tune with that vessel that You are so in tune with that vessel that You are so in tune with that vessel that when something does pop up, you identify when something does pop up, you identify when something does pop up, you identify right away. when you don't you're like right away. when you don't you're like right away. when you don't you're like um my back kind of hurts where um my back kind of hurts where um my back kind of hurts where uh you don't know. I'm in tune with that uh you don't know. I'm in tune with that uh you don't know. I'm in tune with that thing so well that when I walk into a thing so well that when I walk into a thing so well that when I walk into a doctor I'm like take a needle 3 in down, doctor I'm like take a needle 3 in down, doctor I'm like take a needle 3 in down, rotate it over 45 degrees and that's rotate it over 45 degrees and that's rotate it over 45 degrees and that's where it is. I'm like, "Okay, this is where it is. I'm like, "Okay, this is where it is. I'm like, "Okay, this is it." I'm so in tune with it. So when it." I'm so in tune with it. So when it." I'm so in tune with it. So when anything pops up, I can diagnose it. I anything pops up, I can diagnose it. I anything pops up, I can diagnose it. I can walk in and give them actual can walk in and give them actual can walk in and give them actual feedback what's happening. I'm not just feedback what's happening. I'm not just feedback what's happening. I'm not just sitting on the couch all day long just sitting on the couch all day long just sitting on the couch all day long just my neck kind of hurts. No, I know my neck kind of hurts. No, I know my neck kind of hurts. No, I know exactly what it is. I'm doing a full exactly what it is. I'm doing a full exactly what it is. I'm doing a full diagnostic approach the entire day. And diagnostic approach the entire day. And diagnostic approach the entire day. And that's why I've got Vernon. I mean, he's that's why I've got Vernon. I mean, he's that's why I've got Vernon. I mean, he's the best strength coach in the world. the best strength coach in the world. the best strength coach in the world. And if I wouldn't have that guy, I would And if I wouldn't have that guy, I would And if I wouldn't have that guy, I would be &gt;&gt; I mean, he's brought me back from the &gt;&gt; I mean, he's brought me back from the &gt;&gt; I mean, he's brought me back from the dead multiple times than I can count. dead multiple times than I can count. dead multiple times than I can count. &gt;&gt; But it's five days a week. I mean, he's &gt;&gt; But it's five days a week. I mean, he's &gt;&gt; But it's five days a week. I mean, he's in there every day. So, if I walk in and in there every day. So, if I walk in and in there every day. So, if I walk in and I've got a slight limp on my left side, I've got a slight limp on my left side, I've got a slight limp on my left side, he's like, "Hey, my man, come over. What he's like, "Hey, my man, come over. What he's like, "Hey, my man, come over. What is that?" And I was like, "I have is that?" And I was like, "I have is that?" And I was like, "I have nothing." Bruce heal. Yeah. How'd you nothing." Bruce heal. Yeah. How'd you nothing." Bruce heal. Yeah. How'd you know it's a bruise he was like, "I know it's a bruise he was like, "I know it's a bruise he was like, "I watched that broad jump on Friday. Like, watched that broad jump on Friday. Like, watched that broad jump on Friday. Like, you landed a little funky. I wanted to you landed a little funky. I wanted to you landed a little funky. I wanted to see if he's gonna mess with you." He see if he's gonna mess with you." He see if he's gonna mess with you." He ided it. I ided it. I just wasn't going ided it. I ided it. I just wasn't going ided it. I ided it. I just wasn't going to say anything. Okay, what are you to say anything. Okay, what are you to say anything. Okay, what are you going to do about it, right? Be going to do about it, right? Be going to do about it, right? Be proactive instead of reactive. But proactive instead of reactive. But proactive instead of reactive. But that's because you're chipping away and that's because you're chipping away and that's because you're chipping away and you know, you're understanding yourself you know, you're understanding yourself you know, you're understanding yourself so well because you are constantly in so well because you are constantly in so well because you are constantly in tune with your body and people just tune with your body and people just tune with your body and people just forget about it. Like, why aren't you forget about it. Like, why aren't you forget about it. Like, why aren't you sleeping? Or I had caffeine at 4:00. Oh, sleeping? Or I had caffeine at 4:00. Oh, sleeping? Or I had caffeine at 4:00. Oh, I'm accountable for everything I put in I'm accountable for everything I put in I'm accountable for everything I put in my body and then everything comes out of my body and then everything comes out of my body and then everything comes out of me. The gym is just one of the methods me. The gym is just one of the methods me. The gym is just one of the methods that really ties them all together for that really ties them all together for that really ties them all together for me. &gt;&gt; The body awareness piece, I think, is &gt;&gt; The body awareness piece, I think, is &gt;&gt; The body awareness piece, I think, is something that uh we should also something that uh we should also something that uh we should also underscore a bit. Uh, I think one thing underscore a bit. Uh, I think one thing underscore a bit. Uh, I think one thing that happens if people don't develop that happens if people don't develop that happens if people don't develop body awareness is that they don't learn body awareness is that they don't learn body awareness is that they don't learn the difference between something that the difference between something that the difference between something that hurts and an injury. A few years ago, hurts and an injury. A few years ago, hurts and an injury. A few years ago, right before going on Cam Haynes's right before going on Cam Haynes's right before going on Cam Haynes's podcast where, you know, you carry that podcast where, you know, you carry that podcast where, you know, you carry that rock. I was about to say he makes you rock. I was about to say he makes you rock. I was about to say he makes you carry the rock. You don't have to. You carry the rock. You don't have to. You carry the rock. You don't have to. You know, you carry the rock up. The thing's know, you carry the rock up. The thing's know, you carry the rock up. The thing's heavy. 72 lbs. Slippery. It's muddy. heavy. 72 lbs. Slippery. It's muddy. heavy. 72 lbs. Slippery. It's muddy. It's,000 ft of elevation. And people do It's,000 ft of elevation. And people do It's,000 ft of elevation. And people do it, right? You can do it. But, um, I it, right? You can do it. But, um, I it, right? You can do it. But, um, I popped a hamstring on the hamstring curl popped a hamstring on the hamstring curl popped a hamstring on the hamstring curl machine like a couple days before. But I machine like a couple days before. But I machine like a couple days before. But I didn't pop it. Like it didn't ravel, didn't pop it. Like it didn't ravel, didn't pop it. Like it didn't ravel, you know, unravel up the up the tendon. you know, unravel up the up the tendon. you know, unravel up the up the tendon. So I was like, I'm just not going to So I was like, I'm just not going to So I was like, I'm just not going to talk about it. I'm not going to say talk about it. I'm not going to say talk about it. I'm not going to say anything. I'm not going to because anything. I'm not going to because anything. I'm not going to because that's going to create its own thing. I that's going to create its own thing. I that's going to create its own thing. I was like, I'm hurt. It hurt, but I'm not was like, I'm hurt. It hurt, but I'm not was like, I'm hurt. It hurt, but I'm not injured. And knowing that line is really injured. And knowing that line is really injured. And knowing that line is really important because if you are injured, important because if you are injured, important because if you are injured, it'd be the stupidest thing in the world it'd be the stupidest thing in the world it'd be the stupidest thing in the world to carry that rock up that hill, right? to carry that rock up that hill, right? to carry that rock up that hill, right? You end up out for six months You end up out for six months You end up out for six months potentially or four months. I had years potentially or four months. I had years potentially or four months. I had years ago a back pain kind of sciatica thing ago a back pain kind of sciatica thing ago a back pain kind of sciatica thing and I couldn't stand up and I actually and I couldn't stand up and I actually and I couldn't stand up and I actually was online. It was Instagram and I have was online. It was Instagram and I have was online. It was Instagram and I have no business affiliation to this kid but no business affiliation to this kid but no business affiliation to this kid but there was a I think he's a chiropractor. there was a I think he's a chiropractor. there was a I think he's a chiropractor. He has this channel called Rehab Fix He has this channel called Rehab Fix He has this channel called Rehab Fix &gt;&gt; and he convinced me that what I need to &gt;&gt; and he convinced me that what I need to &gt;&gt; and he convinced me that what I need to do was some like up dog things. It looks do was some like up dog things. It looks do was some like up dog things. It looks like you're kind of like humping the like you're kind of like humping the like you're kind of like humping the floor, you know, your pelvis is down and floor, you know, your pelvis is down and floor, you know, your pelvis is down and you're pushing up and repeat those. It's you're pushing up and repeat those. It's you're pushing up and repeat those. It's kind of like lizard push-ups, you kind of like lizard push-ups, you kind of like lizard push-ups, you know. Um, and then against the wall if know. Um, and then against the wall if know. Um, and then against the wall if you can't actually do that from the you can't actually do that from the you can't actually do that from the floor. Within three days, it resolved floor. Within three days, it resolved floor. Within three days, it resolved itself. &gt;&gt; And I was thinking about pain meds, &gt;&gt; And I was thinking about pain meds, &gt;&gt; And I was thinking about pain meds, which I don't like to take. In fact, I which I don't like to take. In fact, I which I don't like to take. In fact, I avoid them entirely. I was saying, am I avoid them entirely. I was saying, am I avoid them entirely. I was saying, am I going to have to have surgery? I could going to have to have surgery? I could going to have to have surgery? I could not stand up. I couldn't move. I not stand up. I couldn't move. I not stand up. I couldn't move. I couldn't do it. And and I realized then couldn't do it. And and I realized then couldn't do it. And and I realized then I was like, okay, the line between hurt I was like, okay, the line between hurt I was like, okay, the line between hurt and truly injured is often kind of and truly injured is often kind of and truly injured is often kind of blurry. And you need to be able to work blurry. And you need to be able to work blurry. And you need to be able to work through that space. And you think about through that space. And you think about through that space. And you think about this and it through one lens, and it this and it through one lens, and it this and it through one lens, and it sounds like a selfish thing. Oh, it's sounds like a selfish thing. Oh, it's sounds like a selfish thing. Oh, it's all about being able to work out more. all about being able to work out more. all about being able to work out more. you think out about it through another you think out about it through another you think out about it through another lens, it's, you know, people who think lens, it's, you know, people who think lens, it's, you know, people who think they're injured or who are in pain they're injured or who are in pain they're injured or who are in pain and don't resolve that are very and don't resolve that are very and don't resolve that are very difficult to be around. Very difficult. difficult to be around. Very difficult. difficult to be around. Very difficult. I've been that person. It's just I've been that person. It's just I've been that person. It's just everything grates on you. everything grates on you. everything grates on you. &gt;&gt; And male, female, young or old, people &gt;&gt; And male, female, young or old, people &gt;&gt; And male, female, young or old, people now, you know, they talk about their now, you know, they talk about their now, you know, they talk about their neck or they sleep, right? And I think neck or they sleep, right? And I think neck or they sleep, right? And I think being able to suck stuff up is really being able to suck stuff up is really being able to suck stuff up is really great. It's also important to know when great. It's also important to know when great. It's also important to know when you have a real issue. And so the body you have a real issue. And so the body you have a real issue. And so the body awareness thing, I think, is a is a gift awareness thing, I think, is a is a gift awareness thing, I think, is a is a gift to oneself. You can avoid a lot of to oneself. You can avoid a lot of to oneself. You can avoid a lot of costs, a lot of unnecessary medical costs, a lot of unnecessary medical costs, a lot of unnecessary medical interventions. You can know when it's interventions. You can know when it's interventions. You can know when it's time to take action with proper medical time to take action with proper medical time to take action with proper medical intervention, but also it really allows intervention, but also it really allows intervention, but also it really allows you to be in life with people without you to be in life with people without you to be in life with people without being the person that's always being the person that's always being the person that's always complaining about stuff or is just complaining about stuff or is just complaining about stuff or is just difficult. I think a lot of people who difficult. I think a lot of people who difficult. I think a lot of people who are difficult are in pain and they don't are difficult are in pain and they don't are difficult are in pain and they don't know how to resolve that pain. Y know how to resolve that pain. Y know how to resolve that pain. Y &gt;&gt; and they think they have a problem with &gt;&gt; and they think they have a problem with &gt;&gt; and they think they have a problem with pain. So then they take pain medication pain. So then they take pain medication pain. So then they take pain medication and that's a whole cycle. So, I just, and that's a whole cycle. So, I just, and that's a whole cycle. So, I just, you know, want to underscore that, um, you know, want to underscore that, um, you know, want to underscore that, um, kind of where we're headed here, uh, it kind of where we're headed here, uh, it kind of where we're headed here, uh, it seems again and again is with, you know, seems again and again is with, you know, seems again and again is with, you know, what seems selfish is actually one of what seems selfish is actually one of what seems selfish is actually one of the most selfless things you can do. the most selfless things you can do. the most selfless things you can do. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about what you call &gt;&gt; Let's talk about what you call &gt;&gt; Let's talk about what you call unrackcking at 07 unrackcking at 07 unrackcking at 07 tier one operator, former tier one tier one operator, former tier one tier one operator, former tier one operator, the lingo. So, that I'm operator, the lingo. So, that I'm operator, the lingo. So, that I'm guessing is that unrackcking the weight? guessing is that unrackcking the weight? guessing is that unrackcking the weight? That's when the workout starts. Phone is That's when the workout starts. Phone is That's when the workout starts. Phone is off. &gt;&gt; Phone's on because we run an app on it. &gt;&gt; Phone's on because we run an app on it. &gt;&gt; Phone's on because we run an app on it. So, we have Vernon Griffin, So, we have Vernon Griffin, So, we have Vernon Griffin, &gt;&gt; but you're not looking at text messages. &gt;&gt; but you're not looking at text messages. &gt;&gt; but you're not looking at text messages. You're not shooting selfies of your You're not shooting selfies of your You're not shooting selfies of your calves and biceps, right? I point that calves and biceps, right? I point that calves and biceps, right? I point that out in semigjest because I always joke out in semigjest because I always joke out in semigjest because I always joke that the first rep of every set now that the first rep of every set now that the first rep of every set now seems to be uh guys in the gym taking seems to be uh guys in the gym taking seems to be uh guys in the gym taking pictures of themselves. The last rep of pictures of themselves. The last rep of pictures of themselves. The last rep of every set seems to be guys taking every set seems to be guys taking every set seems to be guys taking pictures of themselves. Um so 07. So pictures of themselves. Um so 07. So pictures of themselves. Um so 07. So what's that workout look like? You're what's that workout look like? You're what's that workout look like? You're doing it 5 days a week. Um I know it's doing it 5 days a week. Um I know it's doing it 5 days a week. Um I know it's going to be different for different going to be different for different going to be different for different people, but you have this program that I people, but you have this program that I people, but you have this program that I really want to explore with you today really want to explore with you today really want to explore with you today about how to measure progress and set about how to measure progress and set about how to measure progress and set standards and meet new standards, higher standards and meet new standards, higher standards and meet new standards, higher standards. Uh, what does that workout standards. Uh, what does that workout standards. Uh, what does that workout look like for you? look like for you? look like for you? &gt;&gt; So, I linked up with Vernon right when I &gt;&gt; So, I linked up with Vernon right when I &gt;&gt; So, I linked up with Vernon right when I was getting medically retired around was getting medically retired around was getting medically retired around 2019. I came back from a gnarly shoulder 2019. I came back from a gnarly shoulder 2019. I came back from a gnarly shoulder injury. I blew it. I had a dislocation. injury. I blew it. I had a dislocation. injury. I blew it. I had a dislocation. It came through my armpit. Shredded out It came through my armpit. Shredded out It came through my armpit. Shredded out everything. And I went from about 215 to everything. And I went from about 215 to everything. And I went from about 215 to about 180 lbs. Got stuck in a rehab about 180 lbs. Got stuck in a rehab about 180 lbs. Got stuck in a rehab clinic in uh in Bethesda, Maryland for clinic in uh in Bethesda, Maryland for clinic in uh in Bethesda, Maryland for 31 days inatient. And I came out like 31 days inatient. And I came out like 31 days inatient. And I came out like death warmed over. Worst I've ever been death warmed over. Worst I've ever been death warmed over. Worst I've ever been in my life. Worst my mental health has in my life. Worst my mental health has in my life. Worst my mental health has ever been. I did not want to play the ever been. I did not want to play the ever been. I did not want to play the game anymore. And the Navy Seal game anymore. And the Navy Seal game anymore. And the Navy Seal Foundation hooked you up with this uh Foundation hooked you up with this uh Foundation hooked you up with this uh physical rehabilitation program in physical rehabilitation program in physical rehabilitation program in Virginia Beach ran by a former SEAL and Virginia Beach ran by a former SEAL and Virginia Beach ran by a former SEAL and Vernon was the lead strength and Vernon was the lead strength and Vernon was the lead strength and conditioning coach. And he was my coach. conditioning coach. And he was my coach. conditioning coach. And he was my coach. And we walked in, we did full body And we walked in, we did full body And we walked in, we did full body assessments. And what's interesting assessments. And what's interesting assessments. And what's interesting about him is he took all your about him is he took all your about him is he took all your limitations and develop concepts and limitations and develop concepts and limitations and develop concepts and movements to establish confidence in movements to establish confidence in movements to establish confidence in that area. So when I came back, you that area. So when I came back, you that area. So when I came back, you know, day one, he's like, "Okay, let's know, day one, he's like, "Okay, let's know, day one, he's like, "Okay, let's try to hang from the bar." I looked try to hang from the bar." I looked try to hang from the bar." I looked right at him. No. He's like, "What? No, right at him. No. He's like, "What? No, right at him. No. He's like, "What? No, I'm not hanging from that bar. I'm not hanging from that bar. I'm not hanging from that bar. I'm done." Like, I've done I've done more done." Like, I've done I've done more done." Like, I've done I've done more pull-ups than most people on the planet. pull-ups than most people on the planet. pull-ups than most people on the planet. My pull-up days are done, man. Like, I'm My pull-up days are done, man. Like, I'm My pull-up days are done, man. Like, I'm not doing it again. He goes, "You got to not doing it again. He goes, "You got to not doing it again. He goes, "You got to trust me." It's not going to happen on trust me." It's not going to happen on trust me." It's not going to happen on day one. Slowly but surely. I mean, I day one. Slowly but surely. I mean, I day one. Slowly but surely. I mean, I mean, he's at the point where he's mean, he's at the point where he's mean, he's at the point where he's holding my knees. I can't even extend my holding my knees. I can't even extend my holding my knees. I can't even extend my arm overhead. Like, arm overhead. Like, arm overhead. Like, I'm &gt;&gt; That's humbling &gt;&gt; That's humbling &gt;&gt; That's humbling &gt;&gt; for a guy that for a guy went was a tier &gt;&gt; for a guy that for a guy went was a tier &gt;&gt; for a guy that for a guy went was a tier one operator. That's humbling. I was so one operator. That's humbling. I was so one operator. That's humbling. I was so bound up by fear that it was going to bound up by fear that it was going to bound up by fear that it was going to come because that was my first shoulder come because that was my first shoulder come because that was my first shoulder surgery and if you've never had one, surgery and if you've never had one, surgery and if you've never had one, shoulder surgeries are the worst rehab shoulder surgeries are the worst rehab shoulder surgeries are the worst rehab I've ever had and I've had a lot of I've ever had and I've had a lot of I've ever had and I've had a lot of them. The shoulder rehab was brutal and them. The shoulder rehab was brutal and them. The shoulder rehab was brutal and I didn't want it to pop and I'd extend I didn't want it to pop and I'd extend I didn't want it to pop and I'd extend and I couldn't do it and I couldn't do and I couldn't do it and I couldn't do and I couldn't do it and I couldn't do it. And he's like, "You just got to it. And he's like, "You just got to it. And he's like, "You just got to trust me, man. Like doctor cleared you. trust me, man. Like doctor cleared you. trust me, man. Like doctor cleared you. The anchors have set. Everything is The anchors have set. Everything is The anchors have set. Everything is there, but you cannot go through the there, but you cannot go through the there, but you cannot go through the rest of your life like this." He's like, rest of your life like this." He's like, rest of your life like this." He's like, "You're not even 40." He's like, "Do you "You're not even 40." He's like, "Do you "You're not even 40." He's like, "Do you want to go another 40 years without want to go another 40 years without want to go another 40 years without doing a pull-up? You're going to have to doing a pull-up? You're going to have to doing a pull-up? You're going to have to trust me." He'd pick me up by the legs. trust me." He'd pick me up by the legs. trust me." He'd pick me up by the legs. I'd put my arm on there and he'd slowly I'd put my arm on there and he'd slowly I'd put my arm on there and he'd slowly but surely start to extend me down until but surely start to extend me down until but surely start to extend me down until we got full range of motion. And we did we got full range of motion. And we did we got full range of motion. And we did that for days and weeks. Then we went to that for days and weeks. Then we went to that for days and weeks. Then we went to a band. Then we took the band off. I a band. Then we took the band off. I a band. Then we took the band off. I just want you to hang. Now we're going just want you to hang. Now we're going just want you to hang. Now we're going to focus on going back up. And we built to focus on going back up. And we built to focus on going back up. And we built back to I mean I can do sets of 25 back to I mean I can do sets of 25 back to I mean I can do sets of 25 pull-ups now. pull-ups now. pull-ups now. &gt;&gt; You're you're pulling your weight, which &gt;&gt; You're you're pulling your weight, which &gt;&gt; You're you're pulling your weight, which is what right now you're is what right now you're is what right now you're &gt;&gt; 215. &gt;&gt; 215. &gt;&gt; 215. &gt;&gt; You're 61 215. &gt;&gt; You're 61 215. &gt;&gt; You're 61 215. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And you pull you're doing sets of 20. &gt;&gt; And you pull you're doing sets of 20. &gt;&gt; And you pull you're doing sets of 20. &gt;&gt; Yeah. 20 25 &gt;&gt; Yeah. 20 25 &gt;&gt; Yeah. 20 25 &gt;&gt; non-kip pull-up. &gt;&gt; non-kip pull-up. &gt;&gt; non-kip pull-up. &gt;&gt; Yep. and it's all bouncing back from &gt;&gt; Yep. and it's all bouncing back from &gt;&gt; Yep. and it's all bouncing back from him. But the whole program we did, you him. But the whole program we did, you him. But the whole program we did, you know, because I'm not a unicorn by know, because I'm not a unicorn by know, because I'm not a unicorn by any means, but I've had all the injuries any means, but I've had all the injuries any means, but I've had all the injuries that everybody else has had. I've had that everybody else has had. I've had that everybody else has had. I've had double hip surgery. I've had double hip surgery. I've had double hip surgery. I've had double shoulder surgery. I've had my abdomen shoulder surgery. I've had my abdomen shoulder surgery. I've had my abdomen blown through a couple times. I mean, blown through a couple times. I mean, blown through a couple times. I mean, I've had them all. I've had thumbs I've had them all. I've had thumbs I've had them all. I've had thumbs I've had to rebuild and had to rebuild and had to rebuild and &gt;&gt; blown through. &gt;&gt; blown through. &gt;&gt; blown through. &gt;&gt; I mean, just everything. When I got &gt;&gt; I mean, just everything. When I got &gt;&gt; I mean, just everything. When I got electrocuted, it blew out everything. electrocuted, it blew out everything. electrocuted, it blew out everything. And we had to rebuild that entire thing. And we had to rebuild that entire thing. And we had to rebuild that entire thing. So all the guys that are in this So all the guys that are in this So all the guys that are in this process, if you're a SWAT team, a process, if you're a SWAT team, a process, if you're a SWAT team, a fireman on a SEAL team, anybody in fireman on a SEAL team, anybody in fireman on a SEAL team, anybody in between, we've all got injuries that between, we've all got injuries that between, we've all got injuries that become limitations and we just avoid become limitations and we just avoid become limitations and we just avoid them. You can't avoid them forever. And them. You can't avoid them forever. And them. You can't avoid them forever. And this program is designed to get you back this program is designed to get you back this program is designed to get you back in shape and in shape and in shape and it grows with you as you go. So every it grows with you as you go. So every it grows with you as you go. So every single week you're chasing numbers from single week you're chasing numbers from single week you're chasing numbers from the week before and pushing. On the days the week before and pushing. On the days the week before and pushing. On the days you don't have it, on the days you wake you don't have it, on the days you wake you don't have it, on the days you wake up and you're bound up just lacking up and you're bound up just lacking up and you're bound up just lacking motivation, we're going with 100% of motivation, we're going with 100% of motivation, we're going with 100% of what we have to offer. That might be what we have to offer. That might be what we have to offer. That might be 75%. I'm giving a 100% of the 75 I have 75%. I'm giving a 100% of the 75 I have 75%. I'm giving a 100% of the 75 I have today. But Monday's u a pull day from today. But Monday's u a pull day from today. But Monday's u a pull day from the floor. Usually trap bar deadlifts. the floor. Usually trap bar deadlifts. the floor. Usually trap bar deadlifts. And we do those because of all the And we do those because of all the And we do those because of all the injuries. I've got a really long torso. injuries. I've got a really long torso. injuries. I've got a really long torso. It puts my back at a weird precarious It puts my back at a weird precarious It puts my back at a weird precarious situation. So we do trap bar deadlifts. situation. So we do trap bar deadlifts. situation. So we do trap bar deadlifts. We do those. A lot of pull-up work, a We do those. A lot of pull-up work, a We do those. A lot of pull-up work, a lot of grip work, a lot of core lot of grip work, a lot of core lot of grip work, a lot of core stability stuff. Tuesday's a press day, stability stuff. Tuesday's a press day, stability stuff. Tuesday's a press day, heavy upper body, bench, incline, that heavy upper body, bench, incline, that heavy upper body, bench, incline, that kind of stuff. Wednesdays an upper body, kind of stuff. Wednesdays an upper body, kind of stuff. Wednesdays an upper body, lower body disassociation. So, we get lower body disassociation. So, we get lower body disassociation. So, we get the upper body moving in one direction, the upper body moving in one direction, the upper body moving in one direction, the lower body moving the other. Um, a the lower body moving the other. Um, a the lower body moving the other. Um, a lot of cords, lot of cords, lot of cords, &gt;&gt; example of that. &gt;&gt; example of that. &gt;&gt; example of that. &gt;&gt; Um, we'll do a lot of banded work. We'll &gt;&gt; Um, we'll do a lot of banded work. We'll &gt;&gt; Um, we'll do a lot of banded work. We'll drop down to a knee like almost in a drop down to a knee like almost in a drop down to a knee like almost in a shooting position and we'll do cross shooting position and we'll do cross shooting position and we'll do cross body pulls with bands, resistance body pulls with bands, resistance body pulls with bands, resistance training, but just, you know, training, but just, you know, training, but just, you know, &gt;&gt; rotational stuff and sort of &gt;&gt; rotational stuff and sort of &gt;&gt; rotational stuff and sort of anti-rotation stuff. anti-rotation stuff. anti-rotation stuff. &gt;&gt; Y on that day, we'll do pio stuff, &gt;&gt; Y on that day, we'll do pio stuff, &gt;&gt; Y on that day, we'll do pio stuff, &gt;&gt; box jumps, height, distance and broad &gt;&gt; box jumps, height, distance and broad &gt;&gt; box jumps, height, distance and broad jump, that kind of stuff, jump, that kind of stuff, jump, that kind of stuff, &gt;&gt; farmers carry walks, all the stuff. Just &gt;&gt; farmers carry walks, all the stuff. Just &gt;&gt; farmers carry walks, all the stuff. Just trying to connect all the dots. Thursday trying to connect all the dots. Thursday trying to connect all the dots. Thursday is the most brutal leg day you've ever is the most brutal leg day you've ever is the most brutal leg day you've ever had. And it's amazing. We got a belt had. And it's amazing. We got a belt had. And it's amazing. We got a belt squat machine. So, anybody who walks in, squat machine. So, anybody who walks in, squat machine. So, anybody who walks in, regardless of the injuries, limitations regardless of the injuries, limitations regardless of the injuries, limitations you have, we have equipment to you have, we have equipment to you have, we have equipment to accommodate that. accommodate that. accommodate that. &gt;&gt; And when you say brutal leg day, um &gt;&gt; And when you say brutal leg day, um &gt;&gt; And when you say brutal leg day, um &gt;&gt; it's just I have a belt squat. I love &gt;&gt; it's just I have a belt squat. I love &gt;&gt; it's just I have a belt squat. I love that thing. I love throwing a lot of that thing. I love throwing a lot of that thing. I love throwing a lot of weight on that thing. Um it's nice. It weight on that thing. Um it's nice. It weight on that thing. Um it's nice. It doesn't load the spine up, but um yeah, doesn't load the spine up, but um yeah, doesn't load the spine up, but um yeah, it's a uh I like to think it's brutal. it's a uh I like to think it's brutal. it's a uh I like to think it's brutal. Can you describe are you talking about Can you describe are you talking about Can you describe are you talking about like an hour and a half, two hours of like an hour and a half, two hours of like an hour and a half, two hours of &gt;&gt; usually from seven to nine &gt;&gt; usually from seven to nine &gt;&gt; usually from seven to nine &gt;&gt; low weight um &gt;&gt; low weight um &gt;&gt; low weight um &gt;&gt; high weight pretty high repetitions you &gt;&gt; high weight pretty high repetitions you &gt;&gt; high weight pretty high repetitions you know &gt;&gt; so high weight high repetitions &gt;&gt; so high weight high repetitions &gt;&gt; so high weight high repetitions &gt;&gt; trying to always trying to push but a &gt;&gt; trying to always trying to push but a &gt;&gt; trying to always trying to push but a lot of single leg movements Bulgarian lot of single leg movements Bulgarian lot of single leg movements Bulgarian split squats I mean a lot of lunges a split squats I mean a lot of lunges a split squats I mean a lot of lunges a lot of lunges with heavy weight I mean lot of lunges with heavy weight I mean lot of lunges with heavy weight I mean 70 lbs in each hand for me that's a lot 70 lbs in each hand for me that's a lot 70 lbs in each hand for me that's a lot of weight of weight of weight &gt;&gt; so not calf raises leg curls &gt;&gt; so not calf raises leg curls &gt;&gt; so not calf raises leg curls &gt;&gt; no but on days some days we'll do a &gt;&gt; no but on days some days we'll do a &gt;&gt; no but on days some days we'll do a feelood day like some days we'll come in feelood day like some days we'll come in feelood day like some days we'll come in he'll take a pulse of the whole room and he'll take a pulse of the whole room and he'll take a pulse of the whole room and he'll We're all going to hit the same muscle We're all going to hit the same muscle We're all going to hit the same muscle groups. We're just going to do it in a groups. We're just going to do it in a groups. We're just going to do it in a more traditional. So, we're going to do more traditional. So, we're going to do more traditional. So, we're going to do hamstring curls, leg extensions. We're hamstring curls, leg extensions. We're hamstring curls, leg extensions. We're going to do belt squats. We're going to going to do belt squats. We're going to going to do belt squats. We're going to do pulsing lunges. Really just pump the do pulsing lunges. Really just pump the do pulsing lunges. Really just pump the blood flow and just chase a really good blood flow and just chase a really good blood flow and just chase a really good pump. Everybody loves doing that. And pump. Everybody loves doing that. And pump. Everybody loves doing that. And Friday is a really It's a feel-good day. Friday is a really It's a feel-good day. Friday is a really It's a feel-good day. It's an arm day. We'll do some It's an arm day. We'll do some It's an arm day. We'll do some shoulders, some accessory work, you shoulders, some accessory work, you shoulders, some accessory work, you know, and then we add in sprints in know, and then we add in sprints in know, and then we add in sprints in between. Probably two to three days a between. Probably two to three days a between. Probably two to three days a week. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; You know, 200 meter repeats, 300 meter &gt;&gt; You know, 200 meter repeats, 300 meter &gt;&gt; You know, 200 meter repeats, 300 meter repeats. &gt;&gt; Done where in the workout? In between &gt;&gt; Done where in the workout? In between &gt;&gt; Done where in the workout? In between sets &gt;&gt; at the end. &gt;&gt; at the end. &gt;&gt; at the end. &gt;&gt; At the end. &gt;&gt; At the end. &gt;&gt; At the end. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We always save it at the end. We &gt;&gt; Yeah. We always save it at the end. We &gt;&gt; Yeah. We always save it at the end. We always did that with the military, too. always did that with the military, too. always did that with the military, too. It always ends with a run. And I've It always ends with a run. And I've It always ends with a run. And I've tried every combination doing sprints, tried every combination doing sprints, tried every combination doing sprints, you know, pre and post, and it really you know, pre and post, and it really you know, pre and post, and it really just zaps a workout for me. just zaps a workout for me. just zaps a workout for me. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Pavo Satsulan, you know, the Pavo &gt;&gt; Yeah. Pavo Satsulan, you know, the Pavo &gt;&gt; Yeah. Pavo Satsulan, you know, the Pavo Satsulan sat in that chair right where Satsulan sat in that chair right where Satsulan sat in that chair right where you're at now and said, you know, if you're at now and said, you know, if you're at now and said, you know, if your goal is hypertrophy and you're your goal is hypertrophy and you're your goal is hypertrophy and you're going to come into a pumping workout, going to come into a pumping workout, going to come into a pumping workout, doesn't really matter if you do cardio doesn't really matter if you do cardio doesn't really matter if you do cardio first or last. But if you're going to if first or last. But if you're going to if first or last. But if you're going to if you're serious about strength and you're serious about strength and you're serious about strength and performance and form, do your cardio performance and form, do your cardio performance and form, do your cardio after, if at all. you know, because a after, if at all. you know, because a after, if at all. you know, because a lot of times those kettle bell workouts lot of times those kettle bell workouts lot of times those kettle bell workouts or some of these leg workouts, they're or some of these leg workouts, they're or some of these leg workouts, they're not quote unquote cardio, but they not quote unquote cardio, but they not quote unquote cardio, but they definitely get heart rate up in a definitely get heart rate up in a definitely get heart rate up in a serious way. serious way. serious way. &gt;&gt; So on Wednesdays, if we're doing a &gt;&gt; So on Wednesdays, if we're doing a &gt;&gt; So on Wednesdays, if we're doing a sprint workout, it might be 10 by 40, 50 sprint workout, it might be 10 by 40, 50 sprint workout, it might be 10 by 40, 50 m sprints, right? Nothing crazy. We'll m sprints, right? Nothing crazy. We'll m sprints, right? Nothing crazy. We'll do that at the very beginning. Get the do that at the very beginning. Get the do that at the very beginning. Get the fast switch muscle fibers going and then fast switch muscle fibers going and then fast switch muscle fibers going and then we'll do whatever the normal Wednesday we'll do whatever the normal Wednesday we'll do whatever the normal Wednesday workout is. Then we go to the flat range workout is. Then we go to the flat range workout is. Then we go to the flat range every Wednesday. every Wednesday. every Wednesday. &gt;&gt; So we train, we bring him out, too. So &gt;&gt; So we train, we bring him out, too. So &gt;&gt; So we train, we bring him out, too. So all the stance, the grip, the all the stance, the grip, the all the stance, the grip, the presentation, everything we talk about presentation, everything we talk about presentation, everything we talk about in the tactical setting, he's there with in the tactical setting, he's there with in the tactical setting, he's there with us. So when I talk about flexing your us. So when I talk about flexing your us. So when I talk about flexing your right glute to add stability to a stable right glute to add stability to a stable right glute to add stability to a stable shooting platform, he's there driving shooting platform, he's there driving shooting platform, he's there driving home. This is why it's important. Think home. This is why it's important. Think home. This is why it's important. Think big toe down, drive your heel down. So I big toe down, drive your heel down. So I big toe down, drive your heel down. So I mean, he's as much of a coach as I am on mean, he's as much of a coach as I am on mean, he's as much of a coach as I am on the flat range. And but he can connect the flat range. And but he can connect the flat range. And but he can connect the dots so well. And that's why I love the dots so well. And that's why I love the dots so well. And that's why I love him. &gt;&gt; He's not going to let you take that &gt;&gt; He's not going to let you take that &gt;&gt; He's not going to let you take that limitation and then live it forever. limitation and then live it forever. limitation and then live it forever. &gt;&gt; You don't want to be like that. &gt;&gt; You don't want to be like that. &gt;&gt; You don't want to be like that. &gt;&gt; And it doesn't help that he's bigger, &gt;&gt; And it doesn't help that he's bigger, &gt;&gt; And it doesn't help that he's bigger, stronger, faster than everybody else. So stronger, faster than everybody else. So stronger, faster than everybody else. So you've always got a good lifting buddy you've always got a good lifting buddy you've always got a good lifting buddy to kind of chase. He always pushes you. to kind of chase. He always pushes you. to kind of chase. He always pushes you. &gt;&gt; But he's so good at navigating the human &gt;&gt; But he's so good at navigating the human &gt;&gt; But he's so good at navigating the human terrain. Because some days I'll walk in terrain. Because some days I'll walk in terrain. Because some days I'll walk in and whatever's happened over the week, whatever's happened over the week, whatever's happened over the week, he'll see me in the morning. He'll look he'll see me in the morning. He'll look he'll see me in the morning. He'll look at me like, "How we holding up?" I'm at me like, "How we holding up?" I'm at me like, "How we holding up?" I'm like, "100%." like, "100%." like, "100%." Yeah, you ain't come over here. What's Yeah, you ain't come over here. What's Yeah, you ain't come over here. What's going on? I'll talk to him. He's like, going on? I'll talk to him. He's like, going on? I'll talk to him. He's like, "We'll shake it all out. We've got two "We'll shake it all out. We've got two "We'll shake it all out. We've got two hours here. Just us. Nothing else hours here. Just us. Nothing else hours here. Just us. Nothing else matters. Let's just focus on this." And matters. Let's just focus on this." And matters. Let's just focus on this." And I find myself pacing a lot. So, in I find myself pacing a lot. So, in I find myself pacing a lot. So, in between sets, I'll block out everything between sets, I'll block out everything between sets, I'll block out everything else. I'm not thinking about social, not else. I'm not thinking about social, not else. I'm not thinking about social, not thinking about my wife, not thinking about my wife, not thinking about my wife, not thinking about the business. I'm thinking about the business. I'm thinking about the business. I'm thinking about putting myself in the best mental spot putting myself in the best mental spot putting myself in the best mental spot to pull bat off the floor at 100% with to pull bat off the floor at 100% with to pull bat off the floor at 100% with no distractions. And I think that's why no distractions. And I think that's why no distractions. And I think that's why I like it so much because it allows me I like it so much because it allows me I like it so much because it allows me to isolate my thoughts. Nothing else to isolate my thoughts. Nothing else to isolate my thoughts. Nothing else matter. You don't matter. This doesn't matter. You don't matter. This doesn't matter. You don't matter. This doesn't matter. Just that movement. Let me get matter. Just that movement. Let me get matter. Just that movement. Let me get through that the best of my ability. through that the best of my ability. through that the best of my ability. Set it down. Recog around. Get ready for Set it down. Recog around. Get ready for Set it down. Recog around. Get ready for the next one. Here we go. Eight reps. the next one. Here we go. Eight reps. the next one. Here we go. Eight reps. I'm going to put so much intent behind I'm going to put so much intent behind I'm going to put so much intent behind this pull that if I get eight or 12, it this pull that if I get eight or 12, it this pull that if I get eight or 12, it doesn't matter. Every single one is all doesn't matter. Every single one is all doesn't matter. Every single one is all out. And you know, Dorian Yates talks out. And you know, Dorian Yates talks out. And you know, Dorian Yates talks about it. Intensity is what really about it. Intensity is what really about it. Intensity is what really drives and I really try to drive intent drives and I really try to drive intent drives and I really try to drive intent behind everything I do now. And behind everything I do now. And behind everything I do now. And &gt;&gt; yeah, he's a huge uh &gt;&gt; yeah, he's a huge uh &gt;&gt; yeah, he's a huge uh man, I can't I can't tell you how many man, I can't I can't tell you how many man, I can't I can't tell you how many times he's brought me back. times he's brought me back. times he's brought me back. &gt;&gt; I mean, the worst injuries you can &gt;&gt; I mean, the worst injuries you can &gt;&gt; I mean, the worst injuries you can imagine. And he's there every single time. And I And he's there every single time. And I And he's there every single time. And I think that's why so many people get on think that's why so many people get on think that's why so many people get on with it. They see the injuries you've with it. They see the injuries you've with it. They see the injuries you've gone through and it's like, well, you gone through and it's like, well, you gone through and it's like, well, you can still perform at a high level. only can still perform at a high level. only can still perform at a high level. only because I'm I don't want to say I'm even because I'm I don't want to say I'm even because I'm I don't want to say I'm even ego driven. I've been so ingrained into ego driven. I've been so ingrained into ego driven. I've been so ingrained into sitting with the routine it doesn't sitting with the routine it doesn't sitting with the routine it doesn't matter what injuries I've had. I mean I matter what injuries I've had. I mean I matter what injuries I've had. I mean I come out and we've got pictures of me in come out and we've got pictures of me in come out and we've got pictures of me in there double slings. Like when I got there double slings. Like when I got there double slings. Like when I got electrocuted double swings I can't even electrocuted double swings I can't even electrocuted double swings I can't even I can't even tie my shoes. He's tying my I can't even tie my shoes. He's tying my I can't even tie my shoes. He's tying my shoes. Like he's putting the belt squat shoes. Like he's putting the belt squat shoes. Like he's putting the belt squat on me. I'm squatting down. He's clipping on me. I'm squatting down. He's clipping on me. I'm squatting down. He's clipping it in. He's unrackcking it the entire it in. He's unrackcking it the entire it in. He's unrackcking it the entire thing. Like he's my guy. thing. Like he's my guy. thing. Like he's my guy. &gt;&gt; Uh tell us his first and last name. &gt;&gt; Uh tell us his first and last name. &gt;&gt; Uh tell us his first and last name. &gt;&gt; Vernon Griffith. And you met him when &gt;&gt; Vernon Griffith. And you met him when &gt;&gt; Vernon Griffith. And you met him when you were injured, right? And and he's a you were injured, right? And and he's a you were injured, right? And and he's a former operator as well. former operator as well. former operator as well. &gt;&gt; He's not. So his business partner was a &gt;&gt; He's not. So his business partner was a &gt;&gt; He's not. So his business partner was a former operator. He was actually in the former operator. He was actually in the former operator. He was actually in the Air Force and transitioned out, got a Air Force and transitioned out, got a Air Force and transitioned out, got a strength conditioning, um all his strength conditioning, um all his strength conditioning, um all his squalls, and he's got such an squalls, and he's got such an squalls, and he's got such an interesting look to mobility impact and interesting look to mobility impact and interesting look to mobility impact and the highle athletes that come the highle athletes that come the highle athletes that come through him. And that's really what it through him. And that's really what it through him. And that's really what it is. He gets big guys tricked into doing is. He gets big guys tricked into doing is. He gets big guys tricked into doing mobility and liking it cuz nobody wants mobility and liking it cuz nobody wants mobility and liking it cuz nobody wants to do mobility. It's not a sexy thing to do mobility. It's not a sexy thing to do mobility. It's not a sexy thing to do. I mean, we get first round draft do. I mean, we get first round draft do. I mean, we get first round draft picks that are pouring through that gym picks that are pouring through that gym picks that are pouring through that gym all week long. And you see them because all week long. And you see them because all week long. And you see them because it's the truth. Like, we're trying to it's the truth. Like, we're trying to it's the truth. Like, we're trying to keep you at a super high level as long keep you at a super high level as long keep you at a super high level as long as humanly possible. The average guy as humanly possible. The average guy as humanly possible. The average guy plays in the NFL, what, three years? plays in the NFL, what, three years? plays in the NFL, what, three years? &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; But I'm trying to keep you in there for &gt;&gt; But I'm trying to keep you in there for &gt;&gt; But I'm trying to keep you in there for 12. How are we going to do it? You have 12. How are we going to do it? You have 12. How are we going to do it? You have to maintain that vessel at a super high to maintain that vessel at a super high to maintain that vessel at a super high level cuz all these young kids are level cuz all these young kids are level cuz all these young kids are trying to knock you off the team. And trying to knock you off the team. And trying to knock you off the team. And then the reality of the sport is trying then the reality of the sport is trying then the reality of the sport is trying to knock you off the team as well. So, to knock you off the team as well. So, to knock you off the team as well. So, we got to keep you really, really mobile we got to keep you really, really mobile we got to keep you really, really mobile and healthy. And I've never seen anybody and healthy. And I've never seen anybody and healthy. And I've never seen anybody that can connect dots better than that can connect dots better than that can connect dots better than that guy. He's an absolute lifesaver. guy. He's an absolute lifesaver. guy. He's an absolute lifesaver. &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by 8LE. 8LE makes smart mattress covers 8LE. 8LE makes smart mattress covers 8LE. 8LE makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your unique needs. Eight has just launched unique needs. Eight has just launched unique needs. Eight has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5, and the their latest model, the Pod 5, and the their latest model, the Pod 5, and the Pod 5 has several new important Pod 5 has several new important Pod 5 has several new important features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The bass shifts to optimize your sleep. The bass shifts to optimize your sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to the EightLe app speaker that syncs to the EightLe app speaker that syncs to the EightLe app and can play audio to support relaxation and can play audio to support relaxation and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. The audio catalog includes and recovery. The audio catalog includes and recovery. The audio catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest scripts that I worked on with Eight scripts that I worked on with Eight scripts that I worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If you're not familiar, Sleep to record. If you're not familiar, Sleep to record. If you're not familiar, NSDR involves listening to an audio NSDR involves listening to an audio NSDR involves listening to an audio script that walks you through a deep script that walks you through a deep script that walks you through a deep body relaxation combined with some very body relaxation combined with some very body relaxation combined with some very simple breathing exercises. It's an simple breathing exercises. It's an simple breathing exercises. It's an extremely powerful tool that anyone can extremely powerful tool that anyone can extremely powerful tool that anyone can benefit from the first time and every benefit from the first time and every benefit from the first time and every time. If you'd like to try eight, go to time. If you'd like to try eight, go to time. If you'd like to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. The way you describe him and your The way you describe him and your The way you describe him and your interactions with him, uh, it almost interactions with him, uh, it almost interactions with him, uh, it almost takes on a sort of, uh, mythical like takes on a sort of, uh, mythical like takes on a sort of, uh, mythical like quality. I mean, like we could be quality. I mean, like we could be quality. I mean, like we could be talking about a movie, but this is talking about a movie, but this is talking about a movie, but this is real and we'll talk about just how real and we'll talk about just how real and we'll talk about just how real it is. Some very real things have real it is. Some very real things have real it is. Some very real things have happened to you by virtue of the uh, happened to you by virtue of the uh, happened to you by virtue of the uh, high-risisk, high consequence career high-risisk, high consequence career high-risisk, high consequence career that you undertook. Uh but you know when that you undertook. Uh but you know when that you undertook. Uh but you know when you hear about this person who's able to you hear about this person who's able to you hear about this person who's able to bring back a high performer and then get bring back a high performer and then get bring back a high performer and then get him to exceed his previous notions of him to exceed his previous notions of him to exceed his previous notions of what he could do and under conditions of what he could do and under conditions of what he could do and under conditions of duress and hopelessness it's you know duress and hopelessness it's you know duress and hopelessness it's you know this is real life though this is not this is real life though this is not this is real life though this is not this isn't Star Wars this is real life this isn't Star Wars this is real life this isn't Star Wars this is real life and um so uh without ever having met him and um so uh without ever having met him and um so uh without ever having met him you know I can feel the uh the respect you know I can feel the uh the respect you know I can feel the uh the respect and the admiration and the gratitude and the admiration and the gratitude and the admiration and the gratitude you have for him and I'm sure you have for him and I'm sure you have for him and I'm sure everyone else can too. Uh, he said, everyone else can too. Uh, he said, everyone else can too. Uh, he said, "This is the stuff of mythology. Um, but "This is the stuff of mythology. Um, but "This is the stuff of mythology. Um, but it's real. So, um, here's what I know it's real. So, um, here's what I know it's real. So, um, here's what I know about you. You live in Virginia Beach. about you. You live in Virginia Beach. about you. You live in Virginia Beach. &gt;&gt; Uh, at one point you were interested in &gt;&gt; Uh, at one point you were interested in &gt;&gt; Uh, at one point you were interested in skateboarding and parttook in skateboarding and parttook in skateboarding and parttook in skateboarding. At some point, you skateboarding. At some point, you skateboarding. At some point, you decided to become a Navy Seal. decided to become a Navy Seal. decided to become a Navy Seal. At some point, you got electrocuted. At some point, you got electrocuted. At some point, you got electrocuted. &gt;&gt; Fill in the blanks for us." &gt;&gt; Fill in the blanks for us." &gt;&gt; Fill in the blanks for us." &gt;&gt; Yeah, man. I was born in uh, San Diego, &gt;&gt; Yeah, man. I was born in uh, San Diego, &gt;&gt; Yeah, man. I was born in uh, San Diego, California. My dad was a SEAL. My mom California. My dad was a SEAL. My mom California. My dad was a SEAL. My mom was in the Navy. So, when my dad was in the Navy. So, when my dad was in the Navy. So, when my dad graduated, my mom was nine months graduated, my mom was nine months graduated, my mom was nine months pregnant with me. So his whole first pregnant with me. So his whole first pregnant with me. So his whole first four years at, you know, the West Coast four years at, you know, the West Coast four years at, you know, the West Coast Seal teams, I was one of the only kids Seal teams, I was one of the only kids Seal teams, I was one of the only kids there. So kind of grew up in the there. So kind of grew up in the there. So kind of grew up in the culture, you know, really ingrained into culture, you know, really ingrained into culture, you know, really ingrained into it. My first it. My first it. My first &gt;&gt; Coronado. &gt;&gt; Coronado. &gt;&gt; Coronado. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; It's my first bottle. I'm wearing a Seal &gt;&gt; It's my first bottle. I'm wearing a Seal &gt;&gt; It's my first bottle. I'm wearing a Seal team one onesie. I mean, team one onesie. I mean, team one onesie. I mean, &gt;&gt; you literally were raised on Coronado. &gt;&gt; you literally were raised on Coronado. &gt;&gt; you literally were raised on Coronado. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I did that. We moved to the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I did that. We moved to the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I did that. We moved to the East Coast. He got transitioned over to East Coast. He got transitioned over to East Coast. He got transitioned over to the East Coast. I grew up the rest of my the East Coast. I grew up the rest of my the East Coast. I grew up the rest of my time there. Fell in love with time there. Fell in love with time there. Fell in love with skateboarding. That's all I wanted to skateboarding. That's all I wanted to skateboarding. That's all I wanted to do. I wanted to go pro. got into a fight do. I wanted to go pro. got into a fight do. I wanted to go pro. got into a fight with the old man around 15 years old, with the old man around 15 years old, with the old man around 15 years old, something like that. And he signed me up something like that. And he signed me up something like that. And he signed me up for summer school um to graduate early. for summer school um to graduate early. for summer school um to graduate early. So I graduated at 17, hit the late entry So I graduated at 17, hit the late entry So I graduated at 17, hit the late entry program, joining Navy a month later. program, joining Navy a month later. program, joining Navy a month later. &gt;&gt; Was that a contentious interaction? I &gt;&gt; Was that a contentious interaction? I &gt;&gt; Was that a contentious interaction? I mean, I mean, skateboarding uh was mean, I mean, skateboarding uh was mean, I mean, skateboarding uh was clearly not the right career for you. I clearly not the right career for you. I clearly not the right career for you. I mean, I'm sure you would have done mean, I'm sure you would have done mean, I'm sure you would have done exceedingly well there, but having grown exceedingly well there, but having grown exceedingly well there, but having grown up a bit in that culture and uh also up a bit in that culture and uh also up a bit in that culture and uh also knowing a bit about the culture, you knowing a bit about the culture, you knowing a bit about the culture, you eventually um decided on um you know, eventually um decided on um you know, eventually um decided on um you know, it's hard to say which one is uh you it's hard to say which one is uh you it's hard to say which one is uh you know, the better career choice. One is know, the better career choice. One is know, the better career choice. One is definitely uh more life-threatening, definitely uh more life-threatening, definitely uh more life-threatening, which is the uh in many ways, um but you which is the uh in many ways, um but you which is the uh in many ways, um but you just said, "Okay, like you're a Navy just said, "Okay, like you're a Navy just said, "Okay, like you're a Navy Seal. You want me to be a Navy Seal, so Seal. You want me to be a Navy Seal, so Seal. You want me to be a Navy Seal, so I'm going to I'm going to hang it up." I'm going to I'm going to hang it up." I'm going to I'm going to hang it up." &gt;&gt; It was always in the back of your mind &gt;&gt; It was always in the back of your mind &gt;&gt; It was always in the back of your mind like that was always what you thought like that was always what you thought like that was always what you thought you were going to do. But at 15 years you were going to do. But at 15 years you were going to do. But at 15 years old, in your mind, you can do them both. old, in your mind, you can do them both. old, in your mind, you can do them both. You're like, "Oh, I can be a You're like, "Oh, I can be a You're like, "Oh, I can be a professional skateboarder and then I can professional skateboarder and then I can professional skateboarder and then I can be a Navy Seal later." You don't realize be a Navy Seal later." You don't realize be a Navy Seal later." You don't realize what it actually takes to do it, even what it actually takes to do it, even what it actually takes to do it, even though you grow up in the culture. though you grow up in the culture. though you grow up in the culture. &gt;&gt; So, when that happened, you know, the &gt;&gt; So, when that happened, you know, the &gt;&gt; So, when that happened, you know, the towers that just fell, I was 17 years towers that just fell, I was 17 years towers that just fell, I was 17 years old, delayed entry program, straight out old, delayed entry program, straight out old, delayed entry program, straight out the Coronado, the Coronado, the Coronado, &gt;&gt; got through SEAL training, came back to &gt;&gt; got through SEAL training, came back to &gt;&gt; got through SEAL training, came back to the East Coast where I've been the East Coast where I've been the East Coast where I've been essentially my whole life. And essentially my whole life. And essentially my whole life. And yeah, joined the Navy in 2002 and got yeah, joined the Navy in 2002 and got yeah, joined the Navy in 2002 and got medically retired in 2019, right around medically retired in 2019, right around medically retired in 2019, right around 17 years. I think it was 16 years and 17 years. I think it was 16 years and 17 years. I think it was 16 years and like 10 months, something like that. like 10 months, something like that. like 10 months, something like that. &gt;&gt; Can I ask you about Buds? A lot of &gt;&gt; Can I ask you about Buds? A lot of &gt;&gt; Can I ask you about Buds? A lot of people have heard of Buds and they people have heard of Buds and they people have heard of Buds and they understand that it has a hell week with understand that it has a hell week with understand that it has a hell week with minimal if any sleep, you know, maybe an minimal if any sleep, you know, maybe an minimal if any sleep, you know, maybe an hour or two tops, but probably not even hour or two tops, but probably not even hour or two tops, but probably not even that. Um, that. Um, that. Um, &gt;&gt; how hard was Buds relative to other &gt;&gt; how hard was Buds relative to other &gt;&gt; how hard was Buds relative to other things that you did in the teams? You things that you did in the teams? You things that you did in the teams? You know, I've heard people say it was the know, I've heard people say it was the know, I've heard people say it was the hardest thing they ever did. I've heard hardest thing they ever did. I've heard hardest thing they ever did. I've heard some people say um it was extremely hard some people say um it was extremely hard some people say um it was extremely hard but not nearly as difficult as like some but not nearly as difficult as like some but not nearly as difficult as like some aspect of um like guys who hate the aspect of um like guys who hate the aspect of um like guys who hate the jungle and humidity or like that was jungle and humidity or like that was jungle and humidity or like that was worse and you never know if people are worse and you never know if people are worse and you never know if people are joking around. I mean did you are joking around. I mean did you are joking around. I mean did you learn a lot in Buds about yourself? learn a lot in Buds about yourself? learn a lot in Buds about yourself? &gt;&gt; If you can make it through Buds you can &gt;&gt; If you can make it through Buds you can &gt;&gt; If you can make it through Buds you can do anything. It it is such a brutal do anything. It it is such a brutal do anything. It it is such a brutal program and I just I had week just program and I just I had week just program and I just I had week just secured and I saw a bunch of the guys secured and I saw a bunch of the guys secured and I saw a bunch of the guys took them out the vendor the other night took them out the vendor the other night took them out the vendor the other night and I was explaining to a group of and I was explaining to a group of and I was explaining to a group of civilians that were out there with them civilians that were out there with them civilians that were out there with them like their parents like you guys all see like their parents like you guys all see like their parents like you guys all see it. Every single person does that it. Every single person does that it. Every single person does that pipeline. It's not just buds. It's you pipeline. It's not just buds. It's you pipeline. It's not just buds. It's you know the Q course for Green Berets. It's know the Q course for Green Berets. It's know the Q course for Green Berets. It's RIP for the Rangers. Marox selection. RIP for the Rangers. Marox selection. RIP for the Rangers. Marox selection. Every single kid that's doing that Every single kid that's doing that Every single kid that's doing that selection program is the biggest deal in selection program is the biggest deal in selection program is the biggest deal in his hometown. the biggest thing in his hometown. the biggest thing in his hometown. the biggest thing in his high school. Everybody knows he's going high school. Everybody knows he's going high school. Everybody knows he's going and the amount of external pressure it's and the amount of external pressure it's and the amount of external pressure it's riding on that kid. Unless you've done riding on that kid. Unless you've done riding on that kid. Unless you've done it, you have no idea. You just don't. it, you have no idea. You just don't. it, you have no idea. You just don't. It's like playing D1 college ball. It's like playing D1 college ball. It's like playing D1 college ball. Everyone in your family is expecting you Everyone in your family is expecting you Everyone in your family is expecting you to be a pro. They're expecting you to be to be a pro. They're expecting you to be to be a pro. They're expecting you to be in the NFL. And if you don't get in the NFL. And if you don't get in the NFL. And if you don't get drafted, it's like, drafted, it's like, drafted, it's like, &gt;&gt; oh my god, it's so much pressure on you. &gt;&gt; oh my god, it's so much pressure on you. &gt;&gt; oh my god, it's so much pressure on you. It's the same way. It's the same way. It's the same way. &gt;&gt; And it's self- selection because people &gt;&gt; And it's self- selection because people &gt;&gt; And it's self- selection because people quit. They're not in general, they're quit. They're not in general, they're quit. They're not in general, they're not asked to leave. Although that can not asked to leave. Although that can not asked to leave. Although that can happen. Um, so if you if somebody happen. Um, so if you if somebody happen. Um, so if you if somebody doesn't make it through BUDS, it means doesn't make it through BUDS, it means doesn't make it through BUDS, it means they quit. they quit. they quit. &gt;&gt; Yep. Pretty much. And it's a lot of &gt;&gt; Yep. Pretty much. And it's a lot of &gt;&gt; Yep. Pretty much. And it's a lot of pressure, right? The GWAP just kicking pressure, right? The GWAP just kicking pressure, right? The GWAP just kicking off. All the instructors were coming off. All the instructors were coming off. All the instructors were coming back from Afghanistan and they were back from Afghanistan and they were back from Afghanistan and they were larger than life. I mean, you really larger than life. I mean, you really larger than life. I mean, you really look up to them. And I was just very look up to them. And I was just very look up to them. And I was just very fortunate that I grew up in the culture fortunate that I grew up in the culture fortunate that I grew up in the culture and I knew a lot of the guys going in, and I knew a lot of the guys going in, and I knew a lot of the guys going in, so I knew what the end state was. Most so I knew what the end state was. Most so I knew what the end state was. Most of these kids are from Buxy, of these kids are from Buxy, of these kids are from Buxy, Mississippi. You've never even seen a Mississippi. You've never even seen a Mississippi. You've never even seen a Navy Seal in real life until you showed Navy Seal in real life until you showed Navy Seal in real life until you showed up here. I grew up with one. All my up here. I grew up with one. All my up here. I grew up with one. All my family friends were SEALs. We didn't family friends were SEALs. We didn't family friends were SEALs. We didn't have a single civilian friend growing have a single civilian friend growing have a single civilian friend growing up. The only thing I've been around were up. The only thing I've been around were up. The only thing I've been around were commandos. So, commandos. So, commandos. So, &gt;&gt; I felt really natural around that &gt;&gt; I felt really natural around that &gt;&gt; I felt really natural around that environment, but I knew it was going to environment, but I knew it was going to environment, but I knew it was going to suck. I just knew it was. suck. I just knew it was. suck. I just knew it was. &gt;&gt; Did your dad have you run with him and &gt;&gt; Did your dad have you run with him and &gt;&gt; Did your dad have you run with him and doing push-ups and things like that at doing push-ups and things like that at doing push-ups and things like that at home, or was it mow the lawn and then go home, or was it mow the lawn and then go home, or was it mow the lawn and then go skateboarding? You know, skateboarding? You know, skateboarding? You know, &gt;&gt; mow the lawn, go skateboarding, then as &gt;&gt; mow the lawn, go skateboarding, then as &gt;&gt; mow the lawn, go skateboarding, then as we transition, we got closer, it was we transition, we got closer, it was we transition, we got closer, it was turn it on, download the Steu Smith turn it on, download the Steu Smith turn it on, download the Steu Smith Guide to Navy Seal Prep and did that Guide to Navy Seal Prep and did that Guide to Navy Seal Prep and did that like everybody else did. Mhm. like everybody else did. Mhm. like everybody else did. Mhm. &gt;&gt; It's a phenomenal program for anybody &gt;&gt; It's a phenomenal program for anybody &gt;&gt; It's a phenomenal program for anybody who's trying to go. But I was I was so who's trying to go. But I was I was so who's trying to go. But I was I was so young. I was so immature. Didn't have a young. I was so immature. Didn't have a young. I was so immature. Didn't have a cell phone. Didn't have a car. I lived cell phone. Didn't have a car. I lived cell phone. Didn't have a car. I lived on the barracks. And the only thing you on the barracks. And the only thing you on the barracks. And the only thing you had to do was get through the program. had to do was get through the program. had to do was get through the program. But what I will say is But what I will say is But what I will say is the 17-year-old me that showed up in the 17-year-old me that showed up in the 17-year-old me that showed up in 2002, if I would try to be a Navy Seal 2002, if I would try to be a Navy Seal 2002, if I would try to be a Navy Seal in 2025, they wouldn't even take me. My in 2025, they wouldn't even take me. My in 2025, they wouldn't even take me. My performance scores, like, you have to performance scores, like, you have to performance scores, like, you have to pass a screen test, push-ups, pull-ups, pass a screen test, push-ups, pull-ups, pass a screen test, push-ups, pull-ups, run, swim, the whole thing. Your scores run, swim, the whole thing. Your scores run, swim, the whole thing. Your scores now have to be so competitive they now have to be so competitive they now have to be so competitive they wouldn't even take in me. wouldn't even take in me. wouldn't even take in me. &gt;&gt; Oh, so the standards have changed. &gt;&gt; Oh, so the standards have changed. &gt;&gt; Oh, so the standards have changed. The &gt;&gt; standards are the same, but the people &gt;&gt; standards are the same, but the people &gt;&gt; standards are the same, but the people going through the program are so better going through the program are so better going through the program are so better prepared they wouldn't even take you. So prepared they wouldn't even take you. So prepared they wouldn't even take you. So if you're not if you're not 120 if you're not if you're not 120 if you're not if you're not 120 push-ups, 120, they don't even look at push-ups, 120, they don't even look at push-ups, 120, they don't even look at you. Like for me, I basically barely you. Like for me, I basically barely you. Like for me, I basically barely scratched through. I was I was a strong scratched through. I was I was a strong scratched through. I was I was a strong swimmer, but technique wasn't my thing. swimmer, but technique wasn't my thing. swimmer, but technique wasn't my thing. And until you take the test, you don't And until you take the test, you don't And until you take the test, you don't realize how hard it is. And I got realize how hard it is. And I got realize how hard it is. And I got through it. I went out to Buds and I was through it. I went out to Buds and I was through it. I went out to Buds and I was successful. But I was by no means a star successful. But I was by no means a star successful. But I was by no means a star athlete. And you've got guys, you know, athlete. And you've got guys, you know, athlete. And you've got guys, you know, Coleman Ruiz, Naval Academy. They are Coleman Ruiz, Naval Academy. They are Coleman Ruiz, Naval Academy. They are freaks. They're phenoms. They are freaks. They're phenoms. They are freaks. They're phenoms. They are professional athletes. And there you professional athletes. And there you professional athletes. And there you are, 6'1, 145 lbs, pot smoking are, 6'1, 145 lbs, pot smoking are, 6'1, 145 lbs, pot smoking skateboarder. We are not on the same skateboarder. We are not on the same skateboarder. We are not on the same level. But mentally, you couldn't mess level. But mentally, you couldn't mess level. But mentally, you couldn't mess with me. I didn't care. with me. I didn't care. with me. I didn't care. &gt;&gt; Like, we're getting surf tortured. And &gt;&gt; Like, we're getting surf tortured. And &gt;&gt; Like, we're getting surf tortured. And you'd watch these guys who were just you'd watch these guys who were just you'd watch these guys who were just these studs get up and quit like these studs get up and quit like these studs get up and quit like it's not going to stop. And I felt like it's not going to stop. And I felt like it's not going to stop. And I felt like I always had the inside scoop. Like if I always had the inside scoop. Like if I always had the inside scoop. Like if you think this is going to end, it's you think this is going to end, it's you think this is going to end, it's not. Like my dad did a lot of diving. I not. Like my dad did a lot of diving. I not. Like my dad did a lot of diving. I was like, I've seen the conditions he was like, I've seen the conditions he was like, I've seen the conditions he dive in, breaking through the ice. Like dive in, breaking through the ice. Like dive in, breaking through the ice. Like it is only going to get worse, dude. If it is only going to get worse, dude. If it is only going to get worse, dude. If this phases you, this is not the program this phases you, this is not the program this phases you, this is not the program for you. And I was right. If if that for you. And I was right. If if that for you. And I was right. If if that phases you, the SEAL team is going to phases you, the SEAL team is going to phases you, the SEAL team is going to chew you alive. So, not everybody should chew you alive. So, not everybody should chew you alive. So, not everybody should make it through that program. I was just make it through that program. I was just make it through that program. I was just fortunate enough that just good enough fortunate enough that just good enough fortunate enough that just good enough to get by. And, you know, maturity came to get by. And, you know, maturity came to get by. And, you know, maturity came later. Buds was definitely not the hardest Buds was definitely not the hardest Buds was definitely not the hardest thing I've ever had to do. At the time thing I've ever had to do. At the time thing I've ever had to do. At the time it was. And when you get through it and it was. And when you get through it and it was. And when you get through it and you see all the you start with 200 and you see all the you start with 200 and you see all the you start with 200 and something people, you graduate less than something people, you graduate less than something people, you graduate less than 20. It's those are 200 of the most 20. It's those are 200 of the most 20. It's those are 200 of the most physically capable people of that year physically capable people of that year physically capable people of that year in the United States Navy and they in the United States Navy and they in the United States Navy and they couldn't make it. couldn't make it. couldn't make it. &gt;&gt; Did any of the people that not made it &gt;&gt; Did any of the people that not made it &gt;&gt; Did any of the people that not made it through as well as made it through as well as made it through as well as made it through surprise you um for not making it surprise you um for not making it surprise you um for not making it through or making it through? through or making it through? through or making it through? &gt;&gt; Not making it through for sure. I mean &gt;&gt; Not making it through for sure. I mean &gt;&gt; Not making it through for sure. I mean all the guys that they You've been all the guys that they You've been all the guys that they You've been around &gt;&gt; Captain America's &gt;&gt; Captain America's &gt;&gt; Captain America's &gt;&gt; Navy Seals have a certain look. They &gt;&gt; Navy Seals have a certain look. They &gt;&gt; Navy Seals have a certain look. They have a certain mystique, a certain or have a certain mystique, a certain or have a certain mystique, a certain or and they do in training, too. It's not and they do in training, too. It's not and they do in training, too. It's not like you just develop that. You've had like you just develop that. You've had like you just develop that. You've had it your whole life. And there were it your whole life. And there were it your whole life. And there were definitely guys you look at that look definitely guys you look at that look definitely guys you look at that look like Dolph Lung from Rocky. You look at like Dolph Lung from Rocky. You look at like Dolph Lung from Rocky. You look at him, you're like, "Oh, that dude is him, you're like, "Oh, that dude is him, you're like, "Oh, that dude is definitely going to make it. He's gone definitely going to make it. He's gone definitely going to make it. He's gone in 20 minutes." You're like, "How? He in 20 minutes." You're like, "How? He in 20 minutes." You're like, "How? He passed everything. He didn't like that passed everything. He didn't like that passed everything. He didn't like that cold water." Like, cold water." Like, cold water." Like, okay. And then you see another guy who okay. And then you see another guy who okay. And then you see another guy who he was in worse shape than me. barely he was in worse shape than me. barely he was in worse shape than me. barely squeak by everything and he is the squeak by everything and he is the squeak by everything and he is the hardest dude you ever met in your life. hardest dude you ever met in your life. hardest dude you ever met in your life. Nothing phases him. Every run, every Nothing phases him. Every run, every Nothing phases him. Every run, every swim, just miserable. He doesn't care. swim, just miserable. He doesn't care. swim, just miserable. He doesn't care. Like he Like he Like he &gt;&gt; he's just kind of It sounds like you &gt;&gt; he's just kind of It sounds like you &gt;&gt; he's just kind of It sounds like you have to not mind being miserable. have to not mind being miserable. have to not mind being miserable. &gt;&gt; You have to get used to it. You have to &gt;&gt; You have to get used to it. You have to &gt;&gt; You have to get used to it. You have to embrace it. It's going to suck. It's embrace it. It's going to suck. It's embrace it. It's going to suck. It's supposed to. And you just got to tell supposed to. And you just got to tell supposed to. And you just got to tell yourself it's worth the price of yourself it's worth the price of yourself it's worth the price of admission. It's going to be miserable. admission. It's going to be miserable. admission. It's going to be miserable. You bought the ticket. You're going to You bought the ticket. You're going to You bought the ticket. You're going to get the whole show and it's totally get the whole show and it's totally get the whole show and it's totally worth it, but you got to be there at the worth it, but you got to be there at the worth it, but you got to be there at the end. You mentioned Coleman Ruiz who's end. You mentioned Coleman Ruiz who's end. You mentioned Coleman Ruiz who's been a guest on this podcast as a good been a guest on this podcast as a good been a guest on this podcast as a good friend of mine and yours as well and friend of mine and yours as well and friend of mine and yours as well and you worked with him and um I'm probably you worked with him and um I'm probably you worked with him and um I'm probably going to get this a little bit wrong but going to get this a little bit wrong but going to get this a little bit wrong but I think once he said uh because I think I think once he said uh because I think I think once he said uh because I think he was an instructor at Buds also for a he was an instructor at Buds also for a he was an instructor at Buds also for a short while. I think he was short while. I think he was short while. I think he was &gt;&gt; um and I think he said you know when you &gt;&gt; um and I think he said you know when you &gt;&gt; um and I think he said you know when you look at the guys that make it through look at the guys that make it through look at the guys that make it through BUDS &gt;&gt; nine times out of 10 they've had one at &gt;&gt; nine times out of 10 they've had one at &gt;&gt; nine times out of 10 they've had one at least one of the following three things. least one of the following three things. least one of the following three things. either spent some serious time in either spent some serious time in either spent some serious time in detention in high school, played a detention in high school, played a detention in high school, played a varsity sport in high school, divorced varsity sport in high school, divorced varsity sport in high school, divorced parents, and you know, that raises a whole bunch and you know, that raises a whole bunch and you know, that raises a whole bunch of other questions about, you know, of other questions about, you know, of other questions about, you know, friction and um kind of, for lack of friction and um kind of, for lack of friction and um kind of, for lack of a better way to put it, like some a better way to put it, like some a better way to put it, like some internal sense of like f you, I'm going internal sense of like f you, I'm going internal sense of like f you, I'm going to push through this anyway, or just f F to push through this anyway, or just f F to push through this anyway, or just f F you to something. So when you're you to something. So when you're you to something. So when you're going so let's assume that Coleman going so let's assume that Coleman going so let's assume that Coleman having given the fact that he's not a having given the fact that he's not a having given the fact that he's not a scientist he's a former operator so scientist he's a former operator so scientist he's a former operator so he knows um he knows um he knows um do you think that there were there were do you think that there were there were do you think that there were there were moments or many moments where it was um moments or many moments where it was um moments or many moments where it was um you against them like you and your you against them like you and your you against them like you and your teammates cuz you're you know teammates cuz you're you know teammates cuz you're you know you're on boat crew or whatever with you're on boat crew or whatever with you're on boat crew or whatever with your teammates. You're working as a with your teammates. You're working as a with your teammates. You're working as a team and learning how to do that. It's team and learning how to do that. It's team and learning how to do that. It's not just about you. It's about the not just about you. It's about the not just about you. It's about the group. Um and it's about you and it's group. Um and it's about you and it's group. Um and it's about you and it's about the expectation. But how many about the expectation. But how many about the expectation. But how many different bins of motivation do you do different bins of motivation do you do different bins of motivation do you do you have to access to get through buds? you have to access to get through buds? you have to access to get through buds? Is it and is fu uh to the instructors or Is it and is fu uh to the instructors or Is it and is fu uh to the instructors or whoever to the cold water is that part whoever to the cold water is that part whoever to the cold water is that part is that a critical bin? is that a critical bin? is that a critical bin? &gt;&gt; It is and it isn't because sometimes you &gt;&gt; It is and it isn't because sometimes you &gt;&gt; It is and it isn't because sometimes you get caught up in the moment. You don't get caught up in the moment. You don't get caught up in the moment. You don't even think about it. You just want to even think about it. You just want to even think about it. You just want to finish that evolution. finish that evolution. finish that evolution. &gt;&gt; So when you're doing a four mile timed &gt;&gt; So when you're doing a four mile timed &gt;&gt; So when you're doing a four mile timed run, that was one of the big things is run, that was one of the big things is run, that was one of the big things is you have to do a four mile timed run. you have to do a four mile timed run. you have to do a four mile timed run. It's got to be I think a seven minute It's got to be I think a seven minute It's got to be I think a seven minute mile or less. And nowhere in does it say mile or less. And nowhere in does it say mile or less. And nowhere in does it say the condition of the beach matters. So the condition of the beach matters. So the condition of the beach matters. So if it's high tide, low tide, you have to if it's high tide, low tide, you have to if it's high tide, low tide, you have to run it on the burm and soft sand. The run it on the burm and soft sand. The run it on the burm and soft sand. The time standard is a time standard time standard is a time standard time standard is a time standard &gt;&gt; and talk to anybody. At any point in &gt;&gt; and talk to anybody. At any point in &gt;&gt; and talk to anybody. At any point in that training, you are going to hit a that training, you are going to hit a that training, you are going to hit a wall where you think your heart's going wall where you think your heart's going wall where you think your heart's going to stop. Like if I take one more step, to stop. Like if I take one more step, to stop. Like if I take one more step, I'll die right here I'll die right here I'll die right here &gt;&gt; cuz your heart rate's so high &gt;&gt; cuz your heart rate's so high &gt;&gt; cuz your heart rate's so high &gt;&gt; and you're like, I can't do it. And at &gt;&gt; and you're like, I can't do it. And at &gt;&gt; and you're like, I can't do it. And at some point, you just don't care. You're some point, you just don't care. You're some point, you just don't care. You're like, I'd rather fall stone cold dead in like, I'd rather fall stone cold dead in like, I'd rather fall stone cold dead in front of all them and die right here front of all them and die right here front of all them and die right here than I would failing or quitting. than I would failing or quitting. than I would failing or quitting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. At least you don't have to go home &gt;&gt; Yeah. At least you don't have to go home &gt;&gt; Yeah. At least you don't have to go home head hanging in shame. head hanging in shame. head hanging in shame. &gt;&gt; Exactly. You just push anyway. &gt;&gt; Exactly. You just push anyway. &gt;&gt; Exactly. You just push anyway. &gt;&gt; Sometimes you'll get it, you'll be &gt;&gt; Sometimes you'll get it, you'll be &gt;&gt; Sometimes you'll get it, you'll be getting surf tortured by the instructors getting surf tortured by the instructors getting surf tortured by the instructors and you're just laying down that 60° and you're just laying down that 60° and you're just laying down that 60° water just miserable. And I tell the water just miserable. And I tell the water just miserable. And I tell the story quite a bit. We had dudes getting story quite a bit. We had dudes getting story quite a bit. We had dudes getting up and leaving mass accidents just in up and leaving mass accidents just in up and leaving mass accidents just in the biggest, strongest dudes. It's broad the biggest, strongest dudes. It's broad the biggest, strongest dudes. It's broad daylight, 70° on Coronado Island, the daylight, 70° on Coronado Island, the daylight, 70° on Coronado Island, the most beautiful day you've ever seen. most beautiful day you've ever seen. most beautiful day you've ever seen. We're laying there just jackhammering We're laying there just jackhammering We're laying there just jackhammering and you look over and all the West Coast and you look over and all the West Coast and you look over and all the West Coast SEAL teams are out to your right and you SEAL teams are out to your right and you SEAL teams are out to your right and you can see SEAL team one out there doing can see SEAL team one out there doing can see SEAL team one out there doing log PT for like their morning PT and you log PT for like their morning PT and you log PT for like their morning PT and you can look at down to the left and you can look at down to the left and you can look at down to the left and you can see the hotel Dell and this little what see the hotel Dell and this little what see the hotel Dell and this little what I call a seven-year-old with a big pink I call a seven-year-old with a big pink I call a seven-year-old with a big pink flamingo jumping in the water having the flamingo jumping in the water having the flamingo jumping in the water having the best time of their life and I'm like best time of their life and I'm like best time of their life and I'm like it's all about your perspective be a it's all about your perspective be a it's all about your perspective be a palace or a prison palace or a prison palace or a prison &gt;&gt; however you want to see it right now &gt;&gt; however you want to see it right now &gt;&gt; however you want to see it right now that &gt;&gt; they're still doing it that kid time of &gt;&gt; they're still doing it that kid time of &gt;&gt; they're still doing it that kid time of their life and we're in the exact same their life and we're in the exact same their life and we're in the exact same water. Mhm. water. Mhm. water. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Just change your mindset. This is all &gt;&gt; Just change your mindset. This is all &gt;&gt; Just change your mindset. This is all part of the process. And if you want to part of the process. And if you want to part of the process. And if you want to wear that shiny gold thing on your wear that shiny gold thing on your wear that shiny gold thing on your chest, you must do this. Just do it. And chest, you must do this. Just do it. And chest, you must do this. Just do it. And I remember that was one of the things I remember that was one of the things I remember that was one of the things like you're not going to break me. No like you're not going to break me. No like you're not going to break me. No matter what you say, I'll die right here matter what you say, I'll die right here matter what you say, I'll die right here in this water. I don't care. And that in this water. I don't care. And that in this water. I don't care. And that kind of that mindset has really been kind of that mindset has really been kind of that mindset has really been beneficial throughout the entire process beneficial throughout the entire process beneficial throughout the entire process because there's parts of there's parts because there's parts of there's parts because there's parts of there's parts of Buds and parts of being in special of Buds and parts of being in special of Buds and parts of being in special operations where you think it's going to operations where you think it's going to operations where you think it's going to kill you kill you kill you &gt;&gt; and then a certain point you just don't &gt;&gt; and then a certain point you just don't &gt;&gt; and then a certain point you just don't care. If it kills me, it kills me. I care. If it kills me, it kills me. I care. If it kills me, it kills me. I don't care. And you get through it. don't care. And you get through it. don't care. And you get through it. Like, you know, I'm so terrified of Like, you know, I'm so terrified of Like, you know, I'm so terrified of heights. Like, I can't jump out of the heights. Like, I can't jump out of the heights. Like, I can't jump out of the back of this airplane. You watch 15 guys back of this airplane. You watch 15 guys back of this airplane. You watch 15 guys going in front of you and you get right going in front of you and you get right going in front of you and you get right to the ram. You go, I don't care. And to the ram. You go, I don't care. And to the ram. You go, I don't care. And you just, for whatever reason, they just you just, for whatever reason, they just you just, for whatever reason, they just jump. &gt;&gt; Like, what made you jump? Everybody else &gt;&gt; Like, what made you jump? Everybody else &gt;&gt; Like, what made you jump? Everybody else did it. I didn't want to be the guy who did it. I didn't want to be the guy who did it. I didn't want to be the guy who said no. Sometimes that performance said no. Sometimes that performance said no. Sometimes that performance anxiety, that pressure to perform on anxiety, that pressure to perform on anxiety, that pressure to perform on demand, it gets you through the hump demand, it gets you through the hump demand, it gets you through the hump and it shows you and it shows you and it shows you &gt;&gt; there is nothing if it can be done by a &gt;&gt; there is nothing if it can be done by a &gt;&gt; there is nothing if it can be done by a human being, I can do it. human being, I can do it. human being, I can do it. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And it just it rings true. It's &gt;&gt; Mhm. And it just it rings true. It's &gt;&gt; Mhm. And it just it rings true. It's like, how far can you run? As far as I like, how far can you run? As far as I like, how far can you run? As far as I have to. Well, how fast can you run? As have to. Well, how fast can you run? As have to. Well, how fast can you run? As fast as I can. Like, if you can run fast as I can. Like, if you can run fast as I can. Like, if you can run that, I can run it. If you can get up that, I can run it. If you can get up that, I can run it. If you can get up and over that mountain, I can do it, and over that mountain, I can do it, and over that mountain, I can do it, too. How you going to do it? One step at too. How you going to do it? One step at too. How you going to do it? One step at a time, brother. Here we go. And it a time, brother. Here we go. And it a time, brother. Here we go. And it makes you so mentally resilient. And I makes you so mentally resilient. And I makes you so mentally resilient. And I think that's the that's really the think that's the that's really the think that's the that's really the defining factor is you can make them defining factor is you can make them defining factor is you can make them believe in their mind they can get believe in their mind they can get believe in their mind they can get through anything. Now, collectively as a through anything. Now, collectively as a through anything. Now, collectively as a group, now you stack 25 of those true group, now you stack 25 of those true group, now you stack 25 of those true believers together, you can do anything. believers together, you can do anything. believers together, you can do anything. And I've seen some dudes do some And I've seen some dudes do some And I've seen some dudes do some herculean feeds and they do it just herculean feeds and they do it just herculean feeds and they do it just because they're too afraid to say no. because they're too afraid to say no. because they're too afraid to say no. Can you do that? Yep. You sure? If it Can you do that? Yep. You sure? If it Can you do that? Yep. You sure? If it can be done, I'll do it. I've seen it can be done, I'll do it. I've seen it can be done, I'll do it. I've seen it time and time again. Yeah. I mean, time and time again. Yeah. I mean, time and time again. Yeah. I mean, everybody hits those moments in buds everybody hits those moments in buds everybody hits those moments in buds where it's just I cannot believe I'm where it's just I cannot believe I'm where it's just I cannot believe I'm doing this right now. But it's magic doing this right now. But it's magic doing this right now. But it's magic once you get through it. once you get through it. once you get through it. &gt;&gt; It's awesome. I mean, I think uh &gt;&gt; It's awesome. I mean, I think uh &gt;&gt; It's awesome. I mean, I think uh setting a threshold for uh if it kills setting a threshold for uh if it kills setting a threshold for uh if it kills me, it kills me is uh in many contexts me, it kills me is uh in many contexts me, it kills me is uh in many contexts is unhealthy. But in that context is unhealthy. But in that context is unhealthy. But in that context is yeah healthy adaptive. Let's call it yeah healthy adaptive. Let's call it yeah healthy adaptive. Let's call it adaptive. I I'm not going to decide adaptive. I I'm not going to decide adaptive. I I'm not going to decide what's healthy or unhealthy. I'm sure what's healthy or unhealthy. I'm sure what's healthy or unhealthy. I'm sure some people are listening to this and some people are listening to this and some people are listening to this and they think like this is how this is how they think like this is how this is how they think like this is how this is how guys get themselves killed and guys get themselves killed and guys get themselves killed and indeed outside of the context of buds. indeed outside of the context of buds. indeed outside of the context of buds. That's yeah sometimes guys do dumb That's yeah sometimes guys do dumb That's yeah sometimes guys do dumb stuff. I always say um there's something stuff. I always say um there's something stuff. I always say um there's something about having a Y chromosome that through about having a Y chromosome that through about having a Y chromosome that through you know I wasn't around tens of you know I wasn't around tens of you know I wasn't around tens of thousands of years ago but I'm guessing thousands of years ago but I'm guessing thousands of years ago but I'm guessing the first homo sapien male who picked up the first homo sapien male who picked up the first homo sapien male who picked up a rock the first thing he did hit a rock the first thing he did hit a rock the first thing he did hit himself in the head with it was like himself in the head with it was like himself in the head with it was like ouch then he hit the guy next to him ouch then he hit the guy next to him ouch then he hit the guy next to him with it and go ouch and then they decide with it and go ouch and then they decide with it and go ouch and then they decide to take it and throw it against a wall to take it and throw it against a wall to take it and throw it against a wall and see what happens and on and on and see what happens and on and on and see what happens and on and on and here we are here we are here we are &gt;&gt; you know and obviously you know those &gt;&gt; you know and obviously you know those &gt;&gt; you know and obviously you know those with two X chromosomes took a different with two X chromosomes took a different with two X chromosomes took a different path and we need that we need the path and we need that we need the path and we need that we need the collaboration in order to survive as a collaboration in order to survive as a collaboration in order to survive as a species obviously ly, but there's species obviously ly, but there's species obviously ly, but there's something about that. Let's just see something about that. Let's just see something about that. Let's just see what happens if and if it kills me, it what happens if and if it kills me, it what happens if and if it kills me, it kills me. That actually is a core kills me. That actually is a core kills me. That actually is a core feature of human evolution that's feature of human evolution that's feature of human evolution that's brought us to some incredible positive brought us to some incredible positive brought us to some incredible positive places. So, clearly Buds is a one places. So, clearly Buds is a one places. So, clearly Buds is a one such micro environment. such micro environment. such micro environment. &gt;&gt; Um, so you make it through and then I &gt;&gt; Um, so you make it through and then I &gt;&gt; Um, so you make it through and then I realize there are a lot of other realize there are a lot of other realize there are a lot of other iterations. There's Jump School and iterations. There's Jump School and iterations. There's Jump School and there's a bunch of other things and um there's a bunch of other things and um there's a bunch of other things and um you go off and you start opting you go off and you start opting you go off and you start opting right away. right away. right away. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I get stationed at SEAL Team &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I get stationed at SEAL Team &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I get stationed at SEAL Team 10 in uh Virginia Beach, Virginia, and 10 in uh Virginia Beach, Virginia, and 10 in uh Virginia Beach, Virginia, and we deploy in 2005. The Iraq war just we deploy in 2005. The Iraq war just we deploy in 2005. The Iraq war just kicked off, so we I check in and I was kicked off, so we I check in and I was kicked off, so we I check in and I was early ' 04 and we deployed um yeah, we early ' 04 and we deployed um yeah, we early ' 04 and we deployed um yeah, we deployed probably 7 months later, sent deployed probably 7 months later, sent deployed probably 7 months later, sent Iraq was phenomenal. Everything you ever Iraq was phenomenal. Everything you ever Iraq was phenomenal. Everything you ever wanted to be scary, like you don't know wanted to be scary, like you don't know wanted to be scary, like you don't know anything. The IED is really bad and just being a The IED is really bad and just being a The IED is really bad and just being a really young kid. I mean, I was really young kid. I mean, I was really young kid. I mean, I was stormtrooping out of Iraq and 19 years stormtrooping out of Iraq and 19 years stormtrooping out of Iraq and 19 years old. I mean, you forget how young you old. I mean, you forget how young you old. I mean, you forget how young you are at 19. are at 19. are at 19. &gt;&gt; So, you're 19, you're kicking doors &gt;&gt; So, you're 19, you're kicking doors &gt;&gt; So, you're 19, you're kicking doors down. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I'm driving in Humvees, blowing stuff &gt;&gt; I'm driving in Humvees, blowing stuff &gt;&gt; I'm driving in Humvees, blowing stuff up. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And seeing friends get blown up. &gt;&gt; And seeing friends get blown up. &gt;&gt; And seeing friends get blown up. &gt;&gt; If you talk to anybody who was in Iraq, &gt;&gt; If you talk to anybody who was in Iraq, &gt;&gt; If you talk to anybody who was in Iraq, the chances of you not hitting an ID the chances of you not hitting an ID the chances of you not hitting an ID were so rare. And we never hit one. were so rare. And we never hit one. were so rare. And we never hit one. They'd hit the convoy in front of us, They'd hit the convoy in front of us, They'd hit the convoy in front of us, the one behind us. We'd get delayed at the one behind us. We'd get delayed at the one behind us. We'd get delayed at the gate for 2 minutes. We'd turn and the gate for 2 minutes. We'd turn and the gate for 2 minutes. We'd turn and boom, they'd go off in front of you. boom, they'd go off in front of you. boom, they'd go off in front of you. They're just not hitting. They're just not hitting. They're just not hitting. They're hitting everybody else but you. And you hitting everybody else but you. And you hitting everybody else but you. And you know, you would tell yourself things know, you would tell yourself things know, you would tell yourself things like, "Oh, the reason they're not doing like, "Oh, the reason they're not doing like, "Oh, the reason they're not doing it is because we look so aggressive it is because we look so aggressive it is because we look so aggressive because we have flames and death skulls because we have flames and death skulls because we have flames and death skulls on the Humvees." on the Humvees." on the Humvees." &gt;&gt; It's not that, man. It's just it's not &gt;&gt; It's not that, man. It's just it's not &gt;&gt; It's not that, man. It's just it's not your time. You be the best trained dude your time. You be the best trained dude your time. You be the best trained dude in the world. That ID hits you, in the world. That ID hits you, in the world. That ID hits you, &gt;&gt; the lights are over. &gt;&gt; the lights are over. &gt;&gt; the lights are over. &gt;&gt; And on that deployment, we lost all the &gt;&gt; And on that deployment, we lost all the &gt;&gt; And on that deployment, we lost all the guys in Operation Red Wings in guys in Operation Red Wings in guys in Operation Red Wings in Afghanistan. That was the other half of Afghanistan. That was the other half of Afghanistan. That was the other half of our SEAL team. our SEAL team. our SEAL team. &gt;&gt; That wasn't ID. That was the helicopter. &gt;&gt; That wasn't ID. That was the helicopter. &gt;&gt; That wasn't ID. That was the helicopter. &gt;&gt; The uh &gt;&gt; The uh &gt;&gt; The uh &gt;&gt; the um now I don't know whether I'd call &gt;&gt; the um now I don't know whether I'd call &gt;&gt; the um now I don't know whether I'd call it famous or infamous. Forgive me. I'm it famous or infamous. Forgive me. I'm it famous or infamous. Forgive me. I'm going to step in it one way or the going to step in it one way or the going to step in it one way or the other. Uh Lone Survivor. other. Uh Lone Survivor. other. Uh Lone Survivor. &gt;&gt; Amazing book, I should say. I really I &gt;&gt; Amazing book, I should say. I really I &gt;&gt; Amazing book, I should say. I really I really enjoyed the book that the movie really enjoyed the book that the movie really enjoyed the book that the movie does a I think a pretty good job of does a I think a pretty good job of does a I think a pretty good job of extracting some of the key moments extracting some of the key moments extracting some of the key moments from the book, but um more than a movie from the book, but um more than a movie from the book, but um more than a movie or book. It's a or book. It's a or book. It's a &gt;&gt; true story. Um and that's the four &gt;&gt; true story. Um and that's the four &gt;&gt; true story. Um and that's the four guys that got um three of them got guys that got um three of them got guys that got um three of them got killed on the ground and then one killed on the ground and then one killed on the ground and then one helicopter blown up attempting to come helicopter blown up attempting to come helicopter blown up attempting to come save them. save them. save them. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Uh to save the one guy. &gt;&gt; Uh to save the one guy. &gt;&gt; Uh to save the one guy. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Marcus. And that was so hard to &gt;&gt; Yeah. Marcus. And that was so hard to &gt;&gt; Yeah. Marcus. And that was so hard to wrap your head around as a 19-year-old. wrap your head around as a 19-year-old. wrap your head around as a 19-year-old. So you got to think, you know, in my So you got to think, you know, in my So you got to think, you know, in my mind, I'd essentially been in the mind, I'd essentially been in the mind, I'd essentially been in the community for 19 years up at that point. community for 19 years up at that point. community for 19 years up at that point. &gt;&gt; And during my dad's time, it was peace &gt;&gt; And during my dad's time, it was peace &gt;&gt; And during my dad's time, it was peace time the whole time. So you weren't time the whole time. So you weren't time the whole time. So you weren't going to funerals all day long. like going to funerals all day long. like going to funerals all day long. like Navy Seals getting killed was it was Navy Seals getting killed was it was Navy Seals getting killed was it was like folklore. It's like oh it's a bad like folklore. It's like oh it's a bad like folklore. It's like oh it's a bad training a bad parachute accident. You training a bad parachute accident. You training a bad parachute accident. You know we had Neil Roberts got killed in know we had Neil Roberts got killed in know we had Neil Roberts got killed in the early GWAT in Afghanistan. Roberts the early GWAT in Afghanistan. Roberts the early GWAT in Afghanistan. Roberts Ridge you ever heard of that story? Ridge you ever heard of that story? Ridge you ever heard of that story? That's a gnarly one. Breast Lebinsky got That's a gnarly one. Breast Lebinsky got That's a gnarly one. Breast Lebinsky got the Medal of Honor. John Chapman the Air the Medal of Honor. John Chapman the Air the Medal of Honor. John Chapman the Air Force guy got the Medal of Honor. Gnarly Force guy got the Medal of Honor. Gnarly Force guy got the Medal of Honor. Gnarly firefight. But outside of that it wasn't firefight. But outside of that it wasn't firefight. But outside of that it wasn't happening very often. And then when all happening very often. And then when all happening very often. And then when all those guys got killed in one shot, it those guys got killed in one shot, it those guys got killed in one shot, it was like a slap of reality. was like a slap of reality. was like a slap of reality. They were the best dudes you ever seen. They were the best dudes you ever seen. They were the best dudes you ever seen. Like they were the highest like Like they were the highest like Like they were the highest like unbelievably trained, unbelievably trained, unbelievably trained, unbelievably experienced and they're gone in an experienced and they're gone in an experienced and they're gone in an instant. No goodbye, no fanfare, no, you instant. No goodbye, no fanfare, no, you instant. No goodbye, no fanfare, no, you know, holding him like tell my mother. know, holding him like tell my mother. know, holding him like tell my mother. It's nothing like Hollywood. They're It's nothing like Hollywood. They're It's nothing like Hollywood. They're gone. &gt;&gt; And that was kept under wraps for a long &gt;&gt; And that was kept under wraps for a long &gt;&gt; And that was kept under wraps for a long time before the book and the movie. I time before the book and the movie. I time before the book and the movie. I mean, people really didn't know. There mean, people really didn't know. There mean, people really didn't know. There wasn't a lot of discussion about SEALs. wasn't a lot of discussion about SEALs. wasn't a lot of discussion about SEALs. And uh And uh And uh &gt;&gt; no, like it wasn't in popular culture. &gt;&gt; no, like it wasn't in popular culture. &gt;&gt; no, like it wasn't in popular culture. And when the book came out, it started And when the book came out, it started And when the book came out, it started to gain steam and people started to, you to gain steam and people started to, you to gain steam and people started to, you know, &gt;&gt; read more about it. But for being inside &gt;&gt; read more about it. But for being inside &gt;&gt; read more about it. But for being inside the SEAL teams, that was your own the SEAL teams, that was your own the SEAL teams, that was your own private 9/11. private 9/11. private 9/11. Every single SEAL cried in an instant, Every single SEAL cried in an instant, Every single SEAL cried in an instant, throwing up. I mean, just you cannot throwing up. I mean, just you cannot throwing up. I mean, just you cannot believe that just happened. And then for believe that just happened. And then for believe that just happened. And then for everybody else who's still fighting the everybody else who's still fighting the everybody else who's still fighting the war, you have to try to explain to your war, you have to try to explain to your war, you have to try to explain to your wife and your family why that's not wife and your family why that's not wife and your family why that's not going to happen to you. And it's a lie. going to happen to you. And it's a lie. going to happen to you. And it's a lie. It's not like they did anything wrong. It's not like they did anything wrong. It's not like they did anything wrong. That's just the way it is. Sometimes it That's just the way it is. Sometimes it That's just the way it is. Sometimes it just happens. just happens. just happens. &gt;&gt; You were married at this point. &gt;&gt; You were married at this point. &gt;&gt; You were married at this point. &gt;&gt; I wasn't single. Thank God. &gt;&gt; I wasn't single. Thank God. &gt;&gt; I wasn't single. Thank God. &gt;&gt; Intentionally. &gt;&gt; Intentionally. &gt;&gt; Intentionally. &gt;&gt; Intentionally. &gt;&gt; Intentionally. &gt;&gt; Intentionally. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I try to wait as long as humanly &gt;&gt; Yeah. I try to wait as long as humanly &gt;&gt; Yeah. I try to wait as long as humanly possible and try to do that. Good possible and try to do that. Good possible and try to do that. Good advice, but you know, it's hard. It's advice, but you know, it's hard. It's advice, but you know, it's hard. It's hard to try to It's hard to do that job hard to try to It's hard to do that job hard to try to It's hard to do that job at full-time and trying to be a at full-time and trying to be a at full-time and trying to be a full-time boyfriend that turns into a full-time boyfriend that turns into a full-time boyfriend that turns into a fiance that turns into a husband, turns fiance that turns into a husband, turns fiance that turns into a husband, turns into a father. It's very hard unless into a father. It's very hard unless into a father. It's very hard unless you're able to compartmentalize really, you're able to compartmentalize really, you're able to compartmentalize really, really well. And fortunately for us, really well. And fortunately for us, really well. And fortunately for us, that's the thing you're the best at is I that's the thing you're the best at is I that's the thing you're the best at is I can wall it off so fast and never think can wall it off so fast and never think can wall it off so fast and never think about you again. Now, when you about you again. Now, when you about you again. Now, when you transition out of the military, that's transition out of the military, that's transition out of the military, that's not really a superpower anymore, but in not really a superpower anymore, but in not really a superpower anymore, but in a moment it served you. a moment it served you. a moment it served you. &gt;&gt; So, as more and more guys are getting &gt;&gt; So, as more and more guys are getting &gt;&gt; So, as more and more guys are getting killed, um, did you find that getting killed, um, did you find that getting killed, um, did you find that getting into action each day, the same way that into action each day, the same way that into action each day, the same way that you described civilian life now, um, and you described civilian life now, um, and you described civilian life now, um, and getting into action each day, being getting into action each day, being getting into action each day, being really adaptive, did you find that really adaptive, did you find that really adaptive, did you find that was key to being able to not go down was key to being able to not go down was key to being able to not go down mental traps? Um, and at the same time, mental traps? Um, and at the same time, mental traps? Um, and at the same time, I acknowledge that you must have also I acknowledge that you must have also I acknowledge that you must have also just been really busy. There's stuff just been really busy. There's stuff just been really busy. There's stuff coming at you all the time. Like just coming at you all the time. Like just coming at you all the time. Like just because I mean it sounds cold, but just because I mean it sounds cold, but just because I mean it sounds cold, but just because guys get killed doesn't mean because guys get killed doesn't mean because guys get killed doesn't mean that the oping stop stops. In fact, that the oping stop stops. In fact, that the oping stop stops. In fact, it probably picks up even more. it probably picks up even more. it probably picks up even more. &gt;&gt; You go out the next you have to you got &gt;&gt; You go out the next you have to you got &gt;&gt; You go out the next you have to you got to keep going. You got to get back on to keep going. You got to get back on to keep going. You got to get back on the horse. Keep them going. The last the horse. Keep them going. The last the horse. Keep them going. The last thing that we wanted is those guys get thing that we wanted is those guys get thing that we wanted is those guys get killed. Well, let's pull them all back. killed. Well, let's pull them all back. killed. Well, let's pull them all back. Let's take, you know, 6 months to, you Let's take, you know, 6 months to, you Let's take, you know, 6 months to, you know, regroup. No, no, no. We know, regroup. No, no, no. We know, regroup. No, no, no. We got to go out right now. Same thing with got to go out right now. Same thing with got to go out right now. Same thing with the parachute accident. I told you about the parachute accident. I told you about the parachute accident. I told you about the electric. I got to do it right the electric. I got to do it right the electric. I got to do it right away. If I don't get back on the horse, away. If I don't get back on the horse, away. If I don't get back on the horse, I'll just build up this dread and I'll just build up this dread and I'll just build up this dread and I'll lose my confidence in the whole I'll lose my confidence in the whole I'll lose my confidence in the whole process. Like, we have to go. And NSW process. Like, we have to go. And NSW process. Like, we have to go. And NSW did. Everybody did. Full gas, full steam did. Everybody did. Full gas, full steam did. Everybody did. Full gas, full steam ahead. Let's go. And just kept going. We ahead. Let's go. And just kept going. We ahead. Let's go. And just kept going. We did another one in 2007. If you've seen did another one in 2007. If you've seen did another one in 2007. If you've seen the stuff with uh Jason Redmond, I the stuff with uh Jason Redmond, I the stuff with uh Jason Redmond, I talked about my buddy Matt shot up. That talked about my buddy Matt shot up. That talked about my buddy Matt shot up. That 2007 deployment was dicey. 2007 deployment was dicey. 2007 deployment was dicey. But it's the same thing. Like But it's the same thing. Like But it's the same thing. Like &gt;&gt; two of your close friends. &gt;&gt; two of your close friends. &gt;&gt; two of your close friends. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you know, &gt;&gt; pretty mangled, &gt;&gt; pretty mangled, &gt;&gt; pretty mangled, &gt;&gt; crazy mangled. And you know, you start &gt;&gt; crazy mangled. And you know, you start &gt;&gt; crazy mangled. And you know, you start to find out really, really fast. It to find out really, really fast. It to find out really, really fast. It doesn't matter how much you train, if doesn't matter how much you train, if doesn't matter how much you train, if your numbers called, you're getting your numbers called, you're getting your numbers called, you're getting pulled. And it's hard to justify because pulled. And it's hard to justify because pulled. And it's hard to justify because now you have a girlfriend, you have all now you have a girlfriend, you have all now you have a girlfriend, you have all this stuff, and people are dying, and this stuff, and people are dying, and this stuff, and people are dying, and you have to reassure them why it's not you have to reassure them why it's not you have to reassure them why it's not going to happen to you. And you get going to happen to you. And you get going to happen to you. And you get really good at compartmentalization. really good at compartmentalization. really good at compartmentalization. Like, I can't control that. The only Like, I can't control that. The only Like, I can't control that. The only thing I can control is this. I'm thing I can control is this. I'm thing I can control is this. I'm shooting as much as I can. And I'm doing shooting as much as I can. And I'm doing shooting as much as I can. And I'm doing as much CQB as I can. I'm jumping as much CQB as I can. I'm jumping as much CQB as I can. I'm jumping as much as I can. I'm around the boys much as I can. I'm around the boys much as I can. I'm around the boys building team camaraderie as much as building team camaraderie as much as building team camaraderie as much as humanly possible because I can't control humanly possible because I can't control humanly possible because I can't control anything else. Control the things you anything else. Control the things you anything else. Control the things you can control. Building confidence. But can control. Building confidence. But can control. Building confidence. But reality, when it slaps, it slaps hard reality, when it slaps, it slaps hard reality, when it slaps, it slaps hard and definitely slapped us. and definitely slapped us. and definitely slapped us. &gt;&gt; As the public understanding of like what &gt;&gt; As the public understanding of like what &gt;&gt; As the public understanding of like what the seals even were and are started to the seals even were and are started to the seals even were and are started to grow and change and the movies, the Lone grow and change and the movies, the Lone grow and change and the movies, the Lone Survivor movie. And I actually think it Survivor movie. And I actually think it Survivor movie. And I actually think it they again I think they did a good job they again I think they did a good job they again I think they did a good job with the movie. I know the book and the with the movie. I know the book and the with the movie. I know the book and the movie were approved by the military. So movie were approved by the military. So movie were approved by the military. So there was a lot of um kind of vetting of there was a lot of um kind of vetting of there was a lot of um kind of vetting of the of the material but I think I think the of the material but I think I think the of the material but I think I think it um hit powerfully. At the time I was it um hit powerfully. At the time I was it um hit powerfully. At the time I was living in San Diego so you know the living in San Diego so you know the living in San Diego so you know the movie theaters were packed but that was movie theaters were packed but that was movie theaters were packed but that was true everywhere. I mean it made a big true everywhere. I mean it made a big true everywhere. I mean it made a big impact. Um, but then with like the impact. Um, but then with like the impact. Um, but then with like the Bin Laden thing, you know, being, you Bin Laden thing, you know, being, you Bin Laden thing, you know, being, you know, the televising, the White know, the televising, the White know, the televising, the White House watching and, you know, I feel House watching and, you know, I feel House watching and, you know, I feel like the whole world came to understand like the whole world came to understand like the whole world came to understand that there were these guys called Navy that there were these guys called Navy that there were these guys called Navy Seals and they're doing this really Seals and they're doing this really Seals and they're doing this really dangerous uh stuff and um taking out bad dangerous uh stuff and um taking out bad dangerous uh stuff and um taking out bad guys. Um, was there anything that guys. Um, was there anything that guys. Um, was there anything that changed about the job just knowing that changed about the job just knowing that changed about the job just knowing that it wasn't as uh as vaulted as it once it wasn't as uh as vaulted as it once it wasn't as uh as vaulted as it once was? I mean, what you're doing is was? I mean, what you're doing is was? I mean, what you're doing is vaulted on a day-to-day basis, but you vaulted on a day-to-day basis, but you vaulted on a day-to-day basis, but you know, just this idea like this is in know, just this idea like this is in know, just this idea like this is in movies and they there it is and covers movies and they there it is and covers movies and they there it is and covers CNN. There's Obama and you know, CNN. There's Obama and you know, CNN. There's Obama and you know, Secretary of Defense watching the OP, Secretary of Defense watching the OP, Secretary of Defense watching the OP, you know, and people then there's a you know, and people then there's a you know, and people then there's a movie made about it very quickly and uh movie made about it very quickly and uh movie made about it very quickly and uh it was I mean it was all happening in it was I mean it was all happening in it was I mean it was all happening in it was weird in real time and on the movies was weird in real time and on the movies was weird in real time and on the movies and it just for a civilian it was a and it just for a civilian it was a and it just for a civilian it was a little bit of a of a mind bend. And I little bit of a of a mind bend. And I little bit of a of a mind bend. And I can't even imagine what it was like if can't even imagine what it was like if can't even imagine what it was like if that's your job. And so much of being that's your job. And so much of being that's your job. And so much of being able to perform the job well relies on able to perform the job well relies on able to perform the job well relies on people not knowing what you're doing and people not knowing what you're doing and people not knowing what you're doing and how you do it. What was that like? how you do it. What was that like? how you do it. What was that like? Terrible. I mean, the very Terrible. I mean, the very Terrible. I mean, the very next day you couldn't drive on the next day you couldn't drive on the next day you couldn't drive on the compound. Every news channel across compound. Every news channel across compound. Every news channel across America was sitting outside of that America was sitting outside of that America was sitting outside of that thing. And not only they taking photos, thing. And not only they taking photos, thing. And not only they taking photos, everybody comes in, they know what you everybody comes in, they know what you everybody comes in, they know what you look like. They're looking for guys with look like. They're looking for guys with look like. They're looking for guys with long hair, beards covered in tattoos, long hair, beards covered in tattoos, long hair, beards covered in tattoos, driving jack, you know, jacked up pickup driving jack, you know, jacked up pickup driving jack, you know, jacked up pickup trucks. That's what they're looking for. trucks. That's what they're looking for. trucks. That's what they're looking for. And now you can't go anywhere. Now And now you can't go anywhere. Now And now you can't go anywhere. Now they're going out in town to all the they're going out in town to all the they're going out in town to all the bars and restaurants you go to and bars and restaurants you go to and bars and restaurants you go to and they're pulling you aside asking you. they're pulling you aside asking you. they're pulling you aside asking you. It's like it's very uncomfortable. It's like it's very uncomfortable. It's like it's very uncomfortable. They'll see wives in there with a little They'll see wives in there with a little They'll see wives in there with a little trident stick on the back of their car. trident stick on the back of their car. trident stick on the back of their car. They'll nail her in the Whole Foods They'll nail her in the Whole Foods They'll nail her in the Whole Foods parking lot. Your husband and Navy Seal. parking lot. Your husband and Navy Seal. parking lot. Your husband and Navy Seal. It's nobody's ever done this before. It's nobody's ever done this before. It's nobody's ever done this before. It's like mum's the word. Everybody kind of like mum's the word. Everybody kind of like mum's the word. Everybody kind of just collapsed on ourselves and really just collapsed on ourselves and really just collapsed on ourselves and really tried to hush this thing down. really tried to hush this thing down. really tried to hush this thing down. But it made the job very difficult. But it made the job very difficult. But it made the job very difficult. It felt like you were just under It felt like you were just under It felt like you were just under microscope the entire time. And then microscope the entire time. And then microscope the entire time. And then when extortion happened, then everybody when extortion happened, then everybody when extortion happened, then everybody started that it was an inside job. You started that it was an inside job. You started that it was an inside job. You know, they Come on, man. know, they Come on, man. know, they Come on, man. &gt;&gt; I know it's probably not something you &gt;&gt; I know it's probably not something you &gt;&gt; I know it's probably not something you want to get into, but maybe just explain want to get into, but maybe just explain want to get into, but maybe just explain for people what extortion 17 was and um for people what extortion 17 was and um for people what extortion 17 was and um why that was so additionally impactful why that was so additionally impactful why that was so additionally impactful uh after what happened with Operation uh after what happened with Operation uh after what happened with Operation Red Wings. Red Wings. Red Wings. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, you know, we had Operation &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, you know, we had Operation &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, you know, we had Operation Red Wings that happened June 28, 2005. Red Wings that happened June 28, 2005. Red Wings that happened June 28, 2005. You had a bunch of really historic You had a bunch of really historic You had a bunch of really historic things that led up after that. You had things that led up after that. You had things that led up after that. You had the rescue of Captain Phillips in 2009. the rescue of Captain Phillips in 2009. the rescue of Captain Phillips in 2009. That was a huge milestone win. Like That was a huge milestone win. Like That was a huge milestone win. Like everybody's goal. Yeah. everybody's goal. Yeah. everybody's goal. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And they made a movie. &gt;&gt; And they made a movie. &gt;&gt; And they made a movie. &gt;&gt; They made a movie and it's great. And &gt;&gt; They made a movie and it's great. And &gt;&gt; They made a movie and it's great. And like but nobody in the teams is on like but nobody in the teams is on like but nobody in the teams is on social media. They're not on I didn't social media. They're not on I didn't social media. They're not on I didn't watch a YouTube video my entire time in watch a YouTube video my entire time in watch a YouTube video my entire time in the SEAL teams. Like what do I watch a the SEAL teams. Like what do I watch a the SEAL teams. Like what do I watch a YouTube video for? Like nobody knew how YouTube video for? Like nobody knew how YouTube video for? Like nobody knew how bad it was spinning outside of your bad it was spinning outside of your bad it was spinning outside of your control. And nobody. control. And nobody. control. And nobody. Bin Laden happens. Um, Bin Laden happens. Um, Bin Laden happens. Um, and then August 6th, 2011, we lose an and then August 6th, 2011, we lose an and then August 6th, 2011, we lose an entire troop of guys in Afghanistan. entire troop of guys in Afghanistan. entire troop of guys in Afghanistan. Hilo gets shot down, kills them all in Hilo gets shot down, kills them all in Hilo gets shot down, kills them all in an instant. Killed 31 total people. And an instant. Killed 31 total people. And an instant. Killed 31 total people. And it was like we were reliving June 28th it was like we were reliving June 28th it was like we were reliving June 28th again. But now it's double as bad. And again. But now it's double as bad. And again. But now it's double as bad. And now you truly have the best that I've now you truly have the best that I've now you truly have the best that I've ever suited up. If you look at the ever suited up. If you look at the ever suited up. If you look at the experience level they have, most of experience level they have, most of experience level they have, most of those guys were pre 911 guys. 10, 12 those guys were pre 911 guys. 10, 12 those guys were pre 911 guys. 10, 12 combat rotations gone. You'll never combat rotations gone. You'll never combat rotations gone. You'll never replace it. Never. You've never filled replace it. Never. You've never filled replace it. Never. You've never filled that void since that moment. And then that void since that moment. And then that void since that moment. And then you have all these people just hateful you have all these people just hateful you have all these people just hateful rhetoric like, "Oh, it was an inside rhetoric like, "Oh, it was an inside rhetoric like, "Oh, it was an inside job." And you know, they knew too job." And you know, they knew too job." And you know, they knew too much. They knew they were on the Bin much. They knew they were on the Bin much. They knew they were on the Bin Laden raid, so we killed them. It's Do Laden raid, so we killed them. It's Do Laden raid, so we killed them. It's Do you know how hard that is to live in you know how hard that is to live in you know how hard that is to live in Virginia Beach doing that job, seeing Virginia Beach doing that job, seeing Virginia Beach doing that job, seeing those wives at Whole Foods wearing a those wives at Whole Foods wearing a those wives at Whole Foods wearing a Memorial T-shirt, knowing you're saying Memorial T-shirt, knowing you're saying Memorial T-shirt, knowing you're saying that? Do you know what that does to a that? Do you know what that does to a that? Do you know what that does to a family? You know what that does to family? You know what that does to family? You know what that does to little kids who wake up and they read little kids who wake up and they read little kids who wake up and they read the comment section. Mom, was dad the comment section. Mom, was dad the comment section. Mom, was dad killed? Yeah. Was he killed by the killed? Yeah. Was he killed by the killed? Yeah. Was he killed by the government? That's what they read government? That's what they read government? That's what they read because that's what you're saying and because that's what you're saying and because that's what you're saying and it's not the truth. It's just not. That it's not the truth. It's just not. That it's not the truth. It's just not. That was an op that went wrong. It's a was an op that went wrong. It's a was an op that went wrong. It's a dangerous job. And when you fly in those dangerous job. And when you fly in those dangerous job. And when you fly in those big gigantic black helicopters and big gigantic black helicopters and big gigantic black helicopters and they're slow to land, you can shoot they're slow to land, you can shoot they're slow to land, you can shoot them. And that's what happened. And this them. And that's what happened. And this them. And that's what happened. And this it's as simple as that. It's a dangerous it's as simple as that. It's a dangerous it's as simple as that. It's a dangerous job. Like what are you going to do? But job. Like what are you going to do? But job. Like what are you going to do? But it is very hard to live in Virginia it is very hard to live in Virginia it is very hard to live in Virginia Beach that is so small. Everywhere you Beach that is so small. Everywhere you Beach that is so small. Everywhere you go, it's around you. I mean, you're go, it's around you. I mean, you're go, it's around you. I mean, you're sipping through black t-shirts all day sipping through black t-shirts all day sipping through black t-shirts all day long. which memorial shirt are you going long. which memorial shirt are you going long. which memorial shirt are you going to wear? It just is. And now you get to wear? It just is. And now you get to wear? It just is. And now you get there now people are starting to erode there now people are starting to erode there now people are starting to erode that from you and it really starts to that from you and it really starts to that from you and it really starts to lose your confidence. So for me now I'm lose your confidence. So for me now I'm lose your confidence. So for me now I'm married, I'm in the organization. married, I'm in the organization. married, I'm in the organization. We had to fill we had to fill a lot of We had to fill we had to fill a lot of We had to fill we had to fill a lot of those guys from other squadrons and one those guys from other squadrons and one those guys from other squadrons and one of my best friends had to go over and of my best friends had to go over and of my best friends had to go over and unfortunately he got killed in uh unfortunately he got killed in uh unfortunately he got killed in uh December 8th, 2012 on a hostage rescue. December 8th, 2012 on a hostage rescue. December 8th, 2012 on a hostage rescue. Ed buyers got the Medal of Honor for Ed buyers got the Medal of Honor for Ed buyers got the Medal of Honor for that operation. My buddy got the Navy that operation. My buddy got the Navy that operation. My buddy got the Navy Cross and you know we went to BUDS Cross and you know we went to BUDS Cross and you know we went to BUDS together. His name was Nick Czech. One together. His name was Nick Czech. One together. His name was Nick Czech. One of the greatest, most pure operators you of the greatest, most pure operators you of the greatest, most pure operators you have ever met. Came from Pennsylvania, have ever met. Came from Pennsylvania, have ever met. Came from Pennsylvania, big wrestler, always in a gym, always big wrestler, always in a gym, always big wrestler, always in a gym, always training. He he represented what the training. He he represented what the training. He he represented what the essence of being a Navy Seal was and essence of being a Navy Seal was and essence of being a Navy Seal was and everyone knew it. When he died, a piece everyone knew it. When he died, a piece everyone knew it. When he died, a piece of me died that I've never gotten back. of me died that I've never gotten back. of me died that I've never gotten back. I'm trying not to cry. I'm trying not to cry. I'm trying not to cry. The hardest thing I've ever had to do The hardest thing I've ever had to do The hardest thing I've ever had to do was look at my wife and tell her that it was look at my wife and tell her that it was look at my wife and tell her that it wasn't going to happen to me after he wasn't going to happen to me after he wasn't going to happen to me after he died because he was the true north. So died because he was the true north. So died because he was the true north. So when she looks at me and she goes, when she looks at me and she goes, when she looks at me and she goes, "Well, the reason you're away from us, "Well, the reason you're away from us, "Well, the reason you're away from us, the reason you spend 300 days on the reason you spend 300 days on the reason you spend 300 days on the road is because you're perfecting his road is because you're perfecting his road is because you're perfecting his craft because you say it buys down the craft because you say it buys down the craft because you say it buys down the risk." What about that? And you can't risk." What about that? And you can't risk." What about that? And you can't justify it. justify it. justify it. And you just look at it, you're like, "I And you just look at it, you're like, "I And you just look at it, you're like, "I just hope it's not my time. I'm just hope it's not my time. I'm just hope it's not my time. I'm just going to try to exhaust all my resources going to try to exhaust all my resources going to try to exhaust all my resources right now to put myself in the best right now to put myself in the best right now to put myself in the best position surrounded by the best people position surrounded by the best people position surrounded by the best people to buy down as much risk as humanly to buy down as much risk as humanly to buy down as much risk as humanly possible. If my numbers called, it's possible. If my numbers called, it's possible. If my numbers called, it's called. What do you want me to do? And called. What do you want me to do? And called. What do you want me to do? And that's where the compartmentalization that's where the compartmentalization that's where the compartmentalization really took hold. You have to be able to really took hold. You have to be able to really took hold. You have to be able to leave Virginia Beach, your wife, your leave Virginia Beach, your wife, your leave Virginia Beach, your wife, your two kids, and completely block them out. two kids, and completely block them out. two kids, and completely block them out. Like, I can't run through that door with Like, I can't run through that door with Like, I can't run through that door with bullets coming out of it thinking about bullets coming out of it thinking about bullets coming out of it thinking about my wife and kids and how I'm going to my wife and kids and how I'm going to my wife and kids and how I'm going to orphan them. You can't. I don't have orphan them. You can't. I don't have orphan them. You can't. I don't have pictures in my room. I'm not trying to pictures in my room. I'm not trying to pictures in my room. I'm not trying to FaceTime all the time. I'm trying to FaceTime all the time. I'm trying to FaceTime all the time. I'm trying to separate myself out so I can just do separate myself out so I can just do separate myself out so I can just do this job. And it makes you it makes you this job. And it makes you it makes you this job. And it makes you it makes you really distant. It makes you not be the really distant. It makes you not be the really distant. It makes you not be the person you want to be or the person you person you want to be or the person you person you want to be or the person you used to be because you can't. used to be because you can't. used to be because you can't. &gt;&gt; Well, you being the person you need to &gt;&gt; Well, you being the person you need to &gt;&gt; Well, you being the person you need to be in order to eventually be able to go be in order to eventually be able to go be in order to eventually be able to go back and become the person you want to back and become the person you want to back and become the person you want to be is what it sounds like to me. be is what it sounds like to me. be is what it sounds like to me. &gt;&gt; And you know, I say to the guys now, &gt;&gt; And you know, I say to the guys now, &gt;&gt; And you know, I say to the guys now, and it'll sound messed up, so forgive and it'll sound messed up, so forgive and it'll sound messed up, so forgive me, but I never chased a guy who had a me, but I never chased a guy who had a me, but I never chased a guy who had a perfect family. There was never a Navy perfect family. There was never a Navy perfect family. There was never a Navy Seal I ever wanted to emulate who had Seal I ever wanted to emulate who had Seal I ever wanted to emulate who had the picture perfect family ever. They the picture perfect family ever. They the picture perfect family ever. They were all either on their second were all either on their second were all either on their second marriage, bad relationship with their marriage, bad relationship with their marriage, bad relationship with their kids because they were so devout at work kids because they were so devout at work kids because they were so devout at work and you looked at him like that's a and you looked at him like that's a and you looked at him like that's a master class. Like it's like watching master class. Like it's like watching master class. Like it's like watching Tiger Woods drag around his golf bag. Tiger Woods drag around his golf bag. Tiger Woods drag around his golf bag. Like that's the best it's ever been Like that's the best it's ever been Like that's the best it's ever been ever. And he has no 50/50. There is no ever. And he has no 50/50. There is no ever. And he has no 50/50. There is no dial for that man. He is living this at dial for that man. He is living this at dial for that man. He is living this at 100% in the moment he retires. I really 100% in the moment he retires. I really 100% in the moment he retires. I really hope he takes all that energy, all that hope he takes all that energy, all that hope he takes all that energy, all that focus, and becomes a better husband and focus, and becomes a better husband and focus, and becomes a better husband and father, but you can't do it both ways. father, but you can't do it both ways. father, but you can't do it both ways. My mind has come to change now, My mind has come to change now, My mind has come to change now, &gt;&gt; but I've never seen it. And I most &gt;&gt; but I've never seen it. And I most &gt;&gt; but I've never seen it. And I most certainly had no balance. I wasn't even certainly had no balance. I wasn't even certainly had no balance. I wasn't even trying to find balance. I was trying to trying to find balance. I was trying to trying to find balance. I was trying to wall them off as much as humanly wall them off as much as humanly wall them off as much as humanly possible to focus on the task at hand possible to focus on the task at hand possible to focus on the task at hand because any distraction was dangerous because any distraction was dangerous because any distraction was dangerous and it's hard to do, but it was and it's hard to do, but it was and it's hard to do, but it was necessary at the time. necessary at the time. necessary at the time. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know any high performers &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know any high performers &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know any high performers especially ultra high performers and especially ultra high performers and especially ultra high performers and especially ultra high especially ultra high especially ultra high performers in high-risisk high performers in high-risisk high performers in high-risisk high consequence careers uh that don't have consequence careers uh that don't have consequence careers uh that don't have some unresolved some unresolved some unresolved dark aspect of themselves or their life dark aspect of themselves or their life dark aspect of themselves or their life or something that I mean you mentioned or something that I mean you mentioned or something that I mean you mentioned Tiger you know it's public knowledge he Tiger you know it's public knowledge he Tiger you know it's public knowledge he had issues outside of his golf game and had issues outside of his golf game and had issues outside of his golf game and &gt;&gt; it sounds like he's resolved those I &gt;&gt; it sounds like he's resolved those I &gt;&gt; it sounds like he's resolved those I think he got married again recently and think he got married again recently and think he got married again recently and you know I think everyone should wish you know I think everyone should wish you know I think everyone should wish him the best and them the best you know him the best and them the best you know him the best and them the best you know it's like it's like it's like &gt;&gt; you know especially in the United States &gt;&gt; you know especially in the United States &gt;&gt; you know especially in the United States We hold people up um and We hold people up um and We hold people up um and we expect perfection from our so-called we expect perfection from our so-called we expect perfection from our so-called heroes historically as well as ones that heroes historically as well as ones that heroes historically as well as ones that are alive and um perfection doesn't are alive and um perfection doesn't are alive and um perfection doesn't exist right because so much of what's exist right because so much of what's exist right because so much of what's required from high performance is um required from high performance is um required from high performance is um total focus total compartmentalization total focus total compartmentalization total focus total compartmentalization and that being a human being is a lot and that being a human being is a lot and that being a human being is a lot more uh complicated than that um it's more uh complicated than that um it's more uh complicated than that um it's something I think to keep in mind I also something I think to keep in mind I also something I think to keep in mind I also just want to uh just briefly double just want to uh just briefly double just want to uh just briefly double click on this thing about comments. click on this thing about comments. click on this thing about comments. You know, I'm not going to tell people You know, I'm not going to tell people You know, I'm not going to tell people to stop saying mean stuff about me if to stop saying mean stuff about me if to stop saying mean stuff about me if they want to or mean stuff about they want to or mean stuff about they want to or mean stuff about somebody. They're going to do it anyway. somebody. They're going to do it anyway. somebody. They're going to do it anyway. Um it's not the issue. But when it Um it's not the issue. But when it Um it's not the issue. But when it comes to kids reading about their dead comes to kids reading about their dead comes to kids reading about their dead parents, their dead dads in this case, parents, their dead dads in this case, parents, their dead dads in this case, um and last week we had a, you know, public and last week we had a, you know, public and last week we had a, you know, public assassination. there's a dead dad and people making up there's a dead dad and people making up there's a dead dad and people making up theories and um coming up with ideas theories and um coming up with ideas theories and um coming up with ideas that they somehow know things that other that they somehow know things that other that they somehow know things that other people don't know. Um and sometimes people don't know. Um and sometimes people don't know. Um and sometimes these people have a professional these people have a professional these people have a professional background in politics or in the background in politics or in the background in politics or in the military or in uh law enforcement and it military or in uh law enforcement and it military or in uh law enforcement and it adds additional weight to these adds additional weight to these adds additional weight to these theories. But the repercussions on theories. But the repercussions on theories. But the repercussions on the on the kids and family and the on the kids and family and the on the kids and family and the legacy is it's uh it's really bad. It's legacy is it's uh it's really bad. It's legacy is it's uh it's really bad. It's really bad. It's a shame there isn't a really bad. It's a shame there isn't a really bad. It's a shame there isn't a thicker filter. I'm all for free speech. thicker filter. I'm all for free speech. thicker filter. I'm all for free speech. Um 100% for free speech, but um there's Um 100% for free speech, but um there's Um 100% for free speech, but um there's a lot of damage done with those a lot of damage done with those a lot of damage done with those thumb clicks that I don't think people thumb clicks that I don't think people thumb clicks that I don't think people can really comprehend. So I'm glad you can really comprehend. So I'm glad you can really comprehend. So I'm glad you pointed that out. you pointed that out. you pointed that out. &gt;&gt; I mean Yeah. I mean, just imagine it &gt;&gt; I mean Yeah. I mean, just imagine it &gt;&gt; I mean Yeah. I mean, just imagine it like you're a 14-year-old kid and you've like you're a 14-year-old kid and you've like you're a 14-year-old kid and you've grown up worshiping your father and he grown up worshiping your father and he grown up worshiping your father and he gets killed in Afghanistan and you see a gets killed in Afghanistan and you see a gets killed in Afghanistan and you see a post about him. You start to read down post about him. You start to read down post about him. You start to read down like he was killed by his government by like he was killed by his government by like he was killed by his government by this and this and like this and this and like this and this and like &gt;&gt; mom it raises doubt &gt;&gt; mom it raises doubt &gt;&gt; mom it raises doubt &gt;&gt; and then that little seed of doubt is &gt;&gt; and then that little seed of doubt is &gt;&gt; and then that little seed of doubt is going to be with him forever. It's like going to be with him forever. It's like going to be with him forever. It's like it takes the entire collective to like it takes the entire collective to like it takes the entire collective to like listen to me. They they've never even listen to me. They they've never even listen to me. They they've never even met a Navy Seal dude. That's some kid in met a Navy Seal dude. That's some kid in met a Navy Seal dude. That's some kid in the middle of nowhere who's typing his the middle of nowhere who's typing his the middle of nowhere who's typing his mother's basement who's just writing mother's basement who's just writing mother's basement who's just writing some hateful stuff. It's not real. It's some hateful stuff. It's not real. It's some hateful stuff. It's not real. It's hard to block it out when there's 500 of hard to block it out when there's 500 of hard to block it out when there's 500 of them &gt;&gt; or guys that were in the military that &gt;&gt; or guys that were in the military that &gt;&gt; or guys that were in the military that didn't make it through selection. didn't make it through selection. didn't make it through selection. they're pissed or um have some they're pissed or um have some they're pissed or um have some resentment for some guy that was jacked resentment for some guy that was jacked resentment for some guy that was jacked in high school who said something and in high school who said something and in high school who said something and they didn't get the date or you know they didn't get the date or you know they didn't get the date or you know &gt;&gt; I mean it's like resent is like a the &gt;&gt; I mean it's like resent is like a the &gt;&gt; I mean it's like resent is like a the ego and resent are a bitter combination ego and resent are a bitter combination ego and resent are a bitter combination last you know can last a lifetime last you know can last a lifetime last you know can last a lifetime &gt;&gt; negative comments many times are &gt;&gt; negative comments many times are &gt;&gt; negative comments many times are irrelevant but in this context uh have a irrelevant but in this context uh have a irrelevant but in this context uh have a potential lasting very um corrosive potential lasting very um corrosive potential lasting very um corrosive aspect &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function acknowledge one of our sponsors function acknowledge one of our sponsors function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. So, to get early access to Function. So, to get early access to Function. So, you're opting, you're opting, you're opting, guys are dying, you now have a family, guys are dying, you now have a family, guys are dying, you now have a family, &gt;&gt; and it's in your family lineage to do &gt;&gt; and it's in your family lineage to do &gt;&gt; and it's in your family lineage to do this job. Um, this job. Um, this job. Um, I'm curious, you know, was the fact that I'm curious, you know, was the fact that I'm curious, you know, was the fact that your dad was a team guy, did that feel your dad was a team guy, did that feel your dad was a team guy, did that feel like pressure or did it feel like pressure or did it feel like pressure or did it feel like buoyancy or neither? buoyancy or neither? buoyancy or neither? &gt;&gt; It felt normal. &gt;&gt; It felt normal. &gt;&gt; It felt normal. &gt;&gt; Did you feel like you had to outdo him? &gt;&gt; Did you feel like you had to outdo him? &gt;&gt; Did you feel like you had to outdo him? And I would ask that of anyone, military And I would ask that of anyone, military And I would ask that of anyone, military or not, there's this notion Well, let me or not, there's this notion Well, let me or not, there's this notion Well, let me just briefly back up. A friend recently, just briefly back up. A friend recently, just briefly back up. A friend recently, we were talking about kids and family we were talking about kids and family we were talking about kids and family and building family. And uh and he said, and building family. And uh and he said, and building family. And uh and he said, "Uh, you don't want a son. You got "Uh, you don't want a son. You got "Uh, you don't want a son. You got daughters. He has all daughters." I go, daughters. He has all daughters." I go, daughters. He has all daughters." I go, "No, you know, I think I'd like, you "No, you know, I think I'd like, you "No, you know, I think I'd like, you know, want to be her, but who cares? I'd know, want to be her, but who cares? I'd know, want to be her, but who cares? I'd have daughters. I have sons. You know, I have daughters. I have sons. You know, I have daughters. I have sons. You know, I don't care." And he said, "No, cuz if don't care." And he said, "No, cuz if don't care." And he said, "No, cuz if you have a son, he's going to he's going you have a son, he's going to he's going you have a son, he's going to he's going to try and be better than you and then to try and be better than you and then to try and be better than you and then you're going to be in conflict." And I you're going to be in conflict." And I you're going to be in conflict." And I was thinking, I almost said, "No." And was thinking, I almost said, "No." And was thinking, I almost said, "No." And then I was like, "My dad's a scientist." then I was like, "My dad's a scientist." then I was like, "My dad's a scientist." And so I was like, "There's a point in And so I was like, "There's a point in And so I was like, "There's a point in your life where you go, can I fill those your life where you go, can I fill those your life where you go, can I fill those shoes? Can I exceed those shoes?" cuz shoes? Can I exceed those shoes?" cuz shoes? Can I exceed those shoes?" cuz it's natural human son to father it's natural human son to father it's natural human son to father behavior I think. behavior I think. behavior I think. &gt;&gt; And so was there ever a moment where &gt;&gt; And so was there ever a moment where &gt;&gt; And so was there ever a moment where you're like I got to I got to exceed or you're like I got to I got to exceed or you're like I got to I got to exceed or um or just or was it irrelevant? um or just or was it irrelevant? um or just or was it irrelevant? &gt;&gt; I think it was irrelevant but just &gt;&gt; I think it was irrelevant but just &gt;&gt; I think it was irrelevant but just because the timing you came in you know because the timing you came in you know because the timing you came in you know spent his entire time at peace time. spent his entire time at peace time. spent his entire time at peace time. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I did nothing but combat the entire &gt;&gt; I did nothing but combat the entire &gt;&gt; I did nothing but combat the entire time. a lot of deployments back and back a lot of deployments back and back a lot of deployments back and back never took a shore duty station just by never took a shore duty station just by never took a shore duty station just by that amount of experience you already that amount of experience you already that amount of experience you already surpassed it but it doesn't need to be surpassed it but it doesn't need to be surpassed it but it doesn't need to be said &gt;&gt; why not leave guys your one of your &gt;&gt; why not leave guys your one of your &gt;&gt; why not leave guys your one of your closest mentors and friends gets killed closest mentors and friends gets killed closest mentors and friends gets killed &gt;&gt; I mean the retirement plan I'm guessing &gt;&gt; I mean the retirement plan I'm guessing &gt;&gt; I mean the retirement plan I'm guessing is pretty good but it's not that awesome is pretty good but it's not that awesome is pretty good but it's not that awesome that's a plug for the military to that's a plug for the military to that's a plug for the military to increase the retirement salaries and you increase the retirement salaries and you increase the retirement salaries and you get some medical care right you know get some medical care right you know get some medical care right you know some things come to your family for some things come to your family for some things come to your family for staying in 20 years, I think it is. Um, staying in 20 years, I think it is. Um, staying in 20 years, I think it is. Um, but did the thought ever cross your mind but did the thought ever cross your mind but did the thought ever cross your mind like, "Hey, guys are dropping off and like, "Hey, guys are dropping off and like, "Hey, guys are dropping off and you're right in the center of it." Um, you're right in the center of it." Um, you're right in the center of it." Um, maybe leave. maybe leave. maybe leave. Not for a moment. Not for a moment. Not for a moment. &gt;&gt; I should have known that wasn't going &gt;&gt; I should have known that wasn't going &gt;&gt; I should have known that wasn't going to be the answer. At that time it's so different because a At that time it's so different because a At that time it's so different because a lot of people think about special lot of people think about special lot of people think about special operations in the global war on terror operations in the global war on terror operations in the global war on terror is the Marines pushing through Fallujah is the Marines pushing through Fallujah is the Marines pushing through Fallujah broad daylight just getting smashed. broad daylight just getting smashed. broad daylight just getting smashed. Those are the bravest dudes that serve Those are the bravest dudes that serve Those are the bravest dudes that serve during the GWAP. Like there's there is during the GWAP. Like there's there is during the GWAP. Like there's there is nothing more impressive than a nothing more impressive than a nothing more impressive than a 19-year-old Marine and the things 19-year-old Marine and the things 19-year-old Marine and the things they'll do. Like they just are like they'll do. Like they just are like they'll do. Like they just are like they're heroes of mine. My experience in they're heroes of mine. My experience in they're heroes of mine. My experience in a GWAP was very different. a GWAP was very different. a GWAP was very different. It's always at night. It's always, you It's always at night. It's always, you It's always at night. It's always, you know, select targets. It's not like know, select targets. It's not like know, select targets. It's not like they're like, "Hey, you and your team they're like, "Hey, you and your team they're like, "Hey, you and your team are going to go raid this village." No, are going to go raid this village." No, are going to go raid this village." No, we're going for a very, very specific we're going for a very, very specific we're going for a very, very specific person. And then when you look at it, person. And then when you look at it, person. And then when you look at it, Hingway said it best. Once you've hunted Hingway said it best. Once you've hunted Hingway said it best. Once you've hunted our men long enough and liked it, you'll our men long enough and liked it, you'll our men long enough and liked it, you'll never care for anything else thereafter. never care for anything else thereafter. never care for anything else thereafter. There is nothing like hunting a human There is nothing like hunting a human There is nothing like hunting a human being who's hunting you. Nothing. And being who's hunting you. Nothing. And being who's hunting you. Nothing. And you are so afraid you're going to miss you are so afraid you're going to miss you are so afraid you're going to miss it. So that's why you hide injuries. You it. So that's why you hide injuries. You it. So that's why you hide injuries. You don't get surgery. you do everything you don't get surgery. you do everything you don't get surgery. you do everything you can to put yourself in position to be on can to put yourself in position to be on can to put yourself in position to be on the op to not miss the deployment and I the op to not miss the deployment and I the op to not miss the deployment and I think that's what it is in the essence think that's what it is in the essence think that's what it is in the essence is you know you have all the intel folks you know you have all the intel folks you know you have all the intel folks and all the technology that are giving and all the technology that are giving and all the technology that are giving you this one thing and you just stare at you this one thing and you just stare at you this one thing and you just stare at them I know everything about you where them I know everything about you where them I know everything about you where you live your secondary house everybody you live your secondary house everybody you live your secondary house everybody you talk to you right-handed left-handed you talk to you right-handed left-handed you talk to you right-handed left-handed how many windows how many doors the how many windows how many doors the how many windows how many doors the inward opening outward openings there inward opening outward openings there inward opening outward openings there storm doors what's the windows made I storm doors what's the windows made I storm doors what's the windows made I know everything about you and then we know everything about you and then we know everything about you and then we know exactly when we're going to go get know exactly when we're going to go get know exactly when we're going to go get you. We know you're bad. We know you. We know you're bad. We know you. We know you're bad. We know everything you've done. I know everything you've done. I know everything you've done. I know everything you've said on that phone for everything you've said on that phone for everything you've said on that phone for the last 6 months. I know everything the last 6 months. I know everything the last 6 months. I know everything there is to know about you and we are there is to know about you and we are there is to know about you and we are coming to get you. And when you're coming to get you. And when you're coming to get you. And when you're successful, it becomes addictive and you successful, it becomes addictive and you successful, it becomes addictive and you just keep chasing that feeling like I am just keep chasing that feeling like I am just keep chasing that feeling like I am pulling these people off the earth and pulling these people off the earth and pulling these people off the earth and it makes a difference. I'm not just not it makes a difference. I'm not just not it makes a difference. I'm not just not carpet bombing anything. Like that one carpet bombing anything. Like that one carpet bombing anything. Like that one singular dude has done all of this. We singular dude has done all of this. We singular dude has done all of this. We have to remove him. Let's go. And it have to remove him. Let's go. And it have to remove him. Let's go. And it makes you feel like you're important. It makes you feel like you're important. It makes you feel like you're important. It makes you feel like people actually need makes you feel like people actually need makes you feel like people actually need you and you chase it for as long as you and you chase it for as long as you and you chase it for as long as possible. And my buddy Jimmy Hatch wrote possible. And my buddy Jimmy Hatch wrote possible. And my buddy Jimmy Hatch wrote a book called Chasing a Dragon. And a book called Chasing a Dragon. And a book called Chasing a Dragon. And that's what it's like. You chase them that's what it's like. You chase them that's what it's like. You chase them long enough, you'll find them. And you long enough, you'll find them. And you long enough, you'll find them. And you don't want to jump off that train. don't want to jump off that train. don't want to jump off that train. You're so afraid in the teams and You're so afraid in the teams and You're so afraid in the teams and special oper. The military does a really special oper. The military does a really special oper. The military does a really good job good job good job of painting a narrative that if you of painting a narrative that if you of painting a narrative that if you leave this, your life is over. There's leave this, your life is over. There's leave this, your life is over. There's nothing that's going to surpass us. The nothing that's going to surpass us. The nothing that's going to surpass us. The SEAL teams are the only thing you know SEAL teams are the only thing you know SEAL teams are the only thing you know how to do and it's the only thing you'll how to do and it's the only thing you'll how to do and it's the only thing you'll ever feel at home. And it's the truth. ever feel at home. And it's the truth. ever feel at home. And it's the truth. You get guys that get out and they go You get guys that get out and they go You get guys that get out and they go work at Goldman Sachs and they do this work at Goldman Sachs and they do this work at Goldman Sachs and they do this and you do that. If you really get a and you do that. If you really get a and you do that. If you really get a couple beers and you sit down, they're couple beers and you sit down, they're couple beers and you sit down, they're miserable. They miss it. Even all the miserable. They miss it. Even all the miserable. They miss it. Even all the stuff you didn't like, the things you stuff you didn't like, the things you stuff you didn't like, the things you hated about the military and the people hated about the military and the people hated about the military and the people you hated working for at the end of the you hated working for at the end of the you hated working for at the end of the you don't remember any of that. You only you don't remember any of that. You only you don't remember any of that. You only remember the good times. And because you remember the good times. And because you remember the good times. And because you had, you know, the entire time at war, had, you know, the entire time at war, had, you know, the entire time at war, the whole aspect, the whole career was the whole aspect, the whole career was the whole aspect, the whole career was just amazing. You know, standing on the just amazing. You know, standing on the just amazing. You know, standing on the shoulders of giants. shoulders of giants. shoulders of giants. I have got to work with people that are I have got to work with people that are I have got to work with people that are the greatest thing you'll never get to the greatest thing you'll never get to the greatest thing you'll never get to see. Like there's 12 people on the see. Like there's 12 people on the see. Like there's 12 people on the planet that were there that saw that planet that were there that saw that planet that were there that saw that thing and we won't even address it thing and we won't even address it thing and we won't even address it because it's not cool if you because it's not cool if you because it's not cool if you address it. I cannot believe you just address it. I cannot believe you just address it. I cannot believe you just pulled that off. That's the most pulled that off. That's the most pulled that off. That's the most impressive thing I've ever seen in my impressive thing I've ever seen in my impressive thing I've ever seen in my life. and you don't even you don't even life. and you don't even you don't even life. and you don't even you don't even talk about it. Like the regular people talk about it. Like the regular people talk about it. Like the regular people never get to see the level of detail never get to see the level of detail never get to see the level of detail that goes into doing that job. They see that goes into doing that job. They see that goes into doing that job. They see it on a flat range shoot or whatever and it on a flat range shoot or whatever and it on a flat range shoot or whatever and they're like, "Oh, I can do that." But they're like, "Oh, I can do that." But they're like, "Oh, I can do that." But you can't jump out at 35,000 ft at night you can't jump out at 35,000 ft at night you can't jump out at 35,000 ft at night into a place you've never seen and been into a place you've never seen and been into a place you've never seen and been do it. But you can't do that. Like do it. But you can't do that. Like do it. But you can't do that. Like do you know how hard it is to put yourself you know how hard it is to put yourself you know how hard it is to put yourself in a position to do that operation? Like in a position to do that operation? Like in a position to do that operation? Like they have no idea. they have no idea. they have no idea. &gt;&gt; And they're shooting back at you. &gt;&gt; And they're shooting back at you. &gt;&gt; And they're shooting back at you. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; There's that there's that piece. Yeah, &gt;&gt; There's that there's that piece. Yeah, &gt;&gt; There's that there's that piece. Yeah, the targets don't the targets on a the targets don't the targets on a the targets don't the targets on a flat range. Don't shoot back. flat range. Don't shoot back. flat range. Don't shoot back. &gt;&gt; Yeah, right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, right. &gt;&gt; This is two-way range. This isn't &gt;&gt; This is two-way range. This isn't &gt;&gt; This is two-way range. This isn't airsoft. It's not Call of Duty. Like, airsoft. It's not Call of Duty. Like, airsoft. It's not Call of Duty. Like, there's real people. That dude has five there's real people. That dude has five there's real people. That dude has five kids and he's going through that kids and he's going through that kids and he's going through that threshold regardless of what's coming threshold regardless of what's coming threshold regardless of what's coming out of him without a second thought. out of him without a second thought. out of him without a second thought. It's amazing to see. And you know, I It's amazing to see. And you know, I It's amazing to see. And you know, I said it to a group of guys the other day said it to a group of guys the other day said it to a group of guys the other day and you know, when the tower fell, and you know, when the tower fell, and you know, when the tower fell, I've never felt more patriotic in my I've never felt more patriotic in my I've never felt more patriotic in my life. In those moments, you never think about In those moments, you never think about In those moments, you never think about the flag. You never think about the flag. You never think about the flag. You never think about the American people. You never think about American people. You never think about American people. You never think about that. You think you do it for the that. You think you do it for the that. You think you do it for the country. You really do it and you stay country. You really do it and you stay country. You really do it and you stay doing it for the culture. The culture of doing it for the culture. The culture of doing it for the culture. The culture of the SEAL teams was worth every ounce you the SEAL teams was worth every ounce you the SEAL teams was worth every ounce you had to pay for it. And it's every other had to pay for it. And it's every other had to pay for it. And it's every other group will tell you the exact same group will tell you the exact same group will tell you the exact same thing. Like the culture is what keeps thing. Like the culture is what keeps thing. Like the culture is what keeps you there. You're so afraid to leave it you there. You're so afraid to leave it you there. You're so afraid to leave it because you know you're never going to because you know you're never going to because you know you're never going to find it anywhere else. And I was the find it anywhere else. And I was the find it anywhere else. And I was the same way. I mean, when me and my old same way. I mean, when me and my old same way. I mean, when me and my old lady were going through our worst lady were going through our worst lady were going through our worst moments, I told her like, "If you don't moments, I told her like, "If you don't moments, I told her like, "If you don't like the train, jump. I'm not stopping like the train, jump. I'm not stopping like the train, jump. I'm not stopping for you. I'm not." And that's why I was for you. I'm not." And that's why I was for you. I'm not." And that's why I was really concerned when we first got really concerned when we first got really concerned when we first got together because she was married to together because she was married to together because she was married to Danny Deeds was on Operation Red Wings Danny Deeds was on Operation Red Wings Danny Deeds was on Operation Red Wings on the ground. Her dad was a SEAL. I on the ground. Her dad was a SEAL. I on the ground. Her dad was a SEAL. I mean, we were we're embedded in this mean, we were we're embedded in this mean, we were we're embedded in this thing. &gt;&gt; You guys have both came up in it. Wow. &gt;&gt; You guys have both came up in it. Wow. &gt;&gt; You guys have both came up in it. Wow. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Man, like we're embedded in &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Man, like we're embedded in &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Man, like we're embedded in this. And you know, I met her 3 years this. And you know, I met her 3 years this. And you know, I met her 3 years after Danny passed. I didn't know Danny. after Danny passed. I didn't know Danny. after Danny passed. I didn't know Danny. I didn't know her. Mutual friends. We I didn't know her. Mutual friends. We I didn't know her. Mutual friends. We connected around 2008 9. And I told him connected around 2008 9. And I told him connected around 2008 9. And I told him we first I fell in love with her we first I fell in love with her we first I fell in love with her instantly. And it scared me because I instantly. And it scared me because I instantly. And it scared me because I was getting ready to screen and try to was getting ready to screen and try to was getting ready to screen and try to go with the tier one command. And the go with the tier one command. And the go with the tier one command. And the pace was so fast and I was so the pace was so fast and I was so the pace was so fast and I was so worried that she'd look at me one day worried that she'd look at me one day worried that she'd look at me one day and go, I can't do this again. And I and go, I can't do this again. And I and go, I can't do this again. And I wasn't going to leave it for her. And I wasn't going to leave it for her. And I wasn't going to leave it for her. And I told her that don't ever ask me to leave told her that don't ever ask me to leave told her that don't ever ask me to leave cuz I won't. Like if you don't want to cuz I won't. Like if you don't want to cuz I won't. Like if you don't want to do this, I get it. Like we can be best do this, I get it. Like we can be best do this, I get it. Like we can be best friends. We can do whatever, but I'm not friends. We can do whatever, but I'm not friends. We can do whatever, but I'm not leaving this for you. And that was one leaving this for you. And that was one leaving this for you. And that was one of the hardest things I've ever had to of the hardest things I've ever had to of the hardest things I've ever had to do. And for whatever reason, she's a do. And for whatever reason, she's a do. And for whatever reason, she's a unicorn. She has been the quintessential unicorn. She has been the quintessential unicorn. She has been the quintessential team wife above and beyond. Every team wife above and beyond. Every team wife above and beyond. Every deployment, full steam ahead, hot water deployment, full steam ahead, hot water deployment, full steam ahead, hot water heater blows up, tree falls to the heater blows up, tree falls to the heater blows up, tree falls to the minivan, she doesn't even tell me, she minivan, she doesn't even tell me, she minivan, she doesn't even tell me, she just solves it. She's amazing. just solves it. She's amazing. just solves it. She's amazing. And I still blocked her out like I did And I still blocked her out like I did And I still blocked her out like I did everything else because I still thought everything else because I still thought everything else because I still thought that my love for her was a distraction. that my love for her was a distraction. that my love for her was a distraction. And like those are the times I look back And like those are the times I look back And like those are the times I look back on and I regret. But in the moment, I on and I regret. But in the moment, I on and I regret. But in the moment, I don't think I'd change it. I don't think don't think I'd change it. I don't think don't think I'd change it. I don't think I could. I don't think I could do that I could. I don't think I could do that I could. I don't think I could do that job at the level that was required to do job at the level that was required to do job at the level that was required to do it and have that love, it and have that love, it and have that love, you know, hanging around my neck. I you know, hanging around my neck. I you know, hanging around my neck. I couldn't do it. It all ended up working couldn't do it. It all ended up working couldn't do it. It all ended up working out in the wash, but it was u it's hard, out in the wash, but it was u it's hard, out in the wash, but it was u it's hard, man. It's hard to sit there and just man. It's hard to sit there and just man. It's hard to sit there and just wait for your number to get called and wait for your number to get called and wait for your number to get called and just hope it doesn't. just hope it doesn't. just hope it doesn't. I mean, the best dudes in the world are I mean, the best dudes in the world are I mean, the best dudes in the world are getting killed. And you can't just It's getting killed. And you can't just It's getting killed. And you can't just It's not lack of training. It's not lack of not lack of training. It's not lack of not lack of training. It's not lack of funding. It's not lack of experience. funding. It's not lack of experience. funding. It's not lack of experience. It's not lack of commitment. What is it? It's not lack of commitment. What is it? It's not lack of commitment. What is it? It's a dangerous job, man. That's what It's a dangerous job, man. That's what It's a dangerous job, man. That's what it is. It's a super dangerous job and it is. It's a super dangerous job and it is. It's a super dangerous job and people are trying to kill you all day people are trying to kill you all day people are trying to kill you all day long. You just hope that you're better long. You just hope that you're better long. You just hope that you're better than they are. But some days it happens than they are. But some days it happens than they are. But some days it happens regardless. And it's hard. It's hard regardless. And it's hard. It's hard regardless. And it's hard. It's hard putting guys in the ground, especially putting guys in the ground, especially putting guys in the ground, especially when you've grown up with them your when you've grown up with them your when you've grown up with them your whole life. You definitely picked the whole life. You definitely picked the whole life. You definitely picked the right woman. I lassued a unicorn. I right woman. I lassued a unicorn. I right woman. I lassued a unicorn. I did. She unbelievable. did. She unbelievable. did. She unbelievable. &gt;&gt; I have a good friend. He uh cuz I know &gt;&gt; I have a good friend. He uh cuz I know &gt;&gt; I have a good friend. He uh cuz I know you've got daughters and uh and he said you've got daughters and uh and he said you've got daughters and uh and he said um you want to marry a woman that were um you want to marry a woman that were um you want to marry a woman that were you to have daughters you to have daughters you to have daughters &gt;&gt; with her that you'd be very happy if &gt;&gt; with her that you'd be very happy if &gt;&gt; with her that you'd be very happy if they turned out like her. they turned out like her. they turned out like her. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Which is one of the best pieces of &gt;&gt; Which is one of the best pieces of &gt;&gt; Which is one of the best pieces of advice that I didn't hear until fairly advice that I didn't hear until fairly advice that I didn't hear until fairly recently. And the moment I heard it, I recently. And the moment I heard it, I recently. And the moment I heard it, I was like, "Wow, that's really good." You was like, "Wow, that's really good." You was like, "Wow, that's really good." You know, they don't tell us that in high know, they don't tell us that in high know, they don't tell us that in high school. &gt;&gt; No, they don't. No, they don't. But but &gt;&gt; No, they don't. No, they don't. But but &gt;&gt; No, they don't. No, they don't. But but uh clearly you bullseyed on that one. uh clearly you bullseyed on that one. uh clearly you bullseyed on that one. &gt;&gt; So you're opting, you're alive, guys are &gt;&gt; So you're opting, you're alive, guys are &gt;&gt; So you're opting, you're alive, guys are dying, you got a family, and it sounds dying, you got a family, and it sounds dying, you got a family, and it sounds like you love it, too. You're you're like you love it, too. You're you're like you love it, too. You're you're loving the work. loving the work. loving the work. &gt;&gt; Um which is so key, right? I don't cuz &gt;&gt; Um which is so key, right? I don't cuz &gt;&gt; Um which is so key, right? I don't cuz in moments of stress and you know, I in moments of stress and you know, I in moments of stress and you know, I mean, the all the other stuff that's mean, the all the other stuff that's mean, the all the other stuff that's clearly important, love a country, clearly important, love a country, clearly important, love a country, flags, and all that stuff, it sounds flags, and all that stuff, it sounds flags, and all that stuff, it sounds like it's necessary, but it's not like it's necessary, but it's not like it's necessary, but it's not sufficient in those moments. the sufficient in those moments. the sufficient in those moments. the culture is really the glue. culture is really the glue. culture is really the glue. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um then you start incurring some damage. then you start incurring some damage. then you start incurring some damage. &gt;&gt; I mean uh so what do you see in your &gt;&gt; I mean uh so what do you see in your &gt;&gt; I mean uh so what do you see in your mind as kind of the first uh high impact mind as kind of the first uh high impact mind as kind of the first uh high impact event that's not someone else dying? event that's not someone else dying? event that's not someone else dying? &gt;&gt; Um like that your that your body is &gt;&gt; Um like that your that your body is &gt;&gt; Um like that your that your body is starting to take a toll. starting to take a toll. starting to take a toll. &gt;&gt; I had a lot of emotional stuff happen to &gt;&gt; I had a lot of emotional stuff happen to &gt;&gt; I had a lot of emotional stuff happen to me in that second deployment. you know, me in that second deployment. you know, me in that second deployment. you know, my idol, Mattie Roberts. I've talked my idol, Mattie Roberts. I've talked my idol, Mattie Roberts. I've talked about him a couple times. I really about him a couple times. I really about him a couple times. I really hung on to that dude. Like, he really hung on to that dude. Like, he really hung on to that dude. Like, he was my true north. Like, he was the guy. was my true north. Like, he was the guy. was my true north. Like, he was the guy. And when he got shot up, And when he got shot up, And when he got shot up, when you see it happen, you know, his when you see it happen, you know, his when you see it happen, you know, his arm shot off, it flipped around his arm shot off, it flipped around his arm shot off, it flipped around his shoulder. It looked like his arm was shoulder. It looked like his arm was shoulder. It looked like his arm was completely gone. My fingers are inside completely gone. My fingers are inside completely gone. My fingers are inside his arm. We're trying to solve this his arm. We're trying to solve this his arm. We're trying to solve this thing. They're shooting at us from thing. They're shooting at us from thing. They're shooting at us from really, really close proximity. And I really, really close proximity. And I really, really close proximity. And I think it still has the record. I'd have think it still has the record. I'd have think it still has the record. I'd have to ask Jay Redmond, but I think that was to ask Jay Redmond, but I think that was to ask Jay Redmond, but I think that was the uh the closest call for fire mission the uh the closest call for fire mission the uh the closest call for fire mission the entire Iraq war the entire Iraq war the entire Iraq war like inside a 15 m. I mean Cory Mike like inside a 15 m. I mean Cory Mike like inside a 15 m. I mean Cory Mike AC130 gunship. I mean it was on top of AC130 gunship. I mean it was on top of AC130 gunship. I mean it was on top of you a bellfed machine gun just chewing you a bellfed machine gun just chewing you a bellfed machine gun just chewing us up. Everybody shot up except for me us up. Everybody shot up except for me us up. Everybody shot up except for me and one other guy and we're all crowded and one other guy and we're all crowded and one other guy and we're all crowded behind this tractor tire just you felt behind this tractor tire just you felt behind this tractor tire just you felt like a victim and it at one point right like a victim and it at one point right like a victim and it at one point right when the initial contact happened I when the initial contact happened I when the initial contact happened I sprinted to a tree and got a piece of sprinted to a tree and got a piece of sprinted to a tree and got a piece of cover. So there's me, three guys that cover. So there's me, three guys that cover. So there's me, three guys that are all shot up and one other guy who's are all shot up and one other guy who's are all shot up and one other guy who's behind this tractor tire. And I'm behind this tractor tire. And I'm behind this tractor tire. And I'm screaming at him like, "Hey, I've got an screaming at him like, "Hey, I've got an screaming at him like, "Hey, I've got an out. Come over here." And he screams out out. Come over here." And he screams out out. Come over here." And he screams out in Blackhawk down like, "Nope, come to in Blackhawk down like, "Nope, come to in Blackhawk down like, "Nope, come to me." And you're looking back at it. You me." And you're looking back at it. You me." And you're looking back at it. You can see all the muzzle flash. And just can see all the muzzle flash. And just can see all the muzzle flash. And just the way it happened, you had blue forces the way it happened, you had blue forces the way it happened, you had blue forces or friendlies that were in behind him. or friendlies that were in behind him. or friendlies that were in behind him. So you couldn't shoot into this veg line So you couldn't shoot into this veg line So you couldn't shoot into this veg line because you knew there were friendlies because you knew there were friendlies because you knew there were friendlies who were back there. who were back there. who were back there. &gt;&gt; So you're in this weird dance where &gt;&gt; So you're in this weird dance where &gt;&gt; So you're in this weird dance where I can't do anything. Like I felt I can't do anything. Like I felt I can't do anything. Like I felt helpless. You know, I'm getting rounds helpless. You know, I'm getting rounds helpless. You know, I'm getting rounds poured all over me. And at a certain poured all over me. And at a certain poured all over me. And at a certain point, you just go, I'd rather run back point, you just go, I'd rather run back point, you just go, I'd rather run back into the front of this thing and get into the front of this thing and get into the front of this thing and get killed with all of them than be the lone killed with all of them than be the lone killed with all of them than be the lone survivor. I don't want to walk through survivor. I don't want to walk through survivor. I don't want to walk through this. I don't want to live with this this. I don't want to live with this this. I don't want to live with this survivor's guilt. I'd rather just run survivor's guilt. I'd rather just run survivor's guilt. I'd rather just run back up and let's just catch it and be back up and let's just catch it and be back up and let's just catch it and be done with it. And I ran right back into done with it. And I ran right back into done with it. And I ran right back into the center of it and dropped down behind the center of it and dropped down behind the center of it and dropped down behind that tire and started working all the that tire and started working all the that tire and started working all the guys back and, you know, putting on guys back and, you know, putting on guys back and, you know, putting on tourniquets and quick clot and, you tourniquets and quick clot and, you tourniquets and quick clot and, you know, all the stuff. When I came back know, all the stuff. When I came back know, all the stuff. When I came back from that, I was mentally scarred for from that, I was mentally scarred for from that, I was mentally scarred for the rest of my life and I just never the rest of my life and I just never the rest of my life and I just never ever processed it. I just blocked it off ever processed it. I just blocked it off ever processed it. I just blocked it off because it was so close. because it was so close. because it was so close. &gt;&gt; I think because it was the first time I &gt;&gt; I think because it was the first time I &gt;&gt; I think because it was the first time I felt helpless, like I was just waiting felt helpless, like I was just waiting felt helpless, like I was just waiting to die, right? Like the guy that I to die, right? Like the guy that I to die, right? Like the guy that I looked up that I wanted to be like, like looked up that I wanted to be like, like looked up that I wanted to be like, like he was the physical representation of he was the physical representation of he was the physical representation of what I thought the essence of being a what I thought the essence of being a what I thought the essence of being a Navy Seal was. And he's dying in my arms Navy Seal was. And he's dying in my arms Navy Seal was. And he's dying in my arms and I can't shoot back. I mean, we're and I can't shoot back. I mean, we're and I can't shoot back. I mean, we're hunkered down in rounds. We're just hunkered down in rounds. We're just hunkered down in rounds. We're just skipping all over you. And you're just skipping all over you. And you're just skipping all over you. And you're just if that JTAC wouldn't have called in a if that JTAC wouldn't have called in a if that JTAC wouldn't have called in a fire mission, we'd all be dead. I mean, fire mission, we'd all be dead. I mean, fire mission, we'd all be dead. I mean, it's only a matter of time before he it's only a matter of time before he it's only a matter of time before he stands up and just realizes he can just stands up and just realizes he can just stands up and just realizes he can just walk us down. I mean, there's no aloom. walk us down. I mean, there's no aloom. walk us down. I mean, there's no aloom. Night vision's all messed up at this Night vision's all messed up at this Night vision's all messed up at this point. I mean, everything that could point. I mean, everything that could point. I mean, everything that could went wrong went wrong. And now we're went wrong went wrong. And now we're went wrong went wrong. And now we're inside of 10 m getting pounded by a inside of 10 m getting pounded by a inside of 10 m getting pounded by a beltfed machine gun. You can't move. And beltfed machine gun. You can't move. And beltfed machine gun. You can't move. And it was the first time in my life I truly it was the first time in my life I truly it was the first time in my life I truly felt helpless. felt helpless. felt helpless. And everything worked out. Everybody And everything worked out. Everybody And everything worked out. Everybody ended up surviving it. We got him in the ended up surviving it. We got him in the ended up surviving it. We got him in the helicopter and did all that. helicopter and did all that. helicopter and did all that. I just think I never got an opportunity I just think I never got an opportunity I just think I never got an opportunity to ever talk about it. And when I went to ever talk about it. And when I went to ever talk about it. And when I went back home, you know, you're taking a back home, you know, you're taking a back home, you know, you're taking a shower. The showers in Iraq aren't the shower. The showers in Iraq aren't the shower. The showers in Iraq aren't the best, as you can imagine. And I'm best, as you can imagine. And I'm best, as you can imagine. And I'm standing in ankle deep sludge water standing in ankle deep sludge water standing in ankle deep sludge water that's just filled with blood. It's all that's just filled with blood. It's all that's just filled with blood. It's all in my mouth. It's all over my hair. And in my mouth. It's all over my hair. And in my mouth. It's all over my hair. And I remember taking the shower and just I remember taking the shower and just I remember taking the shower and just seeing it all and not knowing if he seeing it all and not knowing if he seeing it all and not knowing if he lived or not. And thinking, do I want to lived or not. And thinking, do I want to lived or not. And thinking, do I want to be washing this off? Because if they be washing this off? Because if they be washing this off? Because if they call me in 20 minutes and tell me he's call me in 20 minutes and tell me he's call me in 20 minutes and tell me he's dead, this is the last piece of him I dead, this is the last piece of him I dead, this is the last piece of him I have. So I save the camies. I saved the boot. So I save the camies. I saved the boot. So I save the camies. I saved the boot. I saved the shirts. I saved everything I saved the shirts. I saved everything I saved the shirts. I saved everything I wore. I shoved it all in the bag and I wore. I shoved it all in the bag and I wore. I shoved it all in the bag and I kept it in case he died. But it was kept it in case he died. But it was kept it in case he died. But it was hard, man. Like the back of that hard, man. Like the back of that hard, man. Like the back of that helicopter looked like Blackhawk Down. helicopter looked like Blackhawk Down. helicopter looked like Blackhawk Down. Just blowout kits and tourniquets and Just blowout kits and tourniquets and Just blowout kits and tourniquets and magazines and rounds all over and just magazines and rounds all over and just magazines and rounds all over and just the most blood I've ever seen. And the most blood I've ever seen. And the most blood I've ever seen. And you're just slipping and sliding in it you're just slipping and sliding in it you're just slipping and sliding in it just like out of the movies. And it's just like out of the movies. And it's just like out of the movies. And it's not it's dudes you've wrapped your arms not it's dudes you've wrapped your arms not it's dudes you've wrapped your arms around and told you I've loved you a around and told you I've loved you a around and told you I've loved you a hundred times. Like this is not what I hundred times. Like this is not what I hundred times. Like this is not what I thought it was going to be like. I thought it was going to be like. I thought it was going to be like. I didn't think this was going to be like didn't think this was going to be like didn't think this was going to be like this. I didn't because I'd never seen this. I didn't because I'd never seen this. I didn't because I'd never seen it. My dad has never been through that. it. My dad has never been through that. it. My dad has never been through that. None of his friends ever went through None of his friends ever went through None of his friends ever went through that. Now I am this 20-year-old kid and that. Now I am this 20-year-old kid and that. Now I am this 20-year-old kid and this is what I'm living with. And it was this is what I'm living with. And it was this is what I'm living with. And it was hard cuz you got to walk back in the hard cuz you got to walk back in the hard cuz you got to walk back in the culture of the SEAL team. So, we're not culture of the SEAL team. So, we're not culture of the SEAL team. So, we're not talking about that. Nobody's ever talking about that. Nobody's ever talking about that. Nobody's ever addressing that. When you see him, you addressing that. When you see him, you addressing that. When you see him, you know, you always make a joke like, "Hey, know, you always make a joke like, "Hey, know, you always make a joke like, "Hey, could you scream any louder? Like, I'm could you scream any louder? Like, I'm could you scream any louder? Like, I'm surprised we all didn't get killed by surprised we all didn't get killed by surprised we all didn't get killed by how loud you were yelling. You always how loud you were yelling. You always how loud you were yelling. You always make a joke about it." make a joke about it." make a joke about it." &gt;&gt; It wasn't a joke, man. I was &gt;&gt; It wasn't a joke, man. I was &gt;&gt; It wasn't a joke, man. I was traumatized. Like, I worshiped that guy. traumatized. Like, I worshiped that guy. traumatized. Like, I worshiped that guy. and to see the reality like he's not and to see the reality like he's not and to see the reality like he's not Superman and neither am I. Superman and neither am I. Superman and neither am I. Fortunately for me, he did the most Fortunately for me, he did the most Fortunately for me, he did the most heroic thing I've ever seen. And that heroic thing I've ever seen. And that heroic thing I've ever seen. And that moment has stuck with me forever. When moment has stuck with me forever. When moment has stuck with me forever. When that initial contact happened, everybody that initial contact happened, everybody that initial contact happened, everybody got shot, including him. And he stood got shot, including him. And he stood got shot, including him. And he stood back up and ran forward and grabbed our back up and ran forward and grabbed our back up and ran forward and grabbed our corman who was all shot up and started corman who was all shot up and started corman who was all shot up and started dragging him back. And I watched it dragging him back. And I watched it dragging him back. And I watched it happen. Gets shot again. It spins him, happen. Gets shot again. It spins him, happen. Gets shot again. It spins him, drops him on the floor, and he gets drops him on the floor, and he gets drops him on the floor, and he gets right back up. Picks him up again, gets right back up. Picks him up again, gets right back up. Picks him up again, gets shot, arm spins over his shoulder, keeps shot, arm spins over his shoulder, keeps shot, arm spins over his shoulder, keeps dragging him back, gets shot again, hits dragging him back, gets shot again, hits dragging him back, gets shot again, hits the ground, gets back up, keeps dragging the ground, gets back up, keeps dragging the ground, gets back up, keeps dragging him. It's like, at no point was he ever him. It's like, at no point was he ever him. It's like, at no point was he ever going to leave that dude. Could he have? going to leave that dude. Could he have? going to leave that dude. Could he have? Yeah, he could have ran a dough behind Yeah, he could have ran a dough behind Yeah, he could have ran a dough behind that tractor tire and sent me out there that tractor tire and sent me out there that tractor tire and sent me out there to go fetch him. He was so committed to go fetch him. He was so committed to go fetch him. He was so committed to the process of I am never going to leave the process of I am never going to leave the process of I am never going to leave you. If he would have took one right in you. If he would have took one right in you. If he would have took one right in the head and he would have died right the head and he would have died right the head and he would have died right then, he would have never bat an eye then, he would have never bat an eye then, he would have never bat an eye about it. If he would have known the about it. If he would have known the about it. If he would have known the outcome, he would have went anyway. And outcome, he would have went anyway. And outcome, he would have went anyway. And that part has stuck with me the entire that part has stuck with me the entire that part has stuck with me the entire time. Like a true believer will go time. Like a true believer will go time. Like a true believer will go further than anyone else in the moment further than anyone else in the moment further than anyone else in the moment of total duress because they're of total duress because they're of total duress because they're conditioned to it. He's already made up conditioned to it. He's already made up conditioned to it. He's already made up in his mind, how far are you willing to in his mind, how far are you willing to in his mind, how far are you willing to go the entire way right now. I'm just go the entire way right now. I'm just go the entire way right now. I'm just looking for an opportunity to prove it. looking for an opportunity to prove it. looking for an opportunity to prove it. And that was his moment to prove it. He And that was his moment to prove it. He And that was his moment to prove it. He proved it to everybody. And still to proved it to everybody. And still to proved it to everybody. And still to this day, I mean, probably still my this day, I mean, probably still my this day, I mean, probably still my biggest inspiration in the entire teams biggest inspiration in the entire teams biggest inspiration in the entire teams is Matt Roberts. Unbelievable human. I is Matt Roberts. Unbelievable human. I is Matt Roberts. Unbelievable human. I try not to get emotional, but yeah. just try not to get emotional, but yeah. just try not to get emotional, but yeah. just amazing human. amazing human. amazing human. &gt;&gt; I mean, intense in every way to hear intense in every way to hear intense in every way to hear about. So, I can only imagine what it's about. So, I can only imagine what it's about. So, I can only imagine what it's like to be there. And um like to be there. And um like to be there. And um your reverence for people around you your reverence for people around you your reverence for people around you that do amazing things is uh super that do amazing things is uh super that do amazing things is uh super impressive. Uh I notice you you're impressive. Uh I notice you you're impressive. Uh I notice you you're constantly noticing the people that constantly noticing the people that constantly noticing the people that you've been blessed to be around that um you've been blessed to be around that um you've been blessed to be around that um show you things show you things show you things &gt;&gt; and uh the extent to which you &gt;&gt; and uh the extent to which you &gt;&gt; and uh the extent to which you internalize it is awesome. I internalize it is awesome. I internalize it is awesome. I realize it also carries some weight realize it also carries some weight realize it also carries some weight when they're not doing well. It's so when they're not doing well. It's so when they're not doing well. It's so interesting. I hope people hear what interesting. I hope people hear what interesting. I hope people hear what I'm hearing. I'm sure they are, which is I'm hearing. I'm sure they are, which is I'm hearing. I'm sure they are, which is that it's never about you. It's always about it's never about you. It's always about it's never about you. It's always about seeing this other person that you seeing this other person that you seeing this other person that you know was like of almost like a like know was like of almost like a like know was like of almost like a like superhero status like real they're human superhero status like real they're human superhero status like real they're human and it sort of brings reality back and it sort of brings reality back and it sort of brings reality back but um all the while you're a but um all the while you're a but um all the while you're a central figure in this interaction. This central figure in this interaction. This central figure in this interaction. This wasn't like watching it on an iPad from wasn't like watching it on an iPad from wasn't like watching it on an iPad from a distance and wishing you could do a distance and wishing you could do a distance and wishing you could do something like uh you're in there too something like uh you're in there too something like uh you're in there too and that's not lost on us as and that's not lost on us as and that's not lost on us as you tell this. So you're carrying this you're carrying this you're carrying this in your head and you're still going back in your head and you're still going back in your head and you're still going back out. So, you didn't process it then. Um, out. So, you didn't process it then. Um, out. So, you didn't process it then. Um, let's talk about you getting let's talk about you getting let's talk about you getting electrocuted. &gt;&gt; Um, because you keep opting. &gt;&gt; Um, because you keep opting. &gt;&gt; Um, because you keep opting. Fortunately, you're not killed. Um, Fortunately, you're not killed. Um, Fortunately, you're not killed. Um, and then you're pretty close to the time and then you're pretty close to the time and then you're pretty close to the time when you can leave feeling like you've when you can leave feeling like you've when you can leave feeling like you've done sufficient time in the teams. done sufficient time in the teams. done sufficient time in the teams. You've you've done your work. Was there You've you've done your work. Was there You've you've done your work. Was there a desire to stay in past 20 years or a desire to stay in past 20 years or a desire to stay in past 20 years or were you were you were you &gt;&gt; Oh, I never planned on getting out. &gt;&gt; Oh, I never planned on getting out. &gt;&gt; Oh, I never planned on getting out. Never. I Nope. Never. I Nope. Never. I Nope. &gt;&gt; You wanted to be one of these so-called &gt;&gt; You wanted to be one of these so-called &gt;&gt; You wanted to be one of these so-called bullfrogs, one of these guys. I know one bullfrogs, one of these guys. I know one bullfrogs, one of these guys. I know one I won't mention his name cuz he won't I won't mention his name cuz he won't I won't mention his name cuz he won't appreciate it, but uh he did something appreciate it, but uh he did something appreciate it, but uh he did something like 32 years or something. And um he's like 32 years or something. And um he's like 32 years or something. And um he's a friend and uh actually asked him he's a friend and uh actually asked him he's a friend and uh actually asked him once what his training regimen he's once what his training regimen he's once what his training regimen he's getting up there now. He's going to give getting up there now. He's going to give getting up there now. He's going to give me a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] for saying that, but uh but me a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] for saying that, but uh but me a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] for saying that, but uh but he's in great shape obviously. and um he's in great shape obviously. and um he's in great shape obviously. and um and he and he says he finds some way and he and he says he finds some way and he and he says he finds some way to make sure that he's breathing super to make sure that he's breathing super to make sure that he's breathing super hard and his heart rate is max for an hard and his heart rate is max for an hard and his heart rate is max for an hour a day his workout like that's hour a day his workout like that's hour a day his workout like that's doesn't get any simpler than that. I doesn't get any simpler than that. I doesn't get any simpler than that. I didn't ask him the variety of things didn't ask him the variety of things didn't ask him the variety of things he's done to accomplish that but um I he's done to accomplish that but um I he's done to accomplish that but um I think it's running. I think it's lifting think it's running. I think it's lifting think it's running. I think it's lifting heavy objects. I think it's swimming. I heavy objects. I think it's swimming. I heavy objects. I think it's swimming. I think it's um but yeah, it doesn't get think it's um but yeah, it doesn't get think it's um but yeah, it doesn't get any simpler than that. And um uh in any simpler than that. And um uh in any simpler than that. And um uh in addition to his uh physical durability, addition to his uh physical durability, addition to his uh physical durability, his mental durability um he says his mental durability um he says his mental durability um he says directly linked to that an hour a day directly linked to that an hour a day directly linked to that an hour a day breathing as hard as he can at max heart breathing as hard as he can at max heart breathing as hard as he can at max heart rate. &gt;&gt; That's that sort of bullfrog mentality. &gt;&gt; That's that sort of bullfrog mentality. &gt;&gt; That's that sort of bullfrog mentality. &gt;&gt; So you want to be one of those guys, but &gt;&gt; So you want to be one of those guys, but &gt;&gt; So you want to be one of those guys, but you decided at some point like it might you decided at some point like it might you decided at some point like it might be wise to lean into the family be wise to lean into the family be wise to lean into the family life. &gt;&gt; No. God, no. Nope. I uh &gt;&gt; No. God, no. Nope. I uh &gt;&gt; No. God, no. Nope. I uh &gt;&gt; Okay. So &gt;&gt; Okay. So &gt;&gt; Okay. So &gt;&gt; Okay. Bad guess, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Okay. Bad guess, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Okay. Bad guess, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Yeah. my first major injury. I made it &gt;&gt; Yeah. my first major injury. I made it &gt;&gt; Yeah. my first major injury. I made it all the way through, you know, came in all the way through, you know, came in all the way through, you know, came in 2002. In 2010, I was going through in 2002. In 2010, I was going through in 2002. In 2010, I was going through selection for the tier one organization selection for the tier one organization selection for the tier one organization and about 3/4 of the way through, we do and about 3/4 of the way through, we do and about 3/4 of the way through, we do a big skydive blog out in Arizona and I a big skydive blog out in Arizona and I a big skydive blog out in Arizona and I love jumping. It's my jam and I had a love jumping. It's my jam and I had a love jumping. It's my jam and I had a bad landing downwind landing, hit this bad landing downwind landing, hit this bad landing downwind landing, hit this ravine, and I snapped my femal neck, ravine, and I snapped my femal neck, ravine, and I snapped my femal neck, broke that thing, and I was so afraid broke that thing, and I was so afraid broke that thing, and I was so afraid they were going to wash me out of the they were going to wash me out of the they were going to wash me out of the program, I just didn't say anything. So, program, I just didn't say anything. So, program, I just didn't say anything. So, I can barely walk. I can't drive a car. I can barely walk. I can't drive a car. I can barely walk. I can't drive a car. I mean, it's full atrophy. It's bad. And I mean, it's full atrophy. It's bad. And I mean, it's full atrophy. It's bad. And I'm jacked up on so many tord dolls, I'm jacked up on so many tord dolls, I'm jacked up on so many tord dolls, tramodols, and 800 milligram motrin that tramodols, and 800 milligram motrin that tramodols, and 800 milligram motrin that I'm able to get through and jump. They I'm able to get through and jump. They I'm able to get through and jump. They know something's wrong with me, but they know something's wrong with me, but they know something's wrong with me, but they know I'm not going to quit. They know I'm not going to quit. They know I'm not going to quit. They know I'm not going to ask for any help. So, I'm not going to ask for any help. So, I'm not going to ask for any help. So, as long as I can pass the evolutions, as long as I can pass the evolutions, as long as I can pass the evolutions, we're good. And all I have to do is we're good. And all I have to do is we're good. And all I have to do is jump. We graduate that, you know, we get jump. We graduate that, you know, we get jump. We graduate that, you know, we get drafted and all the different drafted and all the different drafted and all the different organizations you're going to go to. And organizations you're going to go to. And organizations you're going to go to. And I walked into rehab and I went, "Okay, I walked into rehab and I went, "Okay, I walked into rehab and I went, "Okay, now that that's over, my back's broken." now that that's over, my back's broken." now that that's over, my back's broken." And they were like, "Oh, why do you say And they were like, "Oh, why do you say And they were like, "Oh, why do you say that?" And they told them like, "We had that?" And they told them like, "We had that?" And they told them like, "We had gotten a we got an MRI on my hip when we gotten a we got an MRI on my hip when we gotten a we got an MRI on my hip when we were in Arizona and nothing showed up." were in Arizona and nothing showed up." were in Arizona and nothing showed up." They were like, "I think you tore your They were like, "I think you tore your They were like, "I think you tore your hip flexor." And I was like, "Oh, if I hip flexor." And I was like, "Oh, if I hip flexor." And I was like, "Oh, if I tore my hip flexor, I don't care. We're tore my hip flexor, I don't care. We're tore my hip flexor, I don't care. We're good." I thought it was my back. We get good." I thought it was my back. We get good." I thought it was my back. We get home, they run new uh new images, and my home, they run new uh new images, and my home, they run new uh new images, and my femoral neck is snapped off. And you femoral neck is snapped off. And you femoral neck is snapped off. And you know the deal. You lose a thermal neck, know the deal. You lose a thermal neck, know the deal. You lose a thermal neck, blood supply, total hip replacement, blood supply, total hip replacement, blood supply, total hip replacement, you're out of the military. And I walked you're out of the military. And I walked you're out of the military. And I walked in, saw the doctor, and he, you know, in, saw the doctor, and he, you know, in, saw the doctor, and he, you know, he's sitting there in front of my he's sitting there in front of my he's sitting there in front of my command master chief and all the rehab command master chief and all the rehab command master chief and all the rehab guys. And he goes, "Hey, we got guys. And he goes, "Hey, we got guys. And he goes, "Hey, we got emergency surgery for you tomorrow emergency surgery for you tomorrow emergency surgery for you tomorrow morning, 07." No. And he's like, "What? morning, 07." No. And he's like, "What? morning, 07." No. And he's like, "What? I'm not getting surgery. I've never had I'm not getting surgery. I've never had I'm not getting surgery. I've never had surgery. I'm not getting surgery. Nope. surgery. I'm not getting surgery. Nope. surgery. I'm not getting surgery. Nope. I got deployment coming up. I'm not I got deployment coming up. I'm not I got deployment coming up. I'm not doing that." And my command master, you doing that." And my command master, you doing that." And my command master, you fell looked at me and he goes, fell looked at me and he goes, fell looked at me and he goes, "Um, let me rephrase this. You're "Um, let me rephrase this. You're "Um, let me rephrase this. You're getting surgery tomorrow at 07. If you getting surgery tomorrow at 07. If you getting surgery tomorrow at 07. If you don't, I'm going to shake handy out of don't, I'm going to shake handy out of don't, I'm going to shake handy out of the program." It's like, "Oh, the program." It's like, "Oh, the program." It's like, "Oh, okay. What is it?" And he's like, "15 in okay. What is it?" And he's like, "15 in okay. What is it?" And he's like, "15 in of titanium, three lag bolts. We're of titanium, three lag bolts. We're of titanium, three lag bolts. We're going to pump them in there. Here's a going to pump them in there. Here's a going to pump them in there. Here's a rehab protocol. You're still going to rehab protocol. You're still going to rehab protocol. You're still going to deploy in, you know, I think it was a deploy in, you know, I think it was a deploy in, you know, I think it was a month and a half." And we did. But I got month and a half." And we did. But I got month and a half." And we did. But I got through from the time I broke it, I did through from the time I broke it, I did through from the time I broke it, I did another 85 skydives on it. Went through another 85 skydives on it. Went through another 85 skydives on it. Went through Utah. I mean, up and up and down that Utah. I mean, up and up and down that Utah. I mean, up and up and down that crazy elevation just really just sucking crazy elevation just really just sucking crazy elevation just really just sucking it up. But it was a test for it up. But it was a test for it up. But it was a test for mental resiliency. How far are you mental resiliency. How far are you mental resiliency. How far are you willing to push to be a part of the willing to push to be a part of the willing to push to be a part of the organization the entire way? organization the entire way? organization the entire way? &gt;&gt; Did your team teammates know you had a &gt;&gt; Did your team teammates know you had a &gt;&gt; Did your team teammates know you had a broken femur? broken femur? broken femur? &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; We got through, we did the emergency &gt;&gt; We got through, we did the emergency &gt;&gt; We got through, we did the emergency surgery, had a nasty complication, got surgery, had a nasty complication, got surgery, had a nasty complication, got infected, you know, wound backs, the infected, you know, wound backs, the infected, you know, wound backs, the whole thing. whole thing. whole thing. &gt;&gt; And they were so cool. They uh they flew &gt;&gt; And they were so cool. They uh they flew &gt;&gt; And they were so cool. They uh they flew a rehab guy over to Afghanistan with me a rehab guy over to Afghanistan with me a rehab guy over to Afghanistan with me and that's how we test it out. And you and that's how we test it out. And you and that's how we test it out. And you know, the final test, like we're doing know, the final test, like we're doing know, the final test, like we're doing V2 maxes and broad jumps and all the V2 maxes and broad jumps and all the V2 maxes and broad jumps and all the things, make sure your hip can take it. things, make sure your hip can take it. things, make sure your hip can take it. And the very last thing was this huge And the very last thing was this huge And the very last thing was this huge box, probably a 48 inch box. We got a box, probably a 48 inch box. We got a box, probably a 48 inch box. We got a full kit on. And he looks at me, his full kit on. And he looks at me, his full kit on. And he looks at me, his name's Mike, and he goes, "Okay, we're name's Mike, and he goes, "Okay, we're name's Mike, and he goes, "Okay, we're going to have you drop off this and land going to have you drop off this and land going to have you drop off this and land on the bad leg." And he goes, "DJ, do on the bad leg." And he goes, "DJ, do on the bad leg." And he goes, "DJ, do not step off that box if you don't think not step off that box if you don't think not step off that box if you don't think it'll hold." I knew it wouldn't hold. it'll hold." I knew it wouldn't hold. it'll hold." I knew it wouldn't hold. There's no way it's going to hold. Like, There's no way it's going to hold. Like, There's no way it's going to hold. Like, it feels so bad inside me. Stepped off it. Hit. I felt like a bolt Stepped off it. Hit. I felt like a bolt Stepped off it. Hit. I felt like a bolt of lightning went through me. And I of lightning went through me. And I of lightning went through me. And I looked at him and he went, "How do you looked at him and he went, "How do you looked at him and he went, "How do you feel?" Went 100%. Got my stuff down the feel?" Went 100%. Got my stuff down the feel?" Went 100%. Got my stuff down the helicopter. Made it through all that. The screws Made it through all that. The screws Made it through all that. The screws ended up backing out, going through my ended up backing out, going through my ended up backing out, going through my tea band a couple months later. Had to tea band a couple months later. Had to tea band a couple months later. Had to have another surgery. And just it was have another surgery. And just it was have another surgery. And just it was just a long history of things that just a long history of things that just a long history of things that happened to me. But it really got you happened to me. But it really got you happened to me. But it really got you used to, we talked about it before, are used to, we talked about it before, are used to, we talked about it before, are you hurt or are you injured? you hurt or are you injured? you hurt or are you injured? &gt;&gt; I got to the point very, very fast in &gt;&gt; I got to the point very, very fast in &gt;&gt; I got to the point very, very fast in the SEAL teams. I could not tell the SEAL teams. I could not tell the SEAL teams. I could not tell the difference. I don't know the difference. I don't know the difference. I don't know the difference. Everything hurts. Everything's got a Everything hurts. Everything's got a Everything hurts. Everything's got a limitation. and I'm just pushing through limitation. and I'm just pushing through limitation. and I'm just pushing through it regardless. And again, it's not like it regardless. And again, it's not like it regardless. And again, it's not like I'm a unicorn. If the amount of people I'm a unicorn. If the amount of people I'm a unicorn. If the amount of people over there that need major over there that need major over there that need major reconstructive surgeries, 8 out of 10. reconstructive surgeries, 8 out of 10. reconstructive surgeries, 8 out of 10. Everybody needs it. And they just don't Everybody needs it. And they just don't Everybody needs it. And they just don't do it because you have a deployment do it because you have a deployment do it because you have a deployment coming up or you have a trip you can't coming up or you have a trip you can't coming up or you have a trip you can't miss. There's something going on the way miss. There's something going on the way miss. There's something going on the way you can't miss it. So, you sacrifice you can't miss it. So, you sacrifice you can't miss it. So, you sacrifice yourself. Just don't do it. The same yourself. Just don't do it. The same yourself. Just don't do it. The same thing was happening. Oh. Had a gnarly thing was happening. Oh. Had a gnarly thing was happening. Oh. Had a gnarly shoulder dislocation. Blew it out. Had shoulder dislocation. Blew it out. Had shoulder dislocation. Blew it out. Had to have major reconstructive surgery. I to have major reconstructive surgery. I to have major reconstructive surgery. I had an admin wound, four rounds of had an admin wound, four rounds of had an admin wound, four rounds of plastic surgery, couldn't get it to plastic surgery, couldn't get it to plastic surgery, couldn't get it to close. I mean, all the complications are close. I mean, all the complications are close. I mean, all the complications are happening. After the shoulder surgery, happening. After the shoulder surgery, happening. After the shoulder surgery, it was so bad. Medical retirement was it was so bad. Medical retirement was it was so bad. Medical retirement was imminent. So, hey, we're going to imminent. So, hey, we're going to imminent. So, hey, we're going to medically retire you. Same benefits if medically retire you. Same benefits if medically retire you. Same benefits if you do 20 years, but you can't do this you do 20 years, but you can't do this you do 20 years, but you can't do this job anymore. They wanted to fuse my job anymore. They wanted to fuse my job anymore. They wanted to fuse my lower back, my neck, shoulder surgery, lower back, my neck, shoulder surgery, lower back, my neck, shoulder surgery, shoulder surgery, double hip surgery. shoulder surgery, double hip surgery. shoulder surgery, double hip surgery. So, I had three years of surgeries lined So, I had three years of surgeries lined So, I had three years of surgeries lined up. It's like, I'm not going to sit here up. It's like, I'm not going to sit here up. It's like, I'm not going to sit here in rehab for three years doing in rehab for three years doing in rehab for three years doing surgeries, taking up a slot. I'm not surgeries, taking up a slot. I'm not surgeries, taking up a slot. I'm not doing it. I was like, I'll just get out. doing it. I was like, I'll just get out. doing it. I was like, I'll just get out. I'll retire and I'll deal with it on my I'll retire and I'll deal with it on my I'll retire and I'll deal with it on my own. That's that's kind of the whole own. That's that's kind of the whole own. That's that's kind of the whole process. So, I got put on a laundry process. So, I got put on a laundry process. So, I got put on a laundry list of medications. 60s something pills list of medications. 60s something pills list of medications. 60s something pills a day. Probably 25 30 different a day. Probably 25 30 different a day. Probably 25 30 different prescriptions we were on. prescriptions we were on. prescriptions we were on. &gt;&gt; Goodness. &gt;&gt; Goodness. &gt;&gt; Goodness. &gt;&gt; I mean, Symbalta, Aderall, Gabapin, &gt;&gt; I mean, Symbalta, Aderall, Gabapin, &gt;&gt; I mean, Symbalta, Aderall, Gabapin, heavy doses. heavy doses. heavy doses. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Zimbalta, they got you on it. &gt;&gt; Zimbalta, they got you on it. &gt;&gt; Zimbalta, they got you on it. Anti-depressants. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. And yeah, Symbalta when you &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. And yeah, Symbalta when you &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. And yeah, Symbalta when you come off Symbalta gives you the jolts. come off Symbalta gives you the jolts. come off Symbalta gives you the jolts. Oh yeah, Symbalta is a treat. Um, Lica, Oh yeah, Symbalta is a treat. Um, Lica, Oh yeah, Symbalta is a treat. Um, Lica, um, I've been on everything. Um, um, I've been on everything. Um, um, I've been on everything. Um, Amatriolene to sleep. Take a heavy dose Amatriolene to sleep. Take a heavy dose Amatriolene to sleep. Take a heavy dose of those. Ambient, obviously, of those. Ambient, obviously, of those. Ambient, obviously, everything. Everything in between. You everything. Everything in between. You everything. Everything in between. You take it all. And you don't realize that take it all. And you don't realize that take it all. And you don't realize that you're smashed all day because you're smashed all day because you're smashed all day because you're not you're not hitting alcohol. You not you're not hitting alcohol. You not you're not hitting alcohol. You don't realize that you're processing don't realize that you're processing don't realize that you're processing pharmaceuticals 24 hours a day, every pharmaceuticals 24 hours a day, every pharmaceuticals 24 hours a day, every single day, 52 weeks out of the year. single day, 52 weeks out of the year. single day, 52 weeks out of the year. You don't realize it. You're not sober. You don't realize it. You're not sober. You don't realize it. You're not sober. And that was my hardest thing to kind of And that was my hardest thing to kind of And that was my hardest thing to kind of walk away with is I came out of this walk away with is I came out of this walk away with is I came out of this rehab program. They put me on these rehab program. They put me on these rehab program. They put me on these medications and I felt like a million medications and I felt like a million medications and I felt like a million bucks. I got really hurt in 2013. bucks. I got really hurt in 2013. bucks. I got really hurt in 2013. Amnesia, forgetting where I was at, and Amnesia, forgetting where I was at, and Amnesia, forgetting where I was at, and I went down, they gave me these pills I went down, they gave me these pills I went down, they gave me these pills and I felt like Jesus came down and I felt like Jesus came down and I felt like Jesus came down and touched me. You gave me a symbol. touched me. You gave me a symbol. touched me. You gave me a symbol. Okay. What else you have? Oh, we got Okay. What else you have? Oh, we got Okay. What else you have? Oh, we got this. We got this. We got Give them to this. We got this. We got Give them to this. We got this. We got Give them to me. Stelli ganglion blocks through my me. Stelli ganglion blocks through my me. Stelli ganglion blocks through my throat. Give it to me. Reiki, give it to throat. Give it to me. Reiki, give it to throat. Give it to me. Reiki, give it to me. Anything you have, I'll do it. me. Anything you have, I'll do it. me. Anything you have, I'll do it. There's not a protocol on the planet I There's not a protocol on the planet I There's not a protocol on the planet I have not done. And I've done them at have not done. And I've done them at have not done. And I've done them at 100% full value. 100% full value. 100% full value. And they buy you a little bit of relief. And they buy you a little bit of relief. And they buy you a little bit of relief. We got to the point where I was taking We got to the point where I was taking We got to the point where I was taking so many different medications. A bunch so many different medications. A bunch so many different medications. A bunch of them you were not allowed to take of them you were not allowed to take of them you were not allowed to take together. And I had a new doctor came together. And I had a new doctor came together. And I had a new doctor came in. He's trying to refill all my in. He's trying to refill all my in. He's trying to refill all my prescriptions. And he's like, "You can't prescriptions. And he's like, "You can't prescriptions. And he's like, "You can't take these four medications in take these four medications in take these four medications in combination." He's like, "It'll give you combination." He's like, "It'll give you combination." He's like, "It'll give you a stroke DJ. It'll kill you." And I a stroke DJ. It'll kill you." And I a stroke DJ. It'll kill you." And I went, "Well, it's 2019. I've been taking went, "Well, it's 2019. I've been taking went, "Well, it's 2019. I've been taking them since 2010." them since 2010." them since 2010." Like, I have to keep taking them. He's Like, I have to keep taking them. He's Like, I have to keep taking them. He's like, "You're going to have to med wash like, "You're going to have to med wash like, "You're going to have to med wash out. They send me down to uh Walter Reed out. They send me down to uh Walter Reed out. They send me down to uh Walter Reed the 70 East. It's a neurobbehavioral the 70 East. It's a neurobbehavioral the 70 East. It's a neurobbehavioral ward." I don't know that. I think it's ward." I don't know that. I think it's ward." I don't know that. I think it's like a teen guy clinic where we're going like a teen guy clinic where we're going like a teen guy clinic where we're going to go work on shoulder mobility and to go work on shoulder mobility and to go work on shoulder mobility and whatever else cuz I just came after. whatever else cuz I just came after. whatever else cuz I just came after. &gt;&gt; Sorry, the loud couldn't help it. Well, &gt;&gt; Sorry, the loud couldn't help it. Well, &gt;&gt; Sorry, the loud couldn't help it. Well, I mean, you know, I was I mean, you know, I was I mean, you know, I was &gt;&gt; You don't know, right? I don't know. I &gt;&gt; You don't know, right? I don't know. I &gt;&gt; You don't know, right? I don't know. I go down there, they start taking my go down there, they start taking my go down there, they start taking my shoelaces, they take everything I have, shoelaces, they take everything I have, shoelaces, they take everything I have, and I'm like, and I'm like, and I'm like, &gt;&gt; what is this? I mean, there's fighter &gt;&gt; what is this? I mean, there's fighter &gt;&gt; what is this? I mean, there's fighter pilots that are in there. There's green pilots that are in there. There's green pilots that are in there. There's green berets that are in there. berets that are in there. berets that are in there. &gt;&gt; Like, I went through Sears school. I &gt;&gt; Like, I went through Sears school. I &gt;&gt; Like, I went through Sears school. I don't need this. Sad torture training. don't need this. Sad torture training. don't need this. Sad torture training. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm like, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm like, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm like, &gt;&gt; I don't know why I'm doing this. They &gt;&gt; I don't know why I'm doing this. They &gt;&gt; I don't know why I'm doing this. They don't tell me it's a neurobbehavioral don't tell me it's a neurobbehavioral don't tell me it's a neurobbehavioral war. They tell me it's for a med wash war. They tell me it's for a med wash war. They tell me it's for a med wash out. He's like, hey, you're going to go out. He's like, hey, you're going to go out. He's like, hey, you're going to go there. He's like, you're going to focus there. He's like, you're going to focus there. He's like, you're going to focus on shoulder rehab cuz that was a gnarly on shoulder rehab cuz that was a gnarly on shoulder rehab cuz that was a gnarly shoulder surgery. He's like, "They're shoulder surgery. He's like, "They're shoulder surgery. He's like, "They're going to focus on that. We'll get you going to focus on that. We'll get you going to focus on that. We'll get you washed out all these meds. We'll come washed out all these meds. We'll come washed out all these meds. We'll come back. You'll be in a good spot. Medical back. You'll be in a good spot. Medical back. You'll be in a good spot. Medical retirement transition next phase." retirement transition next phase." retirement transition next phase." Awesome. I went into that hospital Awesome. I went into that hospital Awesome. I went into that hospital broken. My eyes were jet black. I was broken. My eyes were jet black. I was broken. My eyes were jet black. I was 180 lbs. Just death warmed over. I 180 lbs. Just death warmed over. I 180 lbs. Just death warmed over. I didn't want to do anything. And I laid didn't want to do anything. And I laid didn't want to do anything. And I laid in that hospital bed and I had these I in that hospital bed and I had these I in that hospital bed and I had these I had the most amazing nursing staff. And had the most amazing nursing staff. And had the most amazing nursing staff. And I laid down that bed and I started I laid down that bed and I started I laid down that bed and I started getting sick and I was like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] food getting sick and I was like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] food getting sick and I was like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] food poison throwing up, pissing myself. I poison throwing up, pissing myself. I poison throwing up, pissing myself. I mean the whole thing. And I remember mean the whole thing. And I remember mean the whole thing. And I remember throwing up in this bucket and this throwing up in this bucket and this throwing up in this bucket and this beautiful black nurse has this wet beautiful black nurse has this wet beautiful black nurse has this wet washcloth and she's washing my face off washcloth and she's washing my face off washcloth and she's washing my face off and I was like I don't know what I ate. and I was like I don't know what I ate. and I was like I don't know what I ate. I was like I'm so sorry. Like I feel so I was like I'm so sorry. Like I feel so I was like I'm so sorry. Like I feel so embarrassed. And she's like it's okay. embarrassed. And she's like it's okay. embarrassed. And she's like it's okay. It's okay. And I was like I haven't It's okay. And I was like I haven't It's okay. And I was like I haven't eaten anything. I was like I never get eaten anything. I was like I never get eaten anything. I was like I never get food poisoned. She's like oh honey it's food poisoned. She's like oh honey it's food poisoned. She's like oh honey it's okay. And I can remember the look it's okay. And I can remember the look it's okay. And I can remember the look she gave me like, "You have no idea why she gave me like, "You have no idea why she gave me like, "You have no idea why you're here." you're here." you're here." &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; I was like that for probably 10 days. &gt;&gt; I was like that for probably 10 days. &gt;&gt; I was like that for probably 10 days. Around the 10th or 11th day, I finally Around the 10th or 11th day, I finally Around the 10th or 11th day, I finally came out of my room. I got sunglasses came out of my room. I got sunglasses came out of my room. I got sunglasses on. My photo was so bad. If you shine on. My photo was so bad. If you shine on. My photo was so bad. If you shine light my eyes, I'd throw up. Like my TBI light my eyes, I'd throw up. Like my TBI light my eyes, I'd throw up. Like my TBI was it was controlling everything I had. was it was controlling everything I had. was it was controlling everything I had. Wasn't sleeping, had insomnia, had Wasn't sleeping, had insomnia, had Wasn't sleeping, had insomnia, had everything you could have. And that was everything you could have. And that was everything you could have. And that was the first time in a decade I had been the first time in a decade I had been the first time in a decade I had been truly sober. No booze, no nicotine, no truly sober. No booze, no nicotine, no truly sober. No booze, no nicotine, no pharmaceuticals of any kind. And that pharmaceuticals of any kind. And that pharmaceuticals of any kind. And that was my baseline. And if you would have was my baseline. And if you would have was my baseline. And if you would have given me the ability, I would have given me the ability, I would have given me the ability, I would have closed out that chapter right then. I closed out that chapter right then. I closed out that chapter right then. I was done. I could not believe what I had was done. I could not believe what I had was done. I could not believe what I had done to myself, what I had turned myself done to myself, what I had turned myself done to myself, what I had turned myself into. And there's no way to get better. into. And there's no way to get better. into. And there's no way to get better. Like, I'm stuck like this. And now Like, I'm stuck like this. And now Like, I'm stuck like this. And now you're going to kick me out of the only you're going to kick me out of the only you're going to kick me out of the only thing that I've ever loved. Like, what thing that I've ever loved. Like, what thing that I've ever loved. Like, what am I supposed to do now? Rock bottom. am I supposed to do now? Rock bottom. am I supposed to do now? Rock bottom. And we started spinning up art therapy. And we started spinning up art therapy. And we started spinning up art therapy. So, I had um I'd been there before. We' So, I had um I'd been there before. We' So, I had um I'd been there before. We' done art therapy before, and I found it done art therapy before, and I found it done art therapy before, and I found it really beneficial. Um, actually the um really beneficial. Um, actually the um really beneficial. Um, actually the um the Red Cross used to bring me in dogs. the Red Cross used to bring me in dogs. the Red Cross used to bring me in dogs. They'd bring me in a St. Bernard drop in They'd bring me in a St. Bernard drop in They'd bring me in a St. Bernard drop in my bedroom and I just I do dog therapy my bedroom and I just I do dog therapy my bedroom and I just I do dog therapy for a little bit. And she's like, "Do for a little bit. And she's like, "Do for a little bit. And she's like, "Do you want to do art therapy?" And I was you want to do art therapy?" And I was you want to do art therapy?" And I was like, "I'd love to." And she's like, "I'd love to." And she's like, "I'd love to." And she's like, "Well, what do you want?" I was like, "Well, what do you want?" I was like, "Well, what do you want?" I was like, "I'd really love a skateboard." And they "I'd really love a skateboard." And they "I'd really love a skateboard." And they snuck me out of that hospital, not snuck me out of that hospital, not snuck me out of that hospital, not supposed to. And they drove me down this supposed to. And they drove me down this supposed to. And they drove me down this little skate shop right outside of uh little skate shop right outside of uh little skate shop right outside of uh Walter Reed. And there's a skate shop Walter Reed. And there's a skate shop Walter Reed. And there's a skate shop there. And I walk in, you know, I've got there. And I walk in, you know, I've got there. And I walk in, you know, I've got my gown and stuff on. Like I'm all I'm my gown and stuff on. Like I'm all I'm my gown and stuff on. Like I'm all I'm all jacked up, hair super long, beards all jacked up, hair super long, beards all jacked up, hair super long, beards long. I look like a hobo. And uh I told long. I look like a hobo. And uh I told long. I look like a hobo. And uh I told the guy my story. I was like, "Hey, I the guy my story. I was like, "Hey, I the guy my story. I was like, "Hey, I grew up skateboarding. Like it was my grew up skateboarding. Like it was my grew up skateboarding. Like it was my passion. And I really would love to have passion. And I really would love to have passion. And I really would love to have a skateboard just to paint, do art a skateboard just to paint, do art a skateboard just to paint, do art therapy." &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz I got a couple bolts in my &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz I got a couple bolts in my &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz I got a couple bolts in my femur that ripped through my through a femur that ripped through my through a femur that ripped through my through a couple tendons and you know, I just got couple tendons and you know, I just got couple tendons and you know, I just got detoxed and didn't realize it. And got detoxed and didn't realize it. And got detoxed and didn't realize it. And uh and I'm here. Um uh and I'm here. Um uh and I'm here. Um &gt;&gt; uh can I ride a skateboard? Love it. So &gt;&gt; uh can I ride a skateboard? Love it. So &gt;&gt; uh can I ride a skateboard? Love it. So he gives me a bunch of blank he gives me a bunch of blank he gives me a bunch of blank skateboards and I go back and I'm skateboards and I go back and I'm skateboards and I go back and I'm paperier-mâché. I'm doing hands coming paperier-mâché. I'm doing hands coming paperier-mâché. I'm doing hands coming out of him. Just a bunch of really dark out of him. Just a bunch of really dark out of him. Just a bunch of really dark demonic stuff. But I felt so good when I demonic stuff. But I felt so good when I demonic stuff. But I felt so good when I came out. My best friend Cole Fackler, came out. My best friend Cole Fackler, came out. My best friend Cole Fackler, same guy I started tribe skates with and same guy I started tribe skates with and same guy I started tribe skates with and uh GVRs with. We went to BUDS together. uh GVRs with. We went to BUDS together. uh GVRs with. We went to BUDS together. He grew up in Virginia Beach with me. He grew up in Virginia Beach with me. He grew up in Virginia Beach with me. And so we've been thickest thieves for And so we've been thickest thieves for And so we've been thickest thieves for 25 years now. And he's like, "Well, open 25 years now. And he's like, "Well, open 25 years now. And he's like, "Well, open up an LLC." He opens up the backside and up an LLC." He opens up the backside and up an LLC." He opens up the backside and he's like, "Let's just make he's like, "Let's just make he's like, "Let's just make skateboarding your art therapy." So, we skateboarding your art therapy." So, we skateboarding your art therapy." So, we had an artist come on board. We'd start had an artist come on board. We'd start had an artist come on board. We'd start drawing, you know, motivational things, drawing, you know, motivational things, drawing, you know, motivational things, you know, old school UDT stuff for you know, old school UDT stuff for you know, old school UDT stuff for firemen, stuff for police officers, firemen, stuff for police officers, firemen, stuff for police officers, memorial skateboards. And then I found memorial skateboards. And then I found memorial skateboards. And then I found fracture burning. So, you essentially fracture burning. So, you essentially fracture burning. So, you essentially take a microwave transformer, pull it take a microwave transformer, pull it take a microwave transformer, pull it out, and you hook it up to jumper out, and you hook it up to jumper out, and you hook it up to jumper cables, and then run a lead out to an cables, and then run a lead out to an cables, and then run a lead out to an octopus outlet like 110. So when I clip octopus outlet like 110. So when I clip octopus outlet like 110. So when I clip it on top of the wood and I pour an it on top of the wood and I pour an it on top of the wood and I pour an electrolyte solution on it. Coca-Cola, electrolyte solution on it. Coca-Cola, electrolyte solution on it. Coca-Cola, baking soda with warm water was my baking soda with warm water was my baking soda with warm water was my favorite. And I hit it, it'll burn the favorite. And I hit it, it'll burn the favorite. And I hit it, it'll burn the wood grain and they'll connect. Scrub wood grain and they'll connect. Scrub wood grain and they'll connect. Scrub all that out, fill with resin, just make all that out, fill with resin, just make all that out, fill with resin, just make these beautiful pieces. And that was my these beautiful pieces. And that was my these beautiful pieces. And that was my art therapy. I could sit there and burn art therapy. I could sit there and burn art therapy. I could sit there and burn skateboards all day every day. It was skateboards all day every day. It was skateboards all day every day. It was it was amazing. Like it truly changed it was amazing. Like it truly changed it was amazing. Like it truly changed my life. And I don't know why. I didn't my life. And I don't know why. I didn't my life. And I don't know why. I didn't grow up around electricity. Obviously, grow up around electricity. Obviously, grow up around electricity. Obviously, I'm not very good at it. And I'm not very good at it. And I'm not very good at it. And It was something about having to sit It was something about having to sit It was something about having to sit there and sand the lacquer off that there and sand the lacquer off that there and sand the lacquer off that skateboard. I mean, I'd buy brand new skateboard. I mean, I'd buy brand new skateboard. I mean, I'd buy brand new skateboards. I'd sand the entire graphic skateboards. I'd sand the entire graphic skateboards. I'd sand the entire graphic off of it and then we'd burn them. You off of it and then we'd burn them. You off of it and then we'd burn them. You have to sand them off. You'd have to have to sand them off. You'd have to have to sand them off. You'd have to rinse them, wait 24 hours, pour the rinse them, wait 24 hours, pour the rinse them, wait 24 hours, pour the resin, wait 24 hours, sand them off, resin, wait 24 hours, sand them off, resin, wait 24 hours, sand them off, pour it again, 24 hours. I mean, it's a pour it again, 24 hours. I mean, it's a pour it again, 24 hours. I mean, it's a 7-day process to make one board. And 7-day process to make one board. And 7-day process to make one board. And we'd bring in guys who were we'd bring in guys who were we'd bring in guys who were transitioning. They do it, too. It was transitioning. They do it, too. It was transitioning. They do it, too. It was their form of art therapy. And I felt their form of art therapy. And I felt their form of art therapy. And I felt like I was making a difference. like I was making a difference. like I was making a difference. And I'm scheduled to retire at the end And I'm scheduled to retire at the end And I'm scheduled to retire at the end of August 2019. of August 2019. of August 2019. This is Father's Day. So, is that end of This is Father's Day. So, is that end of This is Father's Day. So, is that end of &gt;&gt; June? It's like mid June. Is that right? &gt;&gt; June? It's like mid June. Is that right? &gt;&gt; June? It's like mid June. Is that right? Something like that. Something like that. Something like that. &gt;&gt; Right before I'm scheduled to retire, &gt;&gt; Right before I'm scheduled to retire, &gt;&gt; Right before I'm scheduled to retire, Father's Day morning around 9:00 a.m. Father's Day morning around 9:00 a.m. Father's Day morning around 9:00 a.m. I've been up since 5 burning I've been up since 5 burning I've been up since 5 burning skateboards. I've got a big bay window. skateboards. I've got a big bay window. skateboards. I've got a big bay window. Looks out my backyard and I've got these Looks out my backyard and I've got these Looks out my backyard and I've got these seesaws set up with these boards. And seesaws set up with these boards. And seesaws set up with these boards. And I've got an EOD guy, explosive ordinance I've got an EOD guy, explosive ordinance I've got an EOD guy, explosive ordinance guy from the Navy. He's making uh guy from the Navy. He's making uh guy from the Navy. He's making uh paddles for retirement. So he comes paddles for retirement. So he comes paddles for retirement. So he comes over, they're covered in lacquer. And over, they're covered in lacquer. And over, they're covered in lacquer. And I'm like, "Yo, my man, I can't burn them I'm like, "Yo, my man, I can't burn them I'm like, "Yo, my man, I can't burn them while they have the lacquer." So he's while they have the lacquer." So he's while they have the lacquer." So he's got a sander out. I've been burning. So got a sander out. I've been burning. So got a sander out. I've been burning. So I unplug my machine. He plugs into my I unplug my machine. He plugs into my I unplug my machine. He plugs into my Octopus outlet and is sanding down the Octopus outlet and is sanding down the Octopus outlet and is sanding down the lacquer. When he's done, I'll clip in. lacquer. When he's done, I'll clip in. lacquer. When he's done, I'll clip in. I'll burn him real quick. He'll finish I'll burn him real quick. He'll finish I'll burn him real quick. He'll finish him off. And my wife, I'll never forget, him off. And my wife, I'll never forget, him off. And my wife, I'll never forget, I look up and she bangs on the window I look up and she bangs on the window I look up and she bangs on the window and she's like, "It's Father's Day. and she's like, "It's Father's Day. and she's like, "It's Father's Day. We're supposed to go eat brunch." And I We're supposed to go eat brunch." And I We're supposed to go eat brunch." And I was like, "Last burn. Last burn." was like, "Last burn. Last burn." was like, "Last burn. Last burn." He had unplugged the sander and plugged He had unplugged the sander and plugged He had unplugged the sander and plugged in my machine into the oxid outlet and in my machine into the oxid outlet and in my machine into the oxid outlet and now there's a charge going to it. It's now there's a charge going to it. It's now there's a charge going to it. It's sitting on the ground. I don't know it. sitting on the ground. I don't know it. sitting on the ground. I don't know it. And the way I run the protocol is And the way I run the protocol is And the way I run the protocol is there's no electricity running to its there's no electricity running to its there's no electricity running to its you can put these things in your mouth. you can put these things in your mouth. you can put these things in your mouth. There's no electricity. So I pick them There's no electricity. So I pick them There's no electricity. So I pick them up to adjust them because then I'm going up to adjust them because then I'm going up to adjust them because then I'm going to walk back, plug it in, everybody's to walk back, plug it in, everybody's to walk back, plug it in, everybody's clear, flick the outlet. clear, flick the outlet. clear, flick the outlet. And when I readjusted them, the whole And when I readjusted them, the whole And when I readjusted them, the whole thing lit me up. I had them in both thing lit me up. I had them in both thing lit me up. I had them in both hands. &gt;&gt; You closed the circuit. &gt;&gt; You closed the circuit. &gt;&gt; You closed the circuit. &gt;&gt; Yep. So they were live on the leads just &gt;&gt; Yep. So they were live on the leads just &gt;&gt; Yep. So they were live on the leads just sitting on the ground. I didn't know it. sitting on the ground. I didn't know it. sitting on the ground. I didn't know it. So I went to readjust them. I made So I went to readjust them. I made So I went to readjust them. I made contact with them and it spun me around contact with them and it spun me around contact with them and it spun me around and I faced them about this far away and I faced them about this far away and I faced them about this far away and I can remember the back of my head was I can remember the back of my head was I can remember the back of my head was trying to touch my tailbone. I was trying to touch my tailbone. I was trying to touch my tailbone. I was trying to fight it. I could feel my trying to fight it. I could feel my trying to fight it. I could feel my teeth heating up and I was squeezing teeth heating up and I was squeezing teeth heating up and I was squeezing this thing as hard as I could and I this thing as hard as I could and I this thing as hard as I could and I heard a pop and I stepped back. That was heard a pop and I stepped back. That was heard a pop and I stepped back. That was my collar bone shattering from flex. My my collar bone shattering from flex. My my collar bone shattering from flex. My scapula they both shattered but in the scapula they both shattered but in the scapula they both shattered but in the process you take a hose and you wash off process you take a hose and you wash off process you take a hose and you wash off all the ash. So, right behind me is all the ash. So, right behind me is all the ash. So, right behind me is ankle deep standing water. And now I'm ankle deep standing water. And now I'm ankle deep standing water. And now I'm holding on to this thing. I step back holding on to this thing. I step back holding on to this thing. I step back and my wife, both my kids are turned and my wife, both my kids are turned and my wife, both my kids are turned around watching me from 8 feet away. around watching me from 8 feet away. around watching me from 8 feet away. I pop up, I levitate, and it launches me I pop up, I levitate, and it launches me I pop up, I levitate, and it launches me about 20 ft across my backyard, still about 20 ft across my backyard, still about 20 ft across my backyard, still holding on to the leads. He, thank God, holding on to the leads. He, thank God, holding on to the leads. He, thank God, has the wherewithal to unplug it. So has the wherewithal to unplug it. So has the wherewithal to unplug it. So when I wake up, my hair is standing when I wake up, my hair is standing when I wake up, my hair is standing straight up, my hands are smoking, and I straight up, my hands are smoking, and I straight up, my hands are smoking, and I exhale went and all this smoke came out exhale went and all this smoke came out exhale went and all this smoke came out of my mouth and I remember laying on the of my mouth and I remember laying on the of my mouth and I remember laying on the ground and he's right in my face and he ground and he's right in my face and he ground and he's right in my face and he goes, "Do you know where you're at?" And goes, "Do you know where you're at?" And goes, "Do you know where you're at?" And I said, "On the ground." And he went, I said, "On the ground." And he went, I said, "On the ground." And he went, "Can you move?" And I went, "My "Can you move?" And I went, "My "Can you move?" And I went, "My shoulder's dislocated for sure." And he shoulder's dislocated for sure." And he shoulder's dislocated for sure." And he went, "Can you set up?" And I went, "Can you set up?" And I went, "Can you set up?" And I went, "Help me." And he pulled me up. And as "Help me." And he pulled me up. And as "Help me." And he pulled me up. And as soon as he put pressure on there, I soon as he put pressure on there, I soon as he put pressure on there, I could feel my scapula just gravel. I could feel my scapula just gravel. I could feel my scapula just gravel. I could feel this all hinging in there. My could feel this all hinging in there. My could feel this all hinging in there. My hands are smoking. I'm like, so it blew hands are smoking. I'm like, so it blew hands are smoking. I'm like, so it blew out of my finger, blew out of this out of my finger, blew out of this out of my finger, blew out of this thumb. It fused my tendon to the nerve thumb. It fused my tendon to the nerve thumb. It fused my tendon to the nerve bundle. So, it was stuck like this. I bundle. So, it was stuck like this. I bundle. So, it was stuck like this. I couldn't move anything up here. He couldn't move anything up here. He couldn't move anything up here. He stands me up and I tell him, "I'm going stands me up and I tell him, "I'm going stands me up and I tell him, "I'm going to drive myself to the hospital." My to drive myself to the hospital." My to drive myself to the hospital." My wife is freaking out. They're trying to wife is freaking out. They're trying to wife is freaking out. They're trying to unplug the machine. You know, my kids unplug the machine. You know, my kids unplug the machine. You know, my kids are running out there and I don't want are running out there and I don't want are running out there and I don't want them to see me like this. I don't have a them to see me like this. I don't have a them to see me like this. I don't have a shirt on. I don't even have shoes on. shirt on. I don't even have shoes on. shirt on. I don't even have shoes on. Just got a pair of shorts and my shorts Just got a pair of shorts and my shorts Just got a pair of shorts and my shorts are on fire. So, I had little um ingrown are on fire. So, I had little um ingrown are on fire. So, I had little um ingrown hairs in my thighs. Electricity was hairs in my thighs. Electricity was hairs in my thighs. Electricity was shooting out of those and caught my shooting out of those and caught my shooting out of those and caught my shorts on fire anywhere I had them. So, shorts on fire anywhere I had them. So, shorts on fire anywhere I had them. So, out of the top of my head, one um one out of the top of my head, one um one out of the top of my head, one um one next to my nether region. I mean, just next to my nether region. I mean, just next to my nether region. I mean, just exit shots coming out of my body. I exit shots coming out of my body. I exit shots coming out of my body. I don't know anything about electricity, don't know anything about electricity, don't know anything about electricity, but it's not good. but it's not good. but it's not good. And I take a turn and I've probably got And I take a turn and I've probably got And I take a turn and I've probably got to walk maybe to walk maybe to walk maybe 354t to my car. So, he's in there with 354t to my car. So, he's in there with 354t to my car. So, he's in there with my wife trying to get the keys, trying my wife trying to get the keys, trying my wife trying to get the keys, trying to get me in there. And I turned and I to get me in there. And I turned and I to get me in there. And I turned and I stepped to the door. Have you seen Kill stepped to the door. Have you seen Kill stepped to the door. Have you seen Kill Bill? &gt;&gt; Remember the five finger death touch? &gt;&gt; Remember the five finger death touch? &gt;&gt; Remember the five finger death touch? Five steps. I took one step and Five steps. I took one step and Five steps. I took one step and everything went everything went everything went I took another one and it started I took another one and it started I took another one and it started closing and everything started going closing and everything started going closing and everything started going black. I was like, "Oh god." Third step black. I was like, "Oh god." Third step black. I was like, "Oh god." Third step and I was like, "Oh no." Fourth, fifth and I was like, "Oh no." Fourth, fifth and I was like, "Oh no." Fourth, fifth and I'm looking through a toilet paper and I'm looking through a toilet paper and I'm looking through a toilet paper straw and I'm like, "Oh my god." I took straw and I'm like, "Oh my god." I took straw and I'm like, "Oh my god." I took one more step and everything went black one more step and everything went black one more step and everything went black and I was in total blindness standing and I was in total blindness standing and I was in total blindness standing out there. I'm opening my eyes as wide out there. I'm opening my eyes as wide out there. I'm opening my eyes as wide as I can and I'm panicking. I can hear as I can and I'm panicking. I can hear as I can and I'm panicking. I can hear my wife running through the house my wife running through the house my wife running through the house screaming. I can hear him running around screaming. I can hear him running around screaming. I can hear him running around screaming, trying to get everything screaming, trying to get everything screaming, trying to get everything together. And I'm stuck on the side of together. And I'm stuck on the side of together. And I'm stuck on the side of my house like this, just shaking. I my house like this, just shaking. I my house like this, just shaking. I can't see anything. And I start power breathing as deep and And I start power breathing as deep and And I start power breathing as deep and as hard as I can. And I saw a little as hard as I can. And I saw a little as hard as I can. And I saw a little speck of light. And I just kept doing speck of light. And I just kept doing speck of light. And I just kept doing it, just forcing it. Inhale through my it, just forcing it. Inhale through my it, just forcing it. Inhale through my nose and mouth. Just power as much as I nose and mouth. Just power as much as I nose and mouth. Just power as much as I can. It started to open up, open up, can. It started to open up, open up, can. It started to open up, open up, open up. And probably 20 breaths into open up. And probably 20 breaths into open up. And probably 20 breaths into it, it was like I had superhuman vision. it, it was like I had superhuman vision. it, it was like I had superhuman vision. It was like I was interconnected with It was like I was interconnected with It was like I was interconnected with everything on the planet. It was like I everything on the planet. It was like I everything on the planet. It was like I had a DMT trip. Everything was super had a DMT trip. Everything was super had a DMT trip. Everything was super vibrant. I was totally aware of my whole vibrant. I was totally aware of my whole vibrant. I was totally aware of my whole body. I knew everything that just body. I knew everything that just body. I knew everything that just happened to me. I could recall things happened to me. I could recall things happened to me. I could recall things from in the past. And I knew everything from in the past. And I knew everything from in the past. And I knew everything was going to be fine. I'm good. I walk was going to be fine. I'm good. I walk was going to be fine. I'm good. I walk right over the truck. I open up the car. right over the truck. I open up the car. right over the truck. I open up the car. I get inside it. We hit every single I get inside it. We hit every single I get inside it. We hit every single speed bump and pothole from there until speed bump and pothole from there until speed bump and pothole from there until the ER. Just joining around and you can the ER. Just joining around and you can the ER. Just joining around and you can hear. &gt;&gt; Just remind you your shoulder uh was a &gt;&gt; Just remind you your shoulder uh was a &gt;&gt; Just remind you your shoulder uh was a little messed up. little messed up. little messed up. &gt;&gt; Shoulders &gt;&gt; Shoulders &gt;&gt; Shoulders plural. So I walk to the ER and Princess plural. So I walk to the ER and Princess plural. So I walk to the ER and Princess Antara in Virginia Beach has an amazing Antara in Virginia Beach has an amazing Antara in Virginia Beach has an amazing staff. What they also have is a staff of staff. What they also have is a staff of staff. What they also have is a staff of really, really beautiful nurses. But now really, really beautiful nurses. But now really, really beautiful nurses. But now it's co so now everybody has a mask on it's co so now everybody has a mask on it's co so now everybody has a mask on and all you can see are their eyes. And and all you can see are their eyes. And and all you can see are their eyes. And they had the most beautiful eyes I've they had the most beautiful eyes I've they had the most beautiful eyes I've ever seen. And I'm laying on my back, ever seen. And I'm laying on my back, ever seen. And I'm laying on my back, you know, I walk in and they can see it. you know, I walk in and they can see it. you know, I walk in and they can see it. Like if one of the nurses made a comment Like if one of the nurses made a comment Like if one of the nurses made a comment like, "Who brought in barbecue?" And like, "Who brought in barbecue?" And like, "Who brought in barbecue?" And it's my hands. like they're melted. Like it's my hands. like they're melted. Like it's my hands. like they're melted. Like they're smoking. It's so bad. Like it's they're smoking. It's so bad. Like it's they're smoking. It's so bad. Like it's making me nauseous to think about it. making me nauseous to think about it. making me nauseous to think about it. &gt;&gt; They get me in that table and I'll never &gt;&gt; They get me in that table and I'll never &gt;&gt; They get me in that table and I'll never forget this nurse came over and spun her forget this nurse came over and spun her forget this nurse came over and spun her face and she goes, "I'm so surprised you face and she goes, "I'm so surprised you face and she goes, "I'm so surprised you still have a penis." still have a penis." still have a penis." I said, "What?" And she went, "Honey, I said, "What?" And she went, "Honey, I said, "What?" And she went, "Honey, when you get electrocuted, usually when you get electrocuted, usually when you get electrocuted, usually fingers come off, your nose comes off, fingers come off, your nose comes off, fingers come off, your nose comes off, everything comes off you." And she's everything comes off you." And she's everything comes off you." And she's like, "As far as we can tell, you're like, "As far as we can tell, you're like, "As far as we can tell, you're intact. You haven't lost anything right intact. You haven't lost anything right intact. You haven't lost anything right now." She's like, "Move your fingers. now." She's like, "Move your fingers. now." She's like, "Move your fingers. I'm moving everything. Open my mouth. I'm moving everything. Open my mouth. I'm moving everything. Open my mouth. Can you hear? I can hear." And she's Can you hear? I can hear." And she's Can you hear? I can hear." And she's like, "Okay, well, here we go." They like, "Okay, well, here we go." They like, "Okay, well, here we go." They transferred me. I think I took an transferred me. I think I took an transferred me. I think I took an ambulance ride. I kind of blacked out ambulance ride. I kind of blacked out ambulance ride. I kind of blacked out for a little bit and then I woke up in for a little bit and then I woke up in for a little bit and then I woke up in the burn unit in Norfol and I had the burn unit in Norfol and I had the burn unit in Norfol and I had the specialist came in. My wife is now with specialist came in. My wife is now with specialist came in. My wife is now with me. We're laying there double slings, me. We're laying there double slings, me. We're laying there double slings, you know, trying to identify how bad you know, trying to identify how bad you know, trying to identify how bad everything is. They know we've got to do everything is. They know we've got to do everything is. They know we've got to do an emergency surgery on all this and he an emergency surgery on all this and he an emergency surgery on all this and he goes, "DJ, goes, "DJ, goes, "DJ, so this is after my two months with so this is after my two months with so this is after my two months with Vernon. So this is the best physical Vernon. So this is the best physical Vernon. So this is the best physical condition I've ever been in." So, I came condition I've ever been in." So, I came condition I've ever been in." So, I came from 180, now I'm 220, 6% body fat. I'm from 180, now I'm 220, 6% body fat. I'm from 180, now I'm 220, 6% body fat. I'm in phenomenal shape. Like, I don't in phenomenal shape. Like, I don't in phenomenal shape. Like, I don't need to retire. I could probably still need to retire. I could probably still need to retire. I could probably still suit it up again. And now I'm laying in suit it up again. And now I'm laying in suit it up again. And now I'm laying in this hospital bed. I have to show you this hospital bed. I have to show you this hospital bed. I have to show you the photos. And he uh he walks in. He's the photos. And he uh he walks in. He's the photos. And he uh he walks in. He's like, "You know what Rabbdo is?" And I like, "You know what Rabbdo is?" And I like, "You know what Rabbdo is?" And I said, "Yeah." And he goes, "When you get said, "Yeah." And he goes, "When you get said, "Yeah." And he goes, "When you get electrocuted, your body releases an electrocuted, your body releases an electrocuted, your body releases an enzyme. Everybody has, but it multiplies enzyme. Everybody has, but it multiplies enzyme. Everybody has, but it multiplies rapidly and your muscles liquefy and rapidly and your muscles liquefy and rapidly and your muscles liquefy and they go toxic. Then it goes septic and they go toxic. Then it goes septic and they go toxic. Then it goes septic and you die. Your issue is you're a big you die. Your issue is you're a big you die. Your issue is you're a big dude. If these enzyme markers hit this dude. If these enzyme markers hit this dude. If these enzyme markers hit this level, I got to start cutting stuff out level, I got to start cutting stuff out level, I got to start cutting stuff out of you, man. of you, man. of you, man. &gt;&gt; Taking muscle off. &gt;&gt; Taking muscle off. &gt;&gt; Taking muscle off. &gt;&gt; Yeah. He's like pecs, lats, shoulders, &gt;&gt; Yeah. He's like pecs, lats, shoulders, &gt;&gt; Yeah. He's like pecs, lats, shoulders, delts, hamstrings, quads. Like, so every delts, hamstrings, quads. Like, so every delts, hamstrings, quads. Like, so every hour I'm coming back here and we got to hour I'm coming back here and we got to hour I'm coming back here and we got to start doing these enzyme markers. So, start doing these enzyme markers. So, start doing these enzyme markers. So, I'm laying in that bed, can't move, I I'm laying in that bed, can't move, I I'm laying in that bed, can't move, I can't run, can't do anything. And I'm can't run, can't do anything. And I'm can't run, can't do anything. And I'm looking at my wife and I'm just looking at my wife and I'm just looking at my wife and I'm just imagining Dr. Gavorvorian coming in here imagining Dr. Gavorvorian coming in here imagining Dr. Gavorvorian coming in here and chopping me up in little pieces. and chopping me up in little pieces. and chopping me up in little pieces. I've never been in a low spot like that. I've never been in a low spot like that. I've never been in a low spot like that. Outside of being stuck behind that tire Outside of being stuck behind that tire Outside of being stuck behind that tire with Maddie, this was the first time with Maddie, this was the first time with Maddie, this was the first time since then where I was a true victim of since then where I was a true victim of since then where I was a true victim of circumstance. There's nothing I can do circumstance. There's nothing I can do circumstance. There's nothing I can do to prevent this. There's no magic pill I to prevent this. There's no magic pill I to prevent this. There's no magic pill I can take. There's nowhere to run. can take. There's nowhere to run. can take. There's nowhere to run. There's nothing I can do. I'm either There's nothing I can do. I'm either There's nothing I can do. I'm either going to lay in this hospital bed or I'm going to lay in this hospital bed or I'm going to lay in this hospital bed or I'm going to let that dude come in here and going to let that dude come in here and going to let that dude come in here and chop me up into pieces. And I'm just chop me up into pieces. And I'm just chop me up into pieces. And I'm just consumed with anger, guilt, envy. I just consumed with anger, guilt, envy. I just consumed with anger, guilt, envy. I just don't want to be here right now. And he don't want to be here right now. And he don't want to be here right now. And he came back in the hour and he's like, came back in the hour and he's like, came back in the hour and he's like, "Levelles are good. Levels are good." "Levelles are good. Levels are good." "Levelles are good. Levels are good." Came back next hour, levels are good. Came back next hour, levels are good. Came back next hour, levels are good. Third hour, fourth hour, fifth hour. And Third hour, fourth hour, fifth hour. And Third hour, fourth hour, fifth hour. And he's like, "DJ, every person on the he's like, "DJ, every person on the he's like, "DJ, every person on the planet has this enzyme in your body. planet has this enzyme in your body. planet has this enzyme in your body. Everyone. And not only is yours not Everyone. And not only is yours not Everyone. And not only is yours not climbing, not increasing. There's not a climbing, not increasing. There's not a climbing, not increasing. There's not a trace of it in your body." Now, he's trace of it in your body." Now, he's trace of it in your body." Now, he's like, "I've never seen anything like like, "I've never seen anything like like, "I've never seen anything like it." He's like, it." He's like, it." He's like, &gt;&gt; "Tomorrow morning, you're free to go." &gt;&gt; "Tomorrow morning, you're free to go." &gt;&gt; "Tomorrow morning, you're free to go." Okay. They planned the surgery. They put Okay. They planned the surgery. They put Okay. They planned the surgery. They put in two plates, 20s something screws, did in two plates, 20s something screws, did in two plates, 20s something screws, did the whole thing, but didn't have to chop the whole thing, but didn't have to chop the whole thing, but didn't have to chop me up. And you know, from talking to all me up. And you know, from talking to all me up. And you know, from talking to all the other people, typically people get the other people, typically people get the other people, typically people get electrocuted by one touch. So this arm electrocuted by one touch. So this arm electrocuted by one touch. So this arm comes off, you know, rib cages blow comes off, you know, rib cages blow comes off, you know, rib cages blow open. They were like, we don't know if open. They were like, we don't know if open. They were like, we don't know if it's because you had leads in both hands it's because you had leads in both hands it's because you had leads in both hands and you just completed a circuit and you just completed a circuit and you just completed a circuit and were able to ride it. We don't know what were able to ride it. We don't know what were able to ride it. We don't know what would happen if you would have held it would happen if you would have held it would happen if you would have held it for another second and a half. Where's for another second and a half. Where's for another second and a half. Where's your heart starting and stopping? Just your heart starting and stopping? Just your heart starting and stopping? Just the perfect timing. All the stars had to the perfect timing. All the stars had to the perfect timing. All the stars had to align for you to be here right now. And align for you to be here right now. And align for you to be here right now. And it's a medical mystery. So, I took it it's a medical mystery. So, I took it it's a medical mystery. So, I took it with that medical mystery and now we're with that medical mystery and now we're with that medical mystery and now we're here. But I had to walk back in. So, I here. But I had to walk back in. So, I here. But I had to walk back in. So, I get dropped off my house and this is get dropped off my house and this is get dropped off my house and this is where Vernon really comes into play is where Vernon really comes into play is where Vernon really comes into play is I'm sitting in my house in double I'm sitting in my house in double I'm sitting in my house in double slings. I've got two kids. I've got a slings. I've got two kids. I've got a slings. I've got two kids. I've got a wife. I've got no income. I've got no wife. I've got no income. I've got no wife. I've got no income. I've got no job. I've got no one that can hire me. job. I've got no one that can hire me. job. I've got no one that can hire me. And I can't do anything physically. And I can't do anything physically. And I can't do anything physically. Nothing. I'm just laying there in mental Nothing. I'm just laying there in mental Nothing. I'm just laying there in mental health straight down the tube. And I'm health straight down the tube. And I'm health straight down the tube. And I'm laying there at my kitchen table just laying there at my kitchen table just laying there at my kitchen table just feeling absolute the worst I've ever feeling absolute the worst I've ever feeling absolute the worst I've ever felt. And I get a felt. And I get a felt. And I get a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up to the door, open up the door, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up to the door, open up the door, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up to the door, open up the door, and there's my trainer Vernon. He's and there's my trainer Vernon. He's and there's my trainer Vernon. He's like, "How are you doing, big guy?" Not like, "How are you doing, big guy?" Not like, "How are you doing, big guy?" Not good. He like gives me this halfass good. He like gives me this halfass good. He like gives me this halfass hug. We walk in the kitchen. We're hug. We walk in the kitchen. We're hug. We walk in the kitchen. We're sitting down and he's like, "Talk me sitting down and he's like, "Talk me sitting down and he's like, "Talk me through it." I was like, "I can't do through it." I was like, "I can't do through it." I was like, "I can't do anything." He's like, "Okay, well, now anything." He's like, "Okay, well, now anything." He's like, "Okay, well, now that we've established that, what can that we've established that, what can that we've established that, what can you do?" It's like nothing. Well, can you do?" It's like nothing. Well, can you do?" It's like nothing. Well, can you make a fist? You know, my hands are you make a fist? You know, my hands are you make a fist? You know, my hands are all banded up. I was like, "Yeah." And all banded up. I was like, "Yeah." And all banded up. I was like, "Yeah." And he goes, "Can you move your wrist?" he goes, "Can you move your wrist?" he goes, "Can you move your wrist?" Yeah. And he went, "Can you walk?" I'm Yeah. And he went, "Can you walk?" I'm Yeah. And he went, "Can you walk?" I'm like, "I can walk." He's like, "I can walk." He's like, "I can walk." He's like, "Perfect." Pulls out his back pocket, "Perfect." Pulls out his back pocket, "Perfect." Pulls out his back pocket, this little blue 2PB dumbbell. And he this little blue 2PB dumbbell. And he this little blue 2PB dumbbell. And he sticks it in my fingertips. He's like, sticks it in my fingertips. He's like, sticks it in my fingertips. He's like, "Curl it." And I curled up and I did a "Curl it." And I curled up and I did a "Curl it." And I curled up and I did a wrist curl. And he went, "Roll your hand wrist curl. And he went, "Roll your hand wrist curl. And he went, "Roll your hand over." Okay. So, we can do grip and we can Okay. So, we can do grip and we can Okay. So, we can do grip and we can walk. Here we go. And we did that every walk. Here we go. And we did that every walk. Here we go. And we did that every single day until I could pressurize my single day until I could pressurize my single day until I could pressurize my upper body enough to where a sneeze upper body enough to where a sneeze upper body enough to where a sneeze wouldn't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] me and then we were wouldn't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] me and then we were wouldn't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] me and then we were straight back in the gym. So I'd walk in straight back in the gym. So I'd walk in straight back in the gym. So I'd walk in double slings. He's like, "The only double slings. He's like, "The only double slings. He's like, "The only thing we can do is belt squats, lunges, thing we can do is belt squats, lunges, thing we can do is belt squats, lunges, and mobility. That's all we're going to and mobility. That's all we're going to and mobility. That's all we're going to do." &gt;&gt; Do belt squatting and double slings. &gt;&gt; Do belt squatting and double slings. &gt;&gt; Do belt squatting and double slings. &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; That's awesome. But not hold. So you're &gt;&gt; That's awesome. But not hold. So you're &gt;&gt; That's awesome. But not hold. So you're not holding on to the holes. It's none not holding on to the holes. It's none not holding on to the holes. It's none of that. of that. of that. &gt;&gt; I can't do anything. So I'd literally &gt;&gt; I can't do anything. So I'd literally &gt;&gt; I can't do anything. So I'd literally walk in, I'd step through like a hula walk in, I'd step through like a hula walk in, I'd step through like a hula hoop. He would bring it up around me. hoop. He would bring it up around me. hoop. He would bring it up around me. I'd step on the platform. I'd squat I'd step on the platform. I'd squat I'd step on the platform. I'd squat down. He'd clip me in. I'd stand up. down. He'd clip me in. I'd stand up. down. He'd clip me in. I'd stand up. He'd unrackck it. I'd do my set, He'd unrackck it. I'd do my set, He'd unrackck it. I'd do my set, re-rackck it. He'd take the belt off me re-rackck it. He'd take the belt off me re-rackck it. He'd take the belt off me over and over. And he rebuilt me back over and over. And he rebuilt me back over and over. And he rebuilt me back every single day, five days a week. And every single day, five days a week. And every single day, five days a week. And we have never missed a session together we have never missed a session together we have never missed a session together since 2019. Never. Saved my life, man. since 2019. Never. Saved my life, man. since 2019. Never. Saved my life, man. &gt;&gt; That is awesome. &gt;&gt; That is awesome. &gt;&gt; That is awesome. &gt;&gt; He is the best human. He's been more of &gt;&gt; He is the best human. He's been more of &gt;&gt; He is the best human. He's been more of a life coach than a strength coach. a life coach than a strength coach. a life coach than a strength coach. &gt;&gt; He has unbelievable. And without him, if &gt;&gt; He has unbelievable. And without him, if &gt;&gt; He has unbelievable. And without him, if he wouldn't have walked in with that he wouldn't have walked in with that he wouldn't have walked in with that two-lb dumbbell, there's no telling two-lb dumbbell, there's no telling two-lb dumbbell, there's no telling where I'd be at right now. I told that where I'd be at right now. I told that where I'd be at right now. I told that story of the tactical strength condition story of the tactical strength condition story of the tactical strength condition conference like no one does that. No one conference like no one does that. No one conference like no one does that. No one is going to come over during that moment is going to come over during that moment is going to come over during that moment and push you. Everybody's going to walk and push you. Everybody's going to walk and push you. Everybody's going to walk over and put I'm so sorry for you. Oh, I over and put I'm so sorry for you. Oh, I over and put I'm so sorry for you. Oh, I can't believe this happened. Not him. can't believe this happened. Not him. can't believe this happened. Not him. It's like control things you can It's like control things you can It's like control things you can control. Can you make a fist? Can you control. Can you make a fist? Can you control. Can you make a fist? Can you turn your wrist? Wrist curls in turn your wrist? Wrist curls in turn your wrist? Wrist curls in 20-minute walks. Here we go. And that's 20-minute walks. Here we go. And that's 20-minute walks. Here we go. And that's what we did every single day. what we did every single day. what we did every single day. Bounce it all the way back. I mean, he's Bounce it all the way back. I mean, he's Bounce it all the way back. I mean, he's been there. Had to get a surgery on my been there. Had to get a surgery on my been there. Had to get a surgery on my hand. had to rebuild this whole hand. had to rebuild this whole hand. had to rebuild this whole hand. All the strength and everything we've All the strength and everything we've All the strength and everything we've had to do, the stomach, the kidney, had to do, the stomach, the kidney, had to do, the stomach, the kidney, everything in between. He's been there everything in between. He's been there everything in between. He's been there for. &gt;&gt; How many years ago was that? The roughly &gt;&gt; How many years ago was that? The roughly &gt;&gt; How many years ago was that? The roughly &gt;&gt; That was in 2019. So, what is that? &gt;&gt; That was in 2019. So, what is that? &gt;&gt; That was in 2019. So, what is that? &gt;&gt; It wasn't that long ago. &gt;&gt; It wasn't that long ago. &gt;&gt; It wasn't that long ago. &gt;&gt; Six years. &gt;&gt; Six years. &gt;&gt; Six years. &gt;&gt; And now you're feeling great. Super &gt;&gt; And now you're feeling great. Super &gt;&gt; And now you're feeling great. Super robust. We'll talk about your training robust. We'll talk about your training robust. We'll talk about your training now and what people can do with that now and what people can do with that now and what people can do with that training. I've gleaned a lot of training. I've gleaned a lot of training. I've gleaned a lot of really useful information about your really useful information about your really useful information about your from your current training program about from your current training program about from your current training program about setting standards and setting standards and setting standards and &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; that is a wild &gt;&gt; that is a wild &gt;&gt; that is a wild ride. &gt;&gt; I always say like at least give me a &gt;&gt; I always say like at least give me a &gt;&gt; I always say like at least give me a cool story with it. Like you know I got cool story with it. Like you know I got cool story with it. Like you know I got this skinny thing going on. Not a cool this skinny thing going on. Not a cool this skinny thing going on. Not a cool story. Electrocution it's a cool story. Electrocution it's a cool story. Electrocution it's a cool story. You know it's a feel-good story at the You know it's a feel-good story at the You know it's a feel-good story at the end. It wasn't going through it but end. It wasn't going through it but end. It wasn't going through it but &gt;&gt; you know surround yourself with people &gt;&gt; you know surround yourself with people &gt;&gt; you know surround yourself with people better than you and they'll definitely better than you and they'll definitely better than you and they'll definitely pull you out of the pull you out of the pull you out of the &gt;&gt; depths of despair. &gt;&gt; depths of despair. &gt;&gt; depths of despair. &gt;&gt; I mean it's an amazing story. At at one &gt;&gt; I mean it's an amazing story. At at one &gt;&gt; I mean it's an amazing story. At at one point I thought when you made the return point I thought when you made the return point I thought when you made the return to the skateboarding thing I thought, to the skateboarding thing I thought, to the skateboarding thing I thought, "Oh, you going to start skateboarding "Oh, you going to start skateboarding "Oh, you going to start skateboarding again. You feel that it almost it almost again. You feel that it almost it almost again. You feel that it almost it almost killed you and it didn't even have killed you and it didn't even have killed you and it didn't even have trucks and wheels on the thing yet." trucks and wheels on the thing yet." trucks and wheels on the thing yet." &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Oh man. I'm going to take a second to &gt;&gt; Oh man. I'm going to take a second to &gt;&gt; Oh man. I'm going to take a second to absorb all that. Um, absorb all that. Um, absorb all that. Um, I was going to ask you this later when I was going to ask you this later when I was going to ask you this later when we talk about Ibeane and DMT. we talk about Ibeane and DMT. we talk about Ibeane and DMT. &gt;&gt; Um, and some of the emerging uh &gt;&gt; Um, and some of the emerging uh &gt;&gt; Um, and some of the emerging uh therapeutics for PTSD, substance abuse, therapeutics for PTSD, substance abuse, therapeutics for PTSD, substance abuse, and other things that uh veterans are and other things that uh veterans are and other things that uh veterans are really uh fully embracing now and really uh fully embracing now and really uh fully embracing now and that are making uh a clear march toward that are making uh a clear march toward that are making uh a clear march toward broader treatment of mental health broader treatment of mental health broader treatment of mental health issues. But uh I'll ask you now and I'll issues. But uh I'll ask you now and I'll issues. But uh I'll ask you now and I'll probably ask you again later. probably ask you again later. probably ask you again later. at any point in this um or headed into at any point in this um or headed into at any point in this um or headed into this whole set of things um setbacks and this whole set of things um setbacks and this whole set of things um setbacks and comebacks um did you have feelings of comebacks um did you have feelings of comebacks um did you have feelings of higher power? I mean I don't want to put higher power? I mean I don't want to put higher power? I mean I don't want to put you on the spot but were you raised you on the spot but were you raised you on the spot but were you raised religious? Do believe in God any of religious? Do believe in God any of religious? Do believe in God any of that? I mean, you know, were it not for that? I mean, you know, were it not for that? I mean, you know, were it not for the fact that a very seriously the fact that a very seriously the fact that a very seriously scientifically educated friend of mine, scientifically educated friend of mine, scientifically educated friend of mine, Stanford Medical School, Harvard uh Stanford Medical School, Harvard uh Stanford Medical School, Harvard uh medical um who was a lifetime atheist, medical um who was a lifetime atheist, medical um who was a lifetime atheist, turned to me recently and he said, you turned to me recently and he said, you turned to me recently and he said, you know, I he said he said in his words, I know, I he said he said in his words, I know, I he said he said in his words, I believe in miracles. I said, miracle believe in miracles. I said, miracle believe in miracles. I said, miracle miracles or medical miracles? And he miracles or medical miracles? And he miracles or medical miracles? And he said, miracle miracles. Said, really? said, miracle miracles. Said, really? said, miracle miracles. Said, really? You of all people? Uh, and he said, You of all people? Uh, and he said, You of all people? Uh, and he said, "Yeah, believe in." And I said, "How?" "Yeah, believe in." And I said, "How?" "Yeah, believe in." And I said, "How?" And he said, "Because um I don't want to And he said, "Because um I don't want to And he said, "Because um I don't want to reveal who this person is out of um you reveal who this person is out of um you reveal who this person is out of um you know, it's his right to talk about these know, it's his right to talk about these know, it's his right to talk about these things, but he said out uh because of things, but he said out uh because of things, but he said out uh because of his math training." his math training." his math training." He said, you know, that some of the He said, you know, that some of the He said, you know, that some of the things he's seen and experienced have things he's seen and experienced have things he's seen and experienced have exceeded um probability have exceeded um probability have exceeded um probability statistics that it's impossible for the statistics that it's impossible for the statistics that it's impossible for the that literally impossible for these that literally impossible for these that literally impossible for these things to happen. this isn't, you know, things to happen. this isn't, you know, things to happen. this isn't, you know, one in a trillion or one in 10 trillion one in a trillion or one in 10 trillion one in a trillion or one in 10 trillion that it that some of these miracles go that it that some of these miracles go that it that some of these miracles go beyond what chance could provide uh beyond what chance could provide uh beyond what chance could provide uh intersecting chances. And so, you know, intersecting chances. And so, you know, intersecting chances. And so, you know, to hear a story like yours, people will to hear a story like yours, people will to hear a story like yours, people will come up with their own interpretations. come up with their own interpretations. come up with their own interpretations. And I'm a scientist. I believe in And I'm a scientist. I believe in And I'm a scientist. I believe in science. I do happen to believe in science. I do happen to believe in science. I do happen to believe in God, but I it's an individual choice for God, but I it's an individual choice for God, but I it's an individual choice for everybody. But did you ever step back everybody. But did you ever step back everybody. But did you ever step back and wonder whether or not in and wonder whether or not in and wonder whether or not in addition to Vernon, in addition to addition to Vernon, in addition to addition to Vernon, in addition to Maddie, in addition to your teammates, Maddie, in addition to your teammates, Maddie, in addition to your teammates, in addition to your wife whose father in addition to your wife whose father in addition to your wife whose father happened to be a team guy, I mean, happened to be a team guy, I mean, happened to be a team guy, I mean, there's some things around Virginia there's some things around Virginia there's some things around Virginia Beach they could have predicted that Beach they could have predicted that Beach they could have predicted that perhaps, but perhaps, but perhaps, but &gt;&gt; did you ever pause and just go, "Yeah, &gt;&gt; did you ever pause and just go, "Yeah, &gt;&gt; did you ever pause and just go, "Yeah, maybe there are forces beyond everything maybe there are forces beyond everything maybe there are forces beyond everything I can see that are uh watching out for I can see that are uh watching out for I can see that are uh watching out for me because you've had a number of me because you've had a number of me because you've had a number of second, third, fourth chances that second, third, fourth chances that second, third, fourth chances that starting to sound starting to sound starting to sound miraculous &gt;&gt; they are. It we didn't grow up religious &gt;&gt; they are. It we didn't grow up religious &gt;&gt; they are. It we didn't grow up religious at all. I was always spiritual. Always at all. I was always spiritual. Always at all. I was always spiritual. Always like and I mean you experience things in like and I mean you experience things in like and I mean you experience things in life that can't be can't be explained. life that can't be can't be explained. life that can't be can't be explained. And then when you see religious people And then when you see religious people And then when you see religious people like well that's a miracle. You're like well that's a miracle. You're like well that's a miracle. You're like is it a miracle or am I just lucky? You is it a miracle or am I just lucky? You is it a miracle or am I just lucky? You start to look at it. And then you do buy start to look at it. And then you do buy start to look at it. And then you do buy the neodym and you realize like yep it's the neodym and you realize like yep it's the neodym and you realize like yep it's got to be it's got to be real. Like got to be it's got to be real. Like got to be it's got to be real. Like there has to be a higher power. There there has to be a higher power. There there has to be a higher power. There has to be something that's pulling the has to be something that's pulling the has to be something that's pulling the strings. It's making this happen. Like strings. It's making this happen. Like strings. It's making this happen. Like divine intervention. There's no reason I divine intervention. There's no reason I divine intervention. There's no reason I should be here after that. should be here after that. should be here after that. after this you add up all these after this you add up all these after this you add up all these things like there's not a chance like things like there's not a chance like things like there's not a chance like why like what am I supposed to be doing why like what am I supposed to be doing why like what am I supposed to be doing here how am I supposed to pay that here how am I supposed to pay that here how am I supposed to pay that forward like if somebody's pulling the forward like if somebody's pulling the forward like if somebody's pulling the strings to make sure I'm sitting in a strings to make sure I'm sitting in a strings to make sure I'm sitting in a seat what am I doing to make sure I'm seat what am I doing to make sure I'm seat what am I doing to make sure I'm not wasting this opportunity but I mean not wasting this opportunity but I mean not wasting this opportunity but I mean it definitely makes you question I mean it definitely makes you question I mean it definitely makes you question I mean I definitely see why guys get I don't I definitely see why guys get I don't I definitely see why guys get I don't want to say hung up on religion but when want to say hung up on religion but when want to say hung up on religion but when they really buy in they really turn they really buy in they really turn they really buy in they really turn the page and you're like how much of the page and you're like how much of the page and you're like how much of that is just for TV none of it with that is just for TV none of it with that is just for TV none of it with that Right. Like he felt it. He saw the Right. Like he felt it. He saw the Right. Like he felt it. He saw the change. And change. And change. And I mean, I've seen too many miracles I mean, I've seen too many miracles I mean, I've seen too many miracles happen to believe that happen to believe that happen to believe that somebody's not behind it. Some things somebody's not behind it. Some things somebody's not behind it. Some things not behind it. not behind it. not behind it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I appreciate you sharing that. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. I appreciate you sharing that. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. I appreciate you sharing that. Um I realize that especially on a science I realize that especially on a science I realize that especially on a science health podcast and we talk about other health podcast and we talk about other health podcast and we talk about other things, but it it's talked about it more things, but it it's talked about it more things, but it it's talked about it more and more recently just I mean I can't and more recently just I mean I can't and more recently just I mean I can't help but be a curious human being and help but be a curious human being and help but be a curious human being and wonder about these things. um wonder about these things. um wonder about these things. um whatever the case may be, uh you whatever the case may be, uh you whatever the case may be, uh you made it through. Um you retired. You you made it through. Um you retired. You you made it through. Um you retired. You you did you uh I couldn't imagine if your did you uh I couldn't imagine if your did you uh I couldn't imagine if your wife had uh had um heard that you were wife had uh had um heard that you were wife had uh had um heard that you were not going to retire. I mean I like not going to retire. I mean I like not going to retire. I mean I like to think that nothing can break your to think that nothing can break your to think that nothing can break your guys's uh marriage, but man, that's got guys's uh marriage, but man, that's got guys's uh marriage, but man, that's got that's a lot to bear. that's a lot to bear. that's a lot to bear. &gt;&gt; She was over it. &gt;&gt; She was over it. &gt;&gt; She was over it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. With the kids seeing this. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. With the kids seeing this. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. With the kids seeing this. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, and I had turned myself &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, and I had turned myself &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, and I had turned myself into something I was I wasn't proud of. into something I was I wasn't proud of. into something I was I wasn't proud of. &gt;&gt; You know, I talk about dials, not &gt;&gt; You know, I talk about dials, not &gt;&gt; You know, I talk about dials, not switches, like being able to power down, switches, like being able to power down, switches, like being able to power down, power it up, power it off. I never did power it up, power it off. I never did power it up, power it off. I never did that. So, she got to see the transition that. So, she got to see the transition that. So, she got to see the transition from being at Tiltington and then going from being at Tiltington and then going from being at Tiltington and then going over the tier one organization and what over the tier one organization and what over the tier one organization and what that does with you, the pressure to that does with you, the pressure to that does with you, the pressure to perform, the performance on demand, it perform, the performance on demand, it perform, the performance on demand, it changes you. It has to. You can't be it changes you. It has to. You can't be it changes you. It has to. You can't be the same person you were at 17, 19, 20 the same person you were at 17, 19, 20 the same person you were at 17, 19, 20 and then do that job. You can't. You and then do that job. You can't. You and then do that job. You can't. You have to be able to change. And I think a have to be able to change. And I think a have to be able to change. And I think a lot of that it was just it was wearing lot of that it was just it was wearing lot of that it was just it was wearing her down. I mean, I was gone so much. her down. I mean, I was gone so much. her down. I mean, I was gone so much. And a lot of that I tried to explain to And a lot of that I tried to explain to And a lot of that I tried to explain to the guys now like don't do what I did. I the guys now like don't do what I did. I the guys now like don't do what I did. I would go on every single trip I could would go on every single trip I could would go on every single trip I could because I was living these multiple because I was living these multiple because I was living these multiple different lives. Like I would go out to different lives. Like I would go out to different lives. Like I would go out to Arizona and I would skydive for months Arizona and I would skydive for months Arizona and I would skydive for months on end. I mean, I think I did almost on end. I mean, I think I did almost on end. I mean, I think I did almost 4,000 jumps in seven years. Like, we 4,000 jumps in seven years. Like, we 4,000 jumps in seven years. Like, we went we turned the page. And that's went we turned the page. And that's went we turned the page. And that's deploying. That's every other training deploying. That's every other training deploying. That's every other training trip. That's just sacrificing every trip. That's just sacrificing every trip. That's just sacrificing every weekend and making big pushes out there. weekend and making big pushes out there. weekend and making big pushes out there. But when you go, no one knows who you But when you go, no one knows who you But when you go, no one knows who you are. They don't know what you do for a are. They don't know what you do for a are. They don't know what you do for a job. They just think you're a normal job. They just think you're a normal job. They just think you're a normal skydiver. Like, we're doing these big skydiver. Like, we're doing these big skydiver. Like, we're doing these big wave formations and, you know, trying wave formations and, you know, trying wave formations and, you know, trying out for world records and doing all this out for world records and doing all this out for world records and doing all this stuff. And it's amazing. But it just stuff. And it's amazing. But it just stuff. And it's amazing. But it just takes you so far away from that person I takes you so far away from that person I takes you so far away from that person I have to be in Virginia Beach. You become have to be in Virginia Beach. You become have to be in Virginia Beach. You become addicted to it. And then when I go here, addicted to it. And then when I go here, addicted to it. And then when I go here, I can be someone else completely. No one I can be someone else completely. No one I can be someone else completely. No one knows who I am. I go on this trip, no knows who I am. I go on this trip, no knows who I am. I go on this trip, no one knows who I am. You don't talk about one knows who I am. You don't talk about one knows who I am. You don't talk about the job you do. You make up a line. I'll the job you do. You make up a line. I'll the job you do. You make up a line. I'll throw them out there and it'll make them throw them out there and it'll make them throw them out there and it'll make them all mad. We tell everybody you're part all mad. We tell everybody you're part all mad. We tell everybody you're part of the Red Bull Air Force. of the Red Bull Air Force. of the Red Bull Air Force. &gt;&gt; Red Bull Air Force. &gt;&gt; Red Bull Air Force. &gt;&gt; Red Bull Air Force. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like we skydive with all the boys, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like we skydive with all the boys, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like we skydive with all the boys, we know them all. And because you we know them all. And because you we know them all. And because you skydive enough, you can speak the lingo. skydive enough, you can speak the lingo. skydive enough, you can speak the lingo. Like they see you out all the drop Like they see you out all the drop Like they see you out all the drop zones. They see zones. They see zones. They see &gt;&gt; you can fake that really, really well. &gt;&gt; you can fake that really, really well. &gt;&gt; you can fake that really, really well. Some guys will be a hot air balloon Some guys will be a hot air balloon Some guys will be a hot air balloon pilot. You'll be an MMA fighter. You'll pilot. You'll be an MMA fighter. You'll pilot. You'll be an MMA fighter. You'll be a hockey team or we had real long be a hockey team or we had real long be a hockey team or we had real long hair. you can adopt these different hair. you can adopt these different hair. you can adopt these different personas and I think a lot of that is personas and I think a lot of that is personas and I think a lot of that is just trying to compartmentalize what you just trying to compartmentalize what you just trying to compartmentalize what you have back home where I don't have to have back home where I don't have to have back home where I don't have to think about it because you'll literally think about it because you'll literally think about it because you'll literally I mean your buddies will tell you you'll I mean your buddies will tell you you'll I mean your buddies will tell you you'll be sitting on the couch at 2:00 in the be sitting on the couch at 2:00 in the be sitting on the couch at 2:00 in the afternoon and when that pager goes off afternoon and when that pager goes off afternoon and when that pager goes off you're gone right now like you got 30 you're gone right now like you got 30 you're gone right now like you got 30 minutes there's no goodbye there's no oh minutes there's no goodbye there's no oh minutes there's no goodbye there's no oh let me swing by work real quick and give let me swing by work real quick and give let me swing by work real quick and give you one kiss you don't I'm going fishing you one kiss you don't I'm going fishing you one kiss you don't I'm going fishing jump in a car and you're gone and you jump in a car and you're gone and you jump in a car and you're gone and you got to be able to shut it off it's very got to be able to shut it off it's very got to be able to shut it off it's very hard to do when You're just so very hard to do when You're just so very hard to do when You're just so obsessed with being the best husband and obsessed with being the best husband and obsessed with being the best husband and the best father. You can't shut that the best father. You can't shut that the best father. You can't shut that off. The whole flight ends. You're just off. The whole flight ends. You're just off. The whole flight ends. You're just thinking about like if this happens, thinking about like if this happens, thinking about like if this happens, this happens. How my daughter's going to this happens. How my daughter's going to this happens. How my daughter's going to react? Like, oh my god, they're going to react? Like, oh my god, they're going to react? Like, oh my god, they're going to come here. What point of the day she's come here. What point of the day she's come here. What point of the day she's going to get the news? How if they get going to get the news? How if they get going to get the news? How if they get I'm not going to be there for the I'm not going to be there for the I'm not going to be there for the marriage. I'm not going to be there for marriage. I'm not going to be there for marriage. I'm not going to be there for this this. You start to think about this this. You start to think about this this. You start to think about everything you're going to miss. Clouds everything you're going to miss. Clouds everything you're going to miss. Clouds your judgment. And it makes you hesitate your judgment. And it makes you hesitate your judgment. And it makes you hesitate at that moment. You can't you can't at that moment. You can't you can't at that moment. You can't you can't hesitate, especially when no one else hesitate, especially when no one else hesitate, especially when no one else does. And you paint that in your mind. does. And you paint that in your mind. does. And you paint that in your mind. Nobody else in here is thinking about Nobody else in here is thinking about Nobody else in here is thinking about being a full-time dad or a full-time being a full-time dad or a full-time being a full-time dad or a full-time husband right now. Nobody cares if I'm a husband right now. Nobody cares if I'm a husband right now. Nobody cares if I'm a 63% husband. Nobody cares. They need me 63% husband. Nobody cares. They need me 63% husband. Nobody cares. They need me to do this job at 100% because that's to do this job at 100% because that's to do this job at 100% because that's what this craft deserves. what this craft deserves. what this craft deserves. But it turns you into something you But it turns you into something you But it turns you into something you don't want to be longterm. It's hard, don't want to be longterm. It's hard, don't want to be longterm. It's hard, man. But she was done. She was begging man. But she was done. She was begging man. But she was done. She was begging for me to hang it up cuz all of our for me to hang it up cuz all of our for me to hang it up cuz all of our friends are dying. And then all the guys friends are dying. And then all the guys friends are dying. And then all the guys that transition out and they start doing that transition out and they start doing that transition out and they start doing contracting jobs, they're getting contracting jobs, they're getting contracting jobs, they're getting killed. They're getting shot. We're killed. They're getting shot. We're killed. They're getting shot. We're picking up from the hospital. picking up from the hospital. picking up from the hospital. What else you want me to do? There's no What else you want me to do? There's no What else you want me to do? There's no retirement club. You want me to work at retirement club. You want me to work at retirement club. You want me to work at Home Depot? What do you want me to do? I Home Depot? What do you want me to do? I Home Depot? What do you want me to do? I only know how to do this one thing. And only know how to do this one thing. And only know how to do this one thing. And that was the plan. I was going to retire that was the plan. I was going to retire that was the plan. I was going to retire and start contracting with one of the and start contracting with one of the and start contracting with one of the government agencies and essentially do government agencies and essentially do government agencies and essentially do the same job I do now, just make a the same job I do now, just make a the same job I do now, just make a little bit better money, a little bit little bit better money, a little bit little bit better money, a little bit better schedule, and better schedule, and better schedule, and one thing led to another and ended up one thing led to another and ended up one thing led to another and ended up not doing it. not doing it. not doing it. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, ROA. acknowledge one of our sponsors, ROA. acknowledge one of our sponsors, ROA. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest that are of the absolute highest that are of the absolute highest quality. I'm excited to share that Roka quality. I'm excited to share that Roka quality. I'm excited to share that Roka and I recently teamed up to create a new and I recently teamed up to create a new and I recently teamed up to create a new pair of red lens glasses. These red lens pair of red lens glasses. These red lens pair of red lens glasses. These red lens glasses are meant to be worn in the glasses are meant to be worn in the glasses are meant to be worn in the evening after the sun goes down. They evening after the sun goes down. They evening after the sun goes down. They filter out shortwavelength light that filter out shortwavelength light that filter out shortwavelength light that comes from screens and from LED lights, comes from screens and from LED lights, comes from screens and from LED lights, which are the most common indoor which are the most common indoor which are the most common indoor lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional blue blockers. They do filter out blue blockers. They do filter out blue blockers. They do filter out blue light, but they filter out a lot more light, but they filter out a lot more light, but they filter out a lot more than just blue light. In fact, they than just blue light. In fact, they than just blue light. In fact, they filter out the full range of short filter out the full range of short filter out the full range of short wavelength light that suppresses the wavelength light that suppresses the wavelength light that suppresses the hormone melatonin. By the way, you want hormone melatonin. By the way, you want hormone melatonin. By the way, you want melatonin high in the evening and at melatonin high in the evening and at melatonin high in the evening and at night. Makes it easy to fall and stay night. Makes it easy to fall and stay night. Makes it easy to fall and stay asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths asleep. And those short wavelengths trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases trigger increases in cortisol. Increases in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part in cortisol are great in the early part of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want of the day, but you do not want increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and increases in cortisol in the evening and at night. These Roa Red Lens glasses at night. These Roa Red Lens glasses at night. These Roa Red Lens glasses ensure normal, healthy increases in ensure normal, healthy increases in ensure normal, healthy increases in melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels melatonin and that your cortisol levels stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want stay low, which is again what you want in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing in the evening and at night. In doing so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your help you calm down and improve your transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens glasses also look great. They have a ton glasses also look great. They have a ton glasses also look great. They have a ton of different frames to select from, and of different frames to select from, and of different frames to select from, and you can wear them out to dinner or you can wear them out to dinner or you can wear them out to dinner or concerts, and you can still see things. concerts, and you can still see things. concerts, and you can still see things. I don't recommend you wear them while I don't recommend you wear them while I don't recommend you wear them while driving just for safety purposes. But if driving just for safety purposes. But if driving just for safety purposes. But if you're out to dinner, you're at a you're out to dinner, you're at a you're out to dinner, you're at a concert, you're at a friend's house, or concert, you're at a friend's house, or concert, you're at a friend's house, or you're just at home, pop those Roka Red you're just at home, pop those Roka Red you're just at home, pop those Roka Red Lens glasses on, and you'll really Lens glasses on, and you'll really Lens glasses on, and you'll really notice the difference in terms of your notice the difference in terms of your notice the difference in terms of your levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I mentioned earlier. So, it really is mentioned earlier. So, it really is mentioned earlier. So, it really is possible to support your biology. be possible to support your biology. be possible to support your biology. be scientific about it and remain social at scientific about it and remain social at scientific about it and remain social at the same time if you like. If you'd like the same time if you like. If you'd like the same time if you like. If you'd like to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the code hubman to save 20% and enter the code hubman to save 20% and enter the code hubman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's off your first order. Again, that's off your first order. Again, that's roa.com and enter the code huberman at roa.com and enter the code huberman at roa.com and enter the code huberman at checkout. I want to talk about ibame DMT checkout. I want to talk about ibame DMT checkout. I want to talk about ibame DMT mental health. mental health. mental health. &gt;&gt; But first, I want to talk a little bit &gt;&gt; But first, I want to talk a little bit &gt;&gt; But first, I want to talk a little bit about posture. M about posture. M about posture. M &gt;&gt; recently I heard you talking about &gt;&gt; recently I heard you talking about &gt;&gt; recently I heard you talking about physical posture in the gym, literally physical posture in the gym, literally physical posture in the gym, literally form and how upright one is with their form and how upright one is with their form and how upright one is with their stance or squat and how that translates stance or squat and how that translates stance or squat and how that translates to mental posture and it was the first to mental posture and it was the first to mental posture and it was the first time I've ever heard anyone talk about time I've ever heard anyone talk about time I've ever heard anyone talk about translating the physical into the mental translating the physical into the mental translating the physical into the mental in this way. Um so if you don't mind uh in this way. Um so if you don't mind uh in this way. Um so if you don't mind uh how do you think about mental posture how do you think about mental posture how do you think about mental posture and physical posture and how the two and physical posture and how the two and physical posture and how the two intersect? I think in that analogy, the metaphor I think in that analogy, the metaphor I think in that analogy, the metaphor I used, physical posture, if you think if used, physical posture, if you think if used, physical posture, if you think if I stand feet shoulderwidth apart and I stand feet shoulderwidth apart and I stand feet shoulderwidth apart and I put a barbell on me, you slide on 45s, put a barbell on me, you slide on 45s, put a barbell on me, you slide on 45s, I'm strong. Two more 45s, I'm strong. I'm strong. Two more 45s, I'm strong. I'm strong. Two more 45s, I'm strong. You could load up 8 900 lb and I could You could load up 8 900 lb and I could You could load up 8 900 lb and I could sit there and hold it. Or if you put 315 sit there and hold it. Or if you put 315 sit there and hold it. Or if you put 315 lbs on it, I can drop butt the floor and lbs on it, I can drop butt the floor and lbs on it, I can drop butt the floor and I can squat it. If I hold it at 90° and I can squat it. If I hold it at 90° and I can squat it. If I hold it at 90° and you add on a 45, it feels like a ton. you add on a 45, it feels like a ton. you add on a 45, it feels like a ton. You start adding on 10, everything You start adding on 10, everything You start adding on 10, everything starts to quiver. I use the same thing starts to quiver. I use the same thing starts to quiver. I use the same thing as my mental health. If I wake up in the as my mental health. If I wake up in the as my mental health. If I wake up in the morning, I've set my morning routine and morning, I've set my morning routine and morning, I've set my morning routine and I'm firing on all eight cylinders. You I'm firing on all eight cylinders. You I'm firing on all eight cylinders. You can stack on everything on top of me can stack on everything on top of me can stack on everything on top of me because I'm in an optimal state. I can because I'm in an optimal state. I can because I'm in an optimal state. I can take it just like I'm in a full posture. take it just like I'm in a full posture. take it just like I'm in a full posture. Just keep giving it to me. Keep giving Just keep giving it to me. Keep giving Just keep giving it to me. Keep giving it to me. If I wake up, my morning it to me. If I wake up, my morning it to me. If I wake up, my morning routine's not there. I start reading routine's not there. I start reading routine's not there. I start reading some hateful stuff in the morning, don't some hateful stuff in the morning, don't some hateful stuff in the morning, don't have a good input with my wife first have a good input with my wife first have a good input with my wife first thing, I'm stuck behind the school bus, thing, I'm stuck behind the school bus, thing, I'm stuck behind the school bus, late for my first meeting, now you hand late for my first meeting, now you hand late for my first meeting, now you hand me a parking ticket. it feels like the me a parking ticket. it feels like the me a parking ticket. it feels like the world is collapsing on top of me and I world is collapsing on top of me and I world is collapsing on top of me and I can't do anything for it. So throughout can't do anything for it. So throughout can't do anything for it. So throughout the entire day, that's the whole purpose the entire day, that's the whole purpose the entire day, that's the whole purpose of the micro win kind of formula. Stack of the micro win kind of formula. Stack of the micro win kind of formula. Stack up as many wins to put yourself in up as many wins to put yourself in up as many wins to put yourself in optimal headsp space because reality optimal headsp space because reality optimal headsp space because reality isn't going to know. It's going to smack isn't going to know. It's going to smack isn't going to know. It's going to smack you either way. And if I keep myself you either way. And if I keep myself you either way. And if I keep myself blocking everything that's externally blocking everything that's externally blocking everything that's externally toxic to me when something does get put toxic to me when something does get put toxic to me when something does get put on me that I have to wear, I'm in a good on me that I have to wear, I'm in a good on me that I have to wear, I'm in a good posture to put it on. That jacket might posture to put it on. That jacket might posture to put it on. That jacket might weigh 55 pounds. I put it on and I'm weigh 55 pounds. I put it on and I'm weigh 55 pounds. I put it on and I'm still strong cuz I've been dropping off still strong cuz I've been dropping off still strong cuz I've been dropping off everything that I don't need to wear all everything that I don't need to wear all everything that I don't need to wear all day long. Yeah. I mean, but you'll see day long. Yeah. I mean, but you'll see day long. Yeah. I mean, but you'll see it. I mean, I know you say it analyze it. I mean, I know you say it analyze it. I mean, I know you say it analyze people all day long. When people are in people all day long. When people are in people all day long. When people are in a negative headsp space, their posture a negative headsp space, their posture a negative headsp space, their posture changes, their head drops, their changes, their head drops, their changes, their head drops, their shoulders roll forward. They're always shoulders roll forward. They're always shoulders roll forward. They're always looking at the ground. They're never up looking at the ground. They're never up looking at the ground. They're never up processing information. It's because processing information. It's because processing information. It's because they're dragging whatever just happened they're dragging whatever just happened they're dragging whatever just happened all day long. Now you add in one more all day long. Now you add in one more all day long. Now you add in one more thing. Your mom's got cancer. Oh, your thing. Your mom's got cancer. Oh, your thing. Your mom's got cancer. Oh, your wife's going to leave you. Oh, your kids wife's going to leave you. Oh, your kids wife's going to leave you. Oh, your kids are so everything just starts to weigh are so everything just starts to weigh are so everything just starts to weigh down on you and it feels like down on you and it feels like down on you and it feels like something you'll never get past. something you'll never get past. something you'll never get past. Insurmountable. It's at some point and Insurmountable. It's at some point and Insurmountable. It's at some point and that's all because you start to let it that's all because you start to let it that's all because you start to let it slowly but surely chip away at you. It's slowly but surely chip away at you. It's slowly but surely chip away at you. It's like control the things you can control like control the things you can control like control the things you can control and the things you can control you and the things you can control you and the things you can control you either avoid them completely or you take either avoid them completely or you take either avoid them completely or you take them as that's reality you have to live them as that's reality you have to live them as that's reality you have to live through right now. I don't know why you through right now. I don't know why you through right now. I don't know why you have cancer but you do and you got to have cancer but you do and you got to have cancer but you do and you got to get through it. get through it. get through it. Okay. Well, what positive things do I Okay. Well, what positive things do I Okay. Well, what positive things do I have? Great relationship with my wife, have? Great relationship with my wife, have? Great relationship with my wife, great relationship with my kids, great relationship with my kids, great relationship with my kids, great relationship with my friends, my social relationship with my friends, my social relationship with my friends, my social circle is shrunk, everyone around me is circle is shrunk, everyone around me is circle is shrunk, everyone around me is better than me and they want me to be better than me and they want me to be better than me and they want me to be better. Okay, I can take on a whole lot better. Okay, I can take on a whole lot better. Okay, I can take on a whole lot if I don't have a tight circle, no if I don't have a tight circle, no if I don't have a tight circle, no relationship, my wife, ostracized my relationship, my wife, ostracized my relationship, my wife, ostracized my kids, everything. Now, you start to add kids, everything. Now, you start to add kids, everything. Now, you start to add on that external stress, it cripples on that external stress, it cripples on that external stress, it cripples me really, really fast. And I know I'm me really, really fast. And I know I'm me really, really fast. And I know I'm not the only one. So when I say it to not the only one. So when I say it to not the only one. So when I say it to everybody, whatever you have going on everybody, whatever you have going on everybody, whatever you have going on right now, whatever is absorbing all right now, whatever is absorbing all right now, whatever is absorbing all your bandwidth, it's us two, but you're your bandwidth, it's us two, but you're your bandwidth, it's us two, but you're choosing to wear that jacket all day. choosing to wear that jacket all day. choosing to wear that jacket all day. You're putting on another one and then You're putting on another one and then You're putting on another one and then another one. Then you add the external another one. Then you add the external another one. Then you add the external pressure of having to provide for a pressure of having to provide for a pressure of having to provide for a family and be, you know, that family and be, you know, that family and be, you know, that emotionally stable figure for the emotionally stable figure for the emotionally stable figure for the household. It's hard to do all day long. household. It's hard to do all day long. household. It's hard to do all day long. And a lot of people lose sight of it. And a lot of people lose sight of it. And a lot of people lose sight of it. And I think that's why so many people And I think that's why so many people And I think that's why so many people close their chapter early. They offer close their chapter early. They offer close their chapter early. They offer suicide because they think there's no suicide because they think there's no suicide because they think there's no way I can write the ship. Like it's go way I can write the ship. Like it's go way I can write the ship. Like it's go it's gone too far right now and I don't it's gone too far right now and I don't it's gone too far right now and I don't want to have to sit here and rebuild it want to have to sit here and rebuild it want to have to sit here and rebuild it and they close the chapter out. It's and they close the chapter out. It's and they close the chapter out. It's like if we could have eliminated all those if we could have eliminated all those if we could have eliminated all those things and given yourself a breath of things and given yourself a breath of things and given yourself a breath of fresh air, would you have done the same fresh air, would you have done the same fresh air, would you have done the same thing? If I would have grabbed you right thing? If I would have grabbed you right thing? If I would have grabbed you right before the moment like this isn't before the moment like this isn't before the moment like this isn't permanent. You can fix this right now. permanent. You can fix this right now. permanent. You can fix this right now. You just have to change these aspects. You just have to change these aspects. You just have to change these aspects. They would in the moment though and I've They would in the moment though and I've They would in the moment though and I've been there. You don't have the clarity. been there. You don't have the clarity. been there. You don't have the clarity. you don't have the vision. And a guy you don't have the vision. And a guy you don't have the vision. And a guy told me a long time ago, he goes, "I told me a long time ago, he goes, "I told me a long time ago, he goes, "I think a lot of people want to hit the think a lot of people want to hit the think a lot of people want to hit the reset button on the Nintendo." reset button on the Nintendo." reset button on the Nintendo." Cha-ching. Restart. Restart the game. You're not Restart. Restart the game. You're not Restart. Restart the game. You're not restarting the game. It's over forever. restarting the game. It's over forever. restarting the game. It's over forever. And I hate seeing people do it. I think And I hate seeing people do it. I think And I hate seeing people do it. I think now, you know, after I've come out of now, you know, after I've come out of now, you know, after I've come out of the medicine, I've done a bunch of the medicine, I've done a bunch of the medicine, I've done a bunch of therapy and cut out a lot of toxicity therapy and cut out a lot of toxicity therapy and cut out a lot of toxicity out of my life. I've gotten that breath out of my life. I've gotten that breath out of my life. I've gotten that breath of fresh air. And I'm just I told Marcus of fresh air. And I'm just I told Marcus of fresh air. And I'm just I told Marcus and Amber Capone when I came out of the and Amber Capone when I came out of the and Amber Capone when I came out of the treatment, I'm going to jump on the treatment, I'm going to jump on the treatment, I'm going to jump on the nearest building. I'm going to shout it nearest building. I'm going to shout it nearest building. I'm going to shout it from the rooftops like this will help. from the rooftops like this will help. from the rooftops like this will help. There is a way out of this funk. It's There is a way out of this funk. It's There is a way out of this funk. It's just one step further than you've just one step further than you've just one step further than you've currently gone. Like there's light at currently gone. Like there's light at currently gone. Like there's light at the end of that tunnel. Just one step the end of that tunnel. Just one step the end of that tunnel. Just one step further. One step further and just further. One step further and just further. One step further and just continuously go and it'll get better. continuously go and it'll get better. continuously go and it'll get better. But yeah, for me posture is a huge But yeah, for me posture is a huge But yeah, for me posture is a huge thing. In combatives, it's a huge thing. In combatives, it's a huge thing. In combatives, it's a huge thing. In processing information, it's a huge In processing information, it's a huge In processing information, it's a huge thing. In dealing with stress, it's a thing. In dealing with stress, it's a thing. In dealing with stress, it's a huge thing. I can't let myself collapse huge thing. I can't let myself collapse huge thing. I can't let myself collapse because once you start adding another because once you start adding another because once you start adding another pound to me, it hits me to the floor pound to me, it hits me to the floor pound to me, it hits me to the floor really fast. So, control the things you really fast. So, control the things you really fast. So, control the things you can control and a lot of it is just your can control and a lot of it is just your can control and a lot of it is just your posture and your perspective. Great posture and your perspective. Great posture and your perspective. Great message. Would you agree that lying down message. Would you agree that lying down message. Would you agree that lying down in bed on one's phone on social media is in bed on one's phone on social media is in bed on one's phone on social media is a very dangerous posture cuz I would a very dangerous posture cuz I would a very dangerous posture cuz I would argue that argue that argue that &gt;&gt; and I also tell guys if you are going to &gt;&gt; and I also tell guys if you are going to &gt;&gt; and I also tell guys if you are going to lay in a fetal position and tweet out lay in a fetal position and tweet out lay in a fetal position and tweet out how bad your mental health is, stop. Go how bad your mental health is, stop. Go how bad your mental health is, stop. Go to a Starbucks, go to Whole Foods, walk to a Starbucks, go to Whole Foods, walk to a Starbucks, go to Whole Foods, walk around and see normal human interaction around and see normal human interaction around and see normal human interaction and tell a stranger you're suffering and tell a stranger you're suffering and tell a stranger you're suffering from mental health. They don't do it. from mental health. They don't do it. from mental health. They don't do it. You're just going to sit there in a You're just going to sit there in a You're just going to sit there in a fetal position feeling sorry for fetal position feeling sorry for fetal position feeling sorry for yourself and you think it'll get better yourself and you think it'll get better yourself and you think it'll get better tomorrow. It won't. I've already lived tomorrow. It won't. I've already lived tomorrow. It won't. I've already lived that life. I've already painted the that life. I've already painted the that life. I've already painted the picture for you. I've played you the picture for you. I've played you the picture for you. I've played you the movie. You've watched it. It's not going movie. You've watched it. It's not going movie. You've watched it. It's not going to work. You're going to have to get out to work. You're going to have to get out to work. You're going to have to get out of that bed and you're going to have to of that bed and you're going to have to of that bed and you're going to have to do something every single day that do something every single day that do something every single day that brings you out of that dark depression. brings you out of that dark depression. brings you out of that dark depression. And for me, it's physical movement. If And for me, it's physical movement. If And for me, it's physical movement. If you have the ability to move, move. you have the ability to move, move. you have the ability to move, move. Don't lay in that bed. Don't just sit Don't lay in that bed. Don't just sit Don't lay in that bed. Don't just sit there and scroll. You know, Vernon says there and scroll. You know, Vernon says there and scroll. You know, Vernon says it. Your diet's important. Not what you it. Your diet's important. Not what you it. Your diet's important. Not what you eat, but what you consume eat, but what you consume eat, but what you consume visually, audio, the music you listen visually, audio, the music you listen visually, audio, the music you listen to. We all know there's some music you to. We all know there's some music you to. We all know there's some music you listen to that just changes you ever so listen to that just changes you ever so listen to that just changes you ever so slightly. Is that the person I need to slightly. Is that the person I need to slightly. Is that the person I need to be walking to the store? Do I need to be walking to the store? Do I need to be walking to the store? Do I need to blare mega death right now? No. I need blare mega death right now? No. I need blare mega death right now? No. I need to play Ludovico. That's what I need. I to play Ludovico. That's what I need. I to play Ludovico. That's what I need. I need to walk into this room at 100% full need to walk into this room at 100% full need to walk into this room at 100% full capacity and just receive whatever capacity and just receive whatever capacity and just receive whatever energy is in the room right now. It's energy is in the room right now. It's energy is in the room right now. It's hard to do if I'm in the depths of hard to do if I'm in the depths of hard to do if I'm in the depths of despair right now. So, yeah, I try to despair right now. So, yeah, I try to despair right now. So, yeah, I try to put myself in a position where I have put myself in a position where I have put myself in a position where I have optimal posture all day. optimal posture all day. optimal posture all day. &gt;&gt; You mentioned uh Marcus and Amber &gt;&gt; You mentioned uh Marcus and Amber &gt;&gt; You mentioned uh Marcus and Amber Capone. Now is probably a good time for Capone. Now is probably a good time for Capone. Now is probably a good time for us to just reference who they are and um us to just reference who they are and um us to just reference who they are and um the work that you guys have been doing. the work that you guys have been doing. the work that you guys have been doing. And uh and anytime I sort of plug And uh and anytime I sort of plug And uh and anytime I sort of plug something or mention something, I want something or mention something, I want something or mention something, I want to be very clear. I don't have any to be very clear. I don't have any to be very clear. I don't have any formal affiliation to this upcoming formal affiliation to this upcoming formal affiliation to this upcoming Netflix um show movie. Is it what it's a Netflix um show movie. Is it what it's a Netflix um show movie. Is it what it's a film? Excuse me. Uh to this uh upcoming film? Excuse me. Uh to this uh upcoming film? Excuse me. Uh to this uh upcoming Netflix film, Netflix film, Netflix film, &gt;&gt; but it's going to be an incredible film. &gt;&gt; but it's going to be an incredible film. &gt;&gt; but it's going to be an incredible film. I know this cuz I've seen bits of it. U I know this cuz I've seen bits of it. U I know this cuz I've seen bits of it. U maybe just mention who Marcus and Amber maybe just mention who Marcus and Amber maybe just mention who Marcus and Amber Capone are and what they've been doing Capone are and what they've been doing Capone are and what they've been doing and the film. I do think this is and the film. I do think this is and the film. I do think this is something everyone should see. I'm something everyone should see. I'm something everyone should see. I'm definitely going to see it. And uh I'll definitely going to see it. And uh I'll definitely going to see it. And uh I'll just say that u I think their just say that u I think their just say that u I think their organization Veteran Solutions is one organization Veteran Solutions is one organization Veteran Solutions is one I've been paying attention to and trying I've been paying attention to and trying I've been paying attention to and trying to support in ways I can uh over the to support in ways I can uh over the to support in ways I can uh over the last gosh it's been three four years and last gosh it's been three four years and last gosh it's been three four years and um so maybe tell us about Marcus and um so maybe tell us about Marcus and um so maybe tell us about Marcus and Amber and the film. So Marcus uh joined Amber and the film. So Marcus uh joined Amber and the film. So Marcus uh joined the SEAL teams right pre 911, the SEAL teams right pre 911, the SEAL teams right pre 911, married Amber, had a baby right now in married Amber, had a baby right now in married Amber, had a baby right now in the SEAL teams, got stationed on the SEAL teams, got stationed on the SEAL teams, got stationed on the east coast of me at Seal Team 10. And east coast of me at Seal Team 10. And east coast of me at Seal Team 10. And &gt;&gt; you could watch him change throughout &gt;&gt; you could watch him change throughout &gt;&gt; you could watch him change throughout the years like everybody else, but the years like everybody else, but the years like everybody else, but because he's such a big polarizing because he's such a big polarizing because he's such a big polarizing figure. He's hard to miss. I mean, he's figure. He's hard to miss. I mean, he's figure. He's hard to miss. I mean, he's probably 6'5. probably 6'5. probably 6'5. He's a big guy and he was extremely He's a big guy and he was extremely He's a big guy and he was extremely intimidating, &gt;&gt; but he always had a light in his eyes. &gt;&gt; but he always had a light in his eyes. &gt;&gt; but he always had a light in his eyes. He always seemed like a dude you wanted He always seemed like a dude you wanted He always seemed like a dude you wanted to be around. to be around. to be around. And after the conflicts and multiple And after the conflicts and multiple And after the conflicts and multiple deployments, I mean, you'd see him out deployments, I mean, you'd see him out deployments, I mean, you'd see him out in town and his eyes got jet black and in town and his eyes got jet black and in town and his eyes got jet black and he would be a guy that if you were he would be a guy that if you were he would be a guy that if you were walking on the street and you saw him walking on the street and you saw him walking on the street and you saw him come out, just the way he looked at you, come out, just the way he looked at you, come out, just the way he looked at you, you would cross the street. And he you would cross the street. And he you would cross the street. And he became one of those guys. I gave you the became one of those guys. I gave you the became one of those guys. I gave you the analogy walking to the SPCA and you see analogy walking to the SPCA and you see analogy walking to the SPCA and you see that pitbull, ears been shaved off, that pitbull, ears been shaved off, that pitbull, ears been shaved off, there's scars all over his face, you're there's scars all over his face, you're there's scars all over his face, you're not going to put your hand in that cage. not going to put your hand in that cage. not going to put your hand in that cage. Marcus Capone was like that. Marcus Capone was like that. Marcus Capone was like that. He leaves the SEAL teams, has a very He leaves the SEAL teams, has a very He leaves the SEAL teams, has a very rocky transition, gets a job in finance, rocky transition, gets a job in finance, rocky transition, gets a job in finance, moves around, and you hear it through moves around, and you hear it through moves around, and you hear it through the rumor mill about how bad he's doing, the rumor mill about how bad he's doing, the rumor mill about how bad he's doing, drinking, just not the person you wanted drinking, just not the person you wanted drinking, just not the person you wanted him to be, and definitely not the him to be, and definitely not the him to be, and definitely not the transition you wanted for him. And then transition you wanted for him. And then transition you wanted for him. And then it got so bad that, you know, suicide it got so bad that, you know, suicide it got so bad that, you know, suicide was definitely on the table, circling was definitely on the table, circling was definitely on the table, circling the drain, drinking way too much, just the drain, drinking way too much, just the drain, drinking way too much, just toxic in every way you can imagine. And toxic in every way you can imagine. And toxic in every way you can imagine. And Amber being the angel that she is Amber being the angel that she is Amber being the angel that she is started to research different solutions. started to research different solutions. started to research different solutions. He did mer meditation, yoga, talk He did mer meditation, yoga, talk He did mer meditation, yoga, talk therapy, drugs, did everything you therapy, drugs, did everything you therapy, drugs, did everything you could. And she found Ibegan and 5 Mod could. And she found Ibegan and 5 Mod could. And she found Ibegan and 5 Mod DMT and convinced him to go down there. DMT and convinced him to go down there. DMT and convinced him to go down there. And it was one of those things much like And it was one of those things much like And it was one of those things much like mine. You're going to go do this mine. You're going to go do this mine. You're going to go do this treatment and this is our last attempt. treatment and this is our last attempt. treatment and this is our last attempt. And if this doesn't work, I'm leaving And if this doesn't work, I'm leaving And if this doesn't work, I'm leaving you. And for a team wife to throw in the you. And for a team wife to throw in the you. And for a team wife to throw in the towel after the career is over, that towel after the career is over, that towel after the career is over, that lets you know how bad it is because they lets you know how bad it is because they lets you know how bad it is because they have combed that entire thing. I mean, have combed that entire thing. I mean, have combed that entire thing. I mean, they were in the heart of NSW, in the they were in the heart of NSW, in the they were in the heart of NSW, in the heart of the GWAD, and buried more heart of the GWAD, and buried more heart of the GWAD, and buried more friends than you ever count care to friends than you ever count care to friends than you ever count care to count. And after all of that, she's count. And after all of that, she's count. And after all of that, she's finally going to throw in the towel. finally going to throw in the towel. finally going to throw in the towel. That's how bad he's gotten. And you That's how bad he's gotten. And you That's how bad he's gotten. And you know, you hear that he came back and you know, you hear that he came back and you know, you hear that he came back and you wouldn't even recognize him. Like, you wouldn't even recognize him. Like, you wouldn't even recognize him. Like, you won't believe what Marcus Capone looks won't believe what Marcus Capone looks won't believe what Marcus Capone looks like. and I hadn't seen him. But you got like. and I hadn't seen him. But you got like. and I hadn't seen him. But you got to understand coming from the east coast to understand coming from the east coast to understand coming from the east coast and I'm an idealist. Like I'm a true and I'm an idealist. Like I'm a true and I'm an idealist. Like I'm a true believer and when you hear that Marcus believer and when you hear that Marcus believer and when you hear that Marcus left the east coast and went to the west left the east coast and went to the west left the east coast and went to the west coast and now he's doing yoga, coast and now he's doing yoga, coast and now he's doing yoga, meditation and smoking toad venom, meditation and smoking toad venom, meditation and smoking toad venom, you're like west coast typical. I knew you're like west coast typical. I knew you're like west coast typical. I knew you'd turn him and then you see him, you'd turn him and then you see him, you'd turn him and then you see him, you're like, that's the best version of you're like, that's the best version of you're like, that's the best version of Marcus I've ever seen. Marcus I've ever seen. Marcus I've ever seen. &gt;&gt; And he's not a pacifist. He can still &gt;&gt; And he's not a pacifist. He can still &gt;&gt; And he's not a pacifist. He can still roll that dial all the way over, but he roll that dial all the way over, but he roll that dial all the way over, but he has full control over it. Mhm. has full control over it. Mhm. has full control over it. Mhm. &gt;&gt; You know, 20 years old, flicked a Navy &gt;&gt; You know, 20 years old, flicked a Navy &gt;&gt; You know, 20 years old, flicked a Navy Seal switch and just lived that life to Seal switch and just lived that life to Seal switch and just lived that life to the fullest. Never had a balance point. the fullest. Never had a balance point. the fullest. Never had a balance point. Never needed one, never tried to adopt Never needed one, never tried to adopt Never needed one, never tried to adopt one. So during my whole transition, one. So during my whole transition, one. So during my whole transition, I'll say when he got out, they sat I'll say when he got out, they sat I'll say when he got out, they sat dormant on that medication for a while dormant on that medication for a while dormant on that medication for a while because it was so out there and you because it was so out there and you because it was so out there and you didn't want to shock the culture. You didn't want to shock the culture. You didn't want to shock the culture. You didn't want to shock the community. And didn't want to shock the community. And didn't want to shock the community. And it's taboo. I mean, doing psychedelics it's taboo. I mean, doing psychedelics it's taboo. I mean, doing psychedelics is not a thing that Navy Seals do. is not a thing that Navy Seals do. is not a thing that Navy Seals do. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Ibegan is a 22-hour psychedelic. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Ibegan is a 22-hour psychedelic. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Ibegan is a 22-hour psychedelic. It's a very esoteric. Most people have It's a very esoteric. Most people have It's a very esoteric. Most people have heard of psilocybin or even LSD or MDMA. heard of psilocybin or even LSD or MDMA. heard of psilocybin or even LSD or MDMA. It's and DMT. I mean, it's a this is as It's and DMT. I mean, it's a this is as It's and DMT. I mean, it's a this is as far out there as you possibly can go. far out there as you possibly can go. far out there as you possibly can go. I'm sure someone sitting there is like, I'm sure someone sitting there is like, I'm sure someone sitting there is like, "No, there's some chemical made in, you "No, there's some chemical made in, you "No, there's some chemical made in, you know, but this it's extreme. know, but this it's extreme. know, but this it's extreme. &gt;&gt; It is extreme." And just like the SEAL &gt;&gt; It is extreme." And just like the SEAL &gt;&gt; It is extreme." And just like the SEAL teams, you do everything to the extreme teams, you do everything to the extreme teams, you do everything to the extreme and that's where you go. and that's where you go. and that's where you go. &gt;&gt; A theme there. Yeah. And you know, I was &gt;&gt; A theme there. Yeah. And you know, I was &gt;&gt; A theme there. Yeah. And you know, I was going through a similar thing. going through a similar thing. going through a similar thing. But when they came out, one of his very But when they came out, one of his very But when they came out, one of his very good friends, Chad Wilkinson, committed good friends, Chad Wilkinson, committed good friends, Chad Wilkinson, committed suicide. And I think enough was enough. suicide. And I think enough was enough. suicide. And I think enough was enough. And that was one of his best friends. And that was one of his best friends. And that was one of his best friends. And it crippled him. And when you see And it crippled him. And when you see And it crippled him. And when you see him get the news, you can watch that him get the news, you can watch that him get the news, you can watch that visual. Oh god, I'm trying to cry. You visual. Oh god, I'm trying to cry. You visual. Oh god, I'm trying to cry. You can watch that loss affect him in a way can watch that loss affect him in a way can watch that loss affect him in a way that nobody else will understand. And he that nobody else will understand. And he that nobody else will understand. And he knew he was holding on to this secret. knew he was holding on to this secret. knew he was holding on to this secret. Like this saved my life. And if I would Like this saved my life. And if I would Like this saved my life. And if I would have given that to him, he'd still be have given that to him, he'd still be have given that to him, he'd still be here. and I know it. What am I going to here. and I know it. What am I going to here. and I know it. What am I going to do? I got to start a 501c3 and I got to do? I got to start a 501c3 and I got to do? I got to start a 501c3 and I got to start saving as many people as humanly start saving as many people as humanly start saving as many people as humanly possible. And selfishly, I'm going to possible. And selfishly, I'm going to possible. And selfishly, I'm going to save as many SEALs as humanly possible. save as many SEALs as humanly possible. save as many SEALs as humanly possible. And once you saved one, save two, three, And once you saved one, save two, three, And once you saved one, save two, three, four, five, Army Rangers, Green Breeze, four, five, Army Rangers, Green Breeze, four, five, Army Rangers, Green Breeze, fighter pilots, they all just start fighter pilots, they all just start fighter pilots, they all just start pouring in here. It's the same trauma. pouring in here. It's the same trauma. pouring in here. It's the same trauma. It doesn't matter how you got it. You're It doesn't matter how you got it. You're It doesn't matter how you got it. You're at the brink of it. And you're going to at the brink of it. And you're going to at the brink of it. And you're going to close this chapter out. And this close this chapter out. And this close this chapter out. And this medicine is going to give you that medicine is going to give you that medicine is going to give you that breath. It's going to give you that breath. It's going to give you that breath. It's going to give you that relief to not do it. and they made this relief to not do it. and they made this relief to not do it. and they made this little infomercial that was on social little infomercial that was on social little infomercial that was on social media talking about psychedelics and I media talking about psychedelics and I media talking about psychedelics and I had heard about it and I kind of had heard about it and I kind of had heard about it and I kind of whitewashed it and my wife was at the whitewashed it and my wife was at the whitewashed it and my wife was at the same point. She was getting ready to same point. She was getting ready to same point. She was getting ready to leave me and take the two kids and I leave me and take the two kids and I leave me and take the two kids and I can't do this anymore and we laid in bed can't do this anymore and we laid in bed can't do this anymore and we laid in bed one night and she watched it and she was one night and she watched it and she was one night and she watched it and she was crying and she leaned over and she made crying and she leaned over and she made crying and she leaned over and she made me watch it and I started balling me watch it and I started balling me watch it and I started balling because I could see the difference. So because I could see the difference. So because I could see the difference. So last time I saw Marcus and this Marcus last time I saw Marcus and this Marcus last time I saw Marcus and this Marcus is very different and she looked is very different and she looked is very different and she looked over and she goes, "If you love me, over and she goes, "If you love me, over and she goes, "If you love me, you'll go." I went, you'll go." I went, you'll go." I went, I'll go do psychedelics with my friends I'll go do psychedelics with my friends I'll go do psychedelics with my friends in Mexico. Sure. I never thought it in Mexico. Sure. I never thought it in Mexico. Sure. I never thought it would do anything because I had messed would do anything because I had messed would do anything because I had messed up so much until that point. All the pharmaceuticals, all the All the pharmaceuticals, all the All the pharmaceuticals, all the mistakes I had made, the infidelity, mistakes I had made, the infidelity, mistakes I had made, the infidelity, everything had led me up to that point. everything had led me up to that point. everything had led me up to that point. And I had that secret inside me. And I And I had that secret inside me. And I And I had that secret inside me. And I did not have the strength to tell her. I did not have the strength to tell her. I did not have the strength to tell her. I didn't want to break her heart about all didn't want to break her heart about all didn't want to break her heart about all the things I had messed up. And for me, the things I had messed up. And for me, the things I had messed up. And for me, if you think me going down to Mexico is if you think me going down to Mexico is if you think me going down to Mexico is going to save our marriage, I will 100% going to save our marriage, I will 100% going to save our marriage, I will 100% do it. But I never thought for a chance do it. But I never thought for a chance do it. But I never thought for a chance it would. Never. And I went down there it would. Never. And I went down there it would. Never. And I went down there with a bunch of guys that were legends with a bunch of guys that were legends with a bunch of guys that were legends inside of the community. And you know, inside of the community. And you know, inside of the community. And you know, Ambio, Trevor, Jose, Jonathan, Brianna, Ambio, Trevor, Jose, Jonathan, Brianna, Ambio, Trevor, Jose, Jonathan, Brianna, everybody at Ambio Life Sciences, they everybody at Ambio Life Sciences, they everybody at Ambio Life Sciences, they run the best facility I've ever been a run the best facility I've ever been a run the best facility I've ever been a part of in any facility. part of in any facility. part of in any facility. That medicine is so strong. And I think That medicine is so strong. And I think That medicine is so strong. And I think that's why guys get such relief. It's that's why guys get such relief. It's that's why guys get such relief. It's the only thing stronger than your ego the only thing stronger than your ego the only thing stronger than your ego because you've turned yourself into this because you've turned yourself into this because you've turned yourself into this vessel you think represents the essence vessel you think represents the essence vessel you think represents the essence of what being a Navy Seal is. You're of what being a Navy Seal is. You're of what being a Navy Seal is. You're hard. You're determined. You'll never hard. You're determined. You'll never hard. You're determined. You'll never lose. Like you you'll sacrifice lose. Like you you'll sacrifice lose. Like you you'll sacrifice everything right now if the group asks everything right now if the group asks everything right now if the group asks you to do it. But you won't do it for you to do it. But you won't do it for you to do it. But you won't do it for yourself. You'll never put your yourself. You'll never put your yourself. You'll never put your individual needs above the needs of the individual needs above the needs of the individual needs above the needs of the group. And this is one point where you group. And this is one point where you group. And this is one point where you have to. You have to go for the good of have to. You have to go for the good of have to. You have to go for the good of the group. I have to suck up my ego. Got the group. I have to suck up my ego. Got the group. I have to suck up my ego. Got to suck up my pride. and I have to try to suck up my pride. and I have to try to suck up my pride. and I have to try to kill it right now. And we went down to kill it right now. And we went down to kill it right now. And we went down there and took that medicine. And there and took that medicine. And there and took that medicine. And I have a combat instructor. His name is I have a combat instructor. His name is I have a combat instructor. His name is Tom Ker from Seak Tactical Group. If Tom Ker from Seak Tactical Group. If Tom Ker from Seak Tactical Group. If you've ever watched uh the movie The you've ever watched uh the movie The you've ever watched uh the movie The Hunted with Denio Del Toro, the knife Hunted with Denio Del Toro, the knife Hunted with Denio Del Toro, the knife fighting, that's what they do. And they fighting, that's what they do. And they fighting, that's what they do. And they are the best in the world. And Tom Ker are the best in the world. And Tom Ker are the best in the world. And Tom Ker is a knowledge transfer specialist. He's is a knowledge transfer specialist. He's is a knowledge transfer specialist. He's changed my life in mindset more than changed my life in mindset more than changed my life in mindset more than anybody else on the planet. and he told anybody else on the planet. and he told anybody else on the planet. and he told me a quote the other day and it me a quote the other day and it me a quote the other day and it references this kind of and we were references this kind of and we were references this kind of and we were talking about experience and he goes if talking about experience and he goes if talking about experience and he goes if you understand no explanation's needed you understand no explanation's needed you understand no explanation's needed if you don't understand no explanation if you don't understand no explanation if you don't understand no explanation is possible and that came from Dave is possible and that came from Dave is possible and that came from Dave Joyce another seak disciple and it's the Joyce another seak disciple and it's the Joyce another seak disciple and it's the truest thing I've ever heard unless truest thing I've ever heard unless truest thing I've ever heard unless you've done I gain unless you've done you've done I gain unless you've done you've done I gain unless you've done psychedelics in a therapeutic setting psychedelics in a therapeutic setting psychedelics in a therapeutic setting you'll have no idea how powerful it is you'll have no idea how powerful it is you'll have no idea how powerful it is and when I woke up that next day and when I woke up that next day and when I woke up that next day everything I had ever done negative everything I had ever done negative everything I had ever done negative positive erased. Everything negative, every erased. Everything negative, every erased. Everything negative, every conversation, every bad deed, every time conversation, every bad deed, every time conversation, every bad deed, every time I've hurt anybody, every time I've made I've hurt anybody, every time I've made I've hurt anybody, every time I've made my wife cry, every time I've not been my wife cry, every time I've not been my wife cry, every time I've not been present was in the forefront of my mind. present was in the forefront of my mind. present was in the forefront of my mind. And I felt absolutely terrible. I felt And I felt absolutely terrible. I felt And I felt absolutely terrible. I felt like a monster for everything I had like a monster for everything I had like a monster for everything I had done. Every time I had not been present, done. Every time I had not been present, done. Every time I had not been present, every time I had sacrificed them for every time I had sacrificed them for every time I had sacrificed them for this thing, this thing, this thing, I didn't want to go home. And at the I didn't want to go home. And at the I didn't want to go home. And at the same token, it was the only time in my same token, it was the only time in my same token, it was the only time in my life I'd ever been homesick. I wanted to life I'd ever been homesick. I wanted to life I'd ever been homesick. I wanted to teleport and go home and wrap my arms teleport and go home and wrap my arms teleport and go home and wrap my arms around those three, but I was so around those three, but I was so around those three, but I was so embarrassed at everything that I had embarrassed at everything that I had embarrassed at everything that I had done. There's no way I can do it. I done. There's no way I can do it. I done. There's no way I can do it. I can't go home and break their heart. And can't go home and break their heart. And can't go home and break their heart. And you have the gray day after you do you have the gray day after you do you have the gray day after you do Ibegan. I mean, it feels like you got Ibegan. I mean, it feels like you got Ibegan. I mean, it feels like you got hit by a freight train just in your hit by a freight train just in your hit by a freight train just in your fields. Dudes are throwing up all day fields. Dudes are throwing up all day fields. Dudes are throwing up all day depending on how your experiences. depending on how your experiences. depending on how your experiences. The next day you do five Mio DMT and The next day you do five Mio DMT and The next day you do five Mio DMT and that's the ego death. You know, comes that's the ego death. You know, comes that's the ego death. You know, comes Sonor and Desert Toad. They milk out the Sonor and Desert Toad. They milk out the Sonor and Desert Toad. They milk out the poison glands and that's essentially poison glands and that's essentially poison glands and that's essentially what you're smoking. It's pretty what you're smoking. It's pretty what you're smoking. It's pretty intimidating. Looks like you're smoking intimidating. Looks like you're smoking intimidating. Looks like you're smoking crack rock. And crack rock. And crack rock. And that experience when you smoke that, it that experience when you smoke that, it that experience when you smoke that, it must be like either what finding must be like either what finding must be like either what finding religion or what dying's like. religion or what dying's like. religion or what dying's like. &gt;&gt; Well, you almost died with the &gt;&gt; Well, you almost died with the &gt;&gt; Well, you almost died with the electrocution. And we had a uh very electrocution. And we had a uh very electrocution. And we had a uh very accomplished neuroscientist on the accomplished neuroscientist on the accomplished neuroscientist on the podcast, Kristoff [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] who talked about podcast, Kristoff [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] who talked about podcast, Kristoff [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] who talked about um he's been studying consciousness for um he's been studying consciousness for um he's been studying consciousness for a long time and he talked about his a long time and he talked about his a long time and he talked about his experiences on five DMT total experiences on five DMT total experiences on five DMT total dissolution of self, total dissolution of self, total dissolution of self, total dissolution of space and time, but he described um of space and time, but he described um of space and time, but he described um that he that the his mind was still that he that the his mind was still that he that the his mind was still there, but nothing else was there. And there, but nothing else was there. And there, but nothing else was there. And again, if someone hasn't done it, I've again, if someone hasn't done it, I've again, if someone hasn't done it, I've never done it, but if someone hasn't never done it, but if someone hasn't never done it, but if someone hasn't done it, I'm guessing that no done it, I'm guessing that no done it, I'm guessing that no description will suffice. I've description will suffice. I've description will suffice. I've heard it like from another team guy heard it like from another team guy heard it like from another team guy being described as being strapped to the being described as being strapped to the being described as being strapped to the shock wave of an atom bomb like um you shock wave of an atom bomb like um you shock wave of an atom bomb like um you know, I've heard a bunch of know, I've heard a bunch of know, I've heard a bunch of different description sounds. different description sounds. different description sounds. When you come out of that experience, When you come out of that experience, When you come out of that experience, however, how did that reframe the electrocution, how did that reframe the electrocution, how did that reframe the electrocution, the loss of I mean, we could spend three the loss of I mean, we could spend three the loss of I mean, we could spend three days talking about every single guy that days talking about every single guy that days talking about every single guy that you know that's been killed and still you know that's been killed and still you know that's been killed and still probably only uh touch on probably only uh touch on probably only uh touch on small number of them sadly. You know, so small number of them sadly. You know, so small number of them sadly. You know, so how does all that get reframed coming how does all that get reframed coming how does all that get reframed coming out of an experience like that? out of an experience like that? out of an experience like that? The biggest concern doing Iva gain was The biggest concern doing Iva gain was The biggest concern doing Iva gain was that you were going to be stuck inside that you were going to be stuck inside that you were going to be stuck inside of your own thoughts. Everybody you had of your own thoughts. Everybody you had of your own thoughts. Everybody you had lost, you were just going to relive it. lost, you were just going to relive it. lost, you were just going to relive it. You were going to be in the back of that You were going to be in the back of that You were going to be in the back of that helicopter. You were just going to have helicopter. You were just going to have helicopter. You were just going to have to relive that for 24 straight hours. to relive that for 24 straight hours. to relive that for 24 straight hours. And I will tell you that not a single And I will tell you that not a single And I will tell you that not a single person that I have ever done I gain with person that I have ever done I gain with person that I have ever done I gain with has ever had any military experience. has ever had any military experience. has ever had any military experience. It's always been your childhood and then It's always been your childhood and then It's always been your childhood and then a reflection of what you've done to your a reflection of what you've done to your a reflection of what you've done to your wife and kids. It gaps it. So I've done wife and kids. It gaps it. So I've done wife and kids. It gaps it. So I've done Iain four times. I have never had a Iain four times. I have never had a Iain four times. I have never had a singular military experience ever. singular military experience ever. singular military experience ever. Nothing. &gt;&gt; Childhood. &gt;&gt; Childhood. &gt;&gt; Childhood. &gt;&gt; Childhood. &gt;&gt; Childhood. &gt;&gt; Childhood. &gt;&gt; Big time. &gt;&gt; Big time. &gt;&gt; Big time. &gt;&gt; Childhood. And then in the actual &gt;&gt; Childhood. And then in the actual &gt;&gt; Childhood. And then in the actual medicine, it would allow me to relive medicine, it would allow me to relive medicine, it would allow me to relive past events with my father, with my past events with my father, with my past events with my father, with my mother, hard conversations, you know, mother, hard conversations, you know, mother, hard conversations, you know, blowups, arguments, screams, things you blowups, arguments, screams, things you blowups, arguments, screams, things you &gt;&gt; things I had forgotten, things that were &gt;&gt; things I had forgotten, things that were &gt;&gt; things I had forgotten, things that were never on my conscious mind. And now I'm never on my conscious mind. And now I'm never on my conscious mind. And now I'm reliving them. And then it would shift reliving them. And then it would shift reliving them. And then it would shift and it would be me doing that exact same and it would be me doing that exact same and it would be me doing that exact same thing to my wife, to my kids. And then thing to my wife, to my kids. And then thing to my wife, to my kids. And then it'll put you in their position. So when it'll put you in their position. So when it'll put you in their position. So when I'm screaming, I'm projecting just this I'm screaming, I'm projecting just this I'm screaming, I'm projecting just this hate and this venom is shooting out of hate and this venom is shooting out of hate and this venom is shooting out of me. I can be that seven-year-old little me. I can be that seven-year-old little me. I can be that seven-year-old little girl and I can feel how frightened she girl and I can feel how frightened she girl and I can feel how frightened she is by what she's watching her father is by what she's watching her father is by what she's watching her father turn into. turn into. turn into. &gt;&gt; So real empathy, &gt;&gt; So real empathy, &gt;&gt; So real empathy, &gt;&gt; that is what it is. you become so &gt;&gt; that is what it is. you become so &gt;&gt; that is what it is. you become so empathetic to everyone and everything empathetic to everyone and everything empathetic to everyone and everything and it's the forefront of your mind like and it's the forefront of your mind like and it's the forefront of your mind like I don't want to go home because now I don't want to go home because now I don't want to go home because now I know what I've done. I can't mask it know what I've done. I can't mask it know what I've done. I can't mask it anymore. There's no more anymore. There's no more anymore. There's no more compartmentalization. I've done I've compartmentalization. I've done I've compartmentalization. I've done I've done all those things. I've said that done all those things. I've said that done all those things. I've said that terrible stuff and I'm never going to be terrible stuff and I'm never going to be terrible stuff and I'm never going to be able to reearn my seats at the table. able to reearn my seats at the table. able to reearn my seats at the table. And it's one of those weird predicaments And it's one of those weird predicaments And it's one of those weird predicaments where I want to go home, but I don't where I want to go home, but I don't where I want to go home, but I don't because I don't want to face that. I because I don't want to face that. I because I don't want to face that. I actually did and said that. It's like actually did and said that. It's like actually did and said that. It's like out of every good thing I've ever done, out of every good thing I've ever done, out of every good thing I've ever done, it all got erased on that moment. The it all got erased on that moment. The it all got erased on that moment. The only thing we're going to focus on is only thing we're going to focus on is only thing we're going to focus on is all the bad stuff you've ever done and all the bad stuff you've ever done and all the bad stuff you've ever done and said. So when we came into 5 MO, I did said. So when we came into 5 MO, I did said. So when we came into 5 MO, I did six rounds of 5 MO my first time down six rounds of 5 MO my first time down six rounds of 5 MO my first time down there. Every single one is the most there. Every single one is the most there. Every single one is the most painful thing you've ever been a part painful thing you've ever been a part painful thing you've ever been a part of. It feels um and Trevor says it of. It feels um and Trevor says it of. It feels um and Trevor says it beautifully down at AMBO. He said, beautifully down at AMBO. He said, beautifully down at AMBO. He said, "Whatever's going to happen, let it "Whatever's going to happen, let it "Whatever's going to happen, let it happen. If you think you're going to happen. If you think you're going to happen. If you think you're going to explode, explode. You think you're going explode, explode. You think you're going explode, explode. You think you're going to die, die. You think you're going to die, die. You think you're going to die, die. You think you're going to drown or blast off in the stratosphere, drown or blast off in the stratosphere, drown or blast off in the stratosphere, do it. Don't try to control it. That do it. Don't try to control it. That do it. Don't try to control it. That medicine will take you exactly where you medicine will take you exactly where you medicine will take you exactly where you need to go. You just have to let it. And need to go. You just have to let it. And need to go. You just have to let it. And every time I would, I would start, I every time I would, I would start, I every time I would, I would start, I would scream, and then I would cry and would scream, and then I would cry and would scream, and then I would cry and convulse, throw up, and I'd wake up and convulse, throw up, and I'd wake up and convulse, throw up, and I'd wake up and I'd look around and he'd look at me I'd look around and he'd look at me I'd look around and he'd look at me again, go, again, go, again, go, hit him again, and I'd do it again, and hit him again, and I'd do it again, and hit him again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again. And it was the very I'd do it again. And it was the very I'd do it again. And it was the very last time I did 5mel. You got understand last time I did 5mel. You got understand last time I did 5mel. You got understand I was super depressed and I was most I was super depressed and I was most I was super depressed and I was most certainly suicidal. I did not want to certainly suicidal. I did not want to certainly suicidal. I did not want to come home and face reality. come home and face reality. come home and face reality. And I took that last one and right And I took that last one and right And I took that last one and right before I did, I can't remember if it was before I did, I can't remember if it was before I did, I can't remember if it was the nurse or cuz we used to have the nurse or cuz we used to have the nurse or cuz we used to have teen guys who would sit there and hold teen guys who would sit there and hold teen guys who would sit there and hold space for you, not taking the medicine, space for you, not taking the medicine, space for you, not taking the medicine, just they were there to basically just they were there to basically just they were there to basically safeguard the house so you could just safeguard the house so you could just safeguard the house so you could just focus on you cuz it's hard to be put focus on you cuz it's hard to be put focus on you cuz it's hard to be put under essentially anesthesia in a under essentially anesthesia in a under essentially anesthesia in a foreign country and you don't know foreign country and you don't know foreign country and you don't know what's going to happen to you. what's going to happen to you. what's going to happen to you. &gt;&gt; So there's comfort in knowing there's &gt;&gt; So there's comfort in knowing there's &gt;&gt; So there's comfort in knowing there's team guys around you. And it was either team guys around you. And it was either team guys around you. And it was either the nurse or one of the team guys goes, the nurse or one of the team guys goes, the nurse or one of the team guys goes, "You want to kill yourself, right?" I "You want to kill yourself, right?" I "You want to kill yourself, right?" I said, "Yeah." And he goes, "Then do it. said, "Yeah." And he goes, "Then do it. said, "Yeah." And he goes, "Then do it. Do it with this right here." And I Do it with this right here." And I Do it with this right here." And I changed my intention for the medicine. changed my intention for the medicine. changed my intention for the medicine. And I told myself it was this pink And I told myself it was this pink And I told myself it was this pink toxin, this purple toxin. I'm going to toxin, this purple toxin. I'm going to toxin, this purple toxin. I'm going to inhale it. I'm going to coat my entire inhale it. I'm going to coat my entire inhale it. I'm going to coat my entire body with this. I'm going to kill myself body with this. I'm going to kill myself body with this. I'm going to kill myself right here so I don't have to go home. right here so I don't have to go home. right here so I don't have to go home. And that changed the entire experience And that changed the entire experience And that changed the entire experience for me. for me. for me. Everything shrunk down jet black and a Everything shrunk down jet black and a Everything shrunk down jet black and a single white pixel showed up and it single white pixel showed up and it single white pixel showed up and it exploded and it looked like it was Star exploded and it looked like it was Star exploded and it looked like it was Star Trek taking off all the tracers and Trek taking off all the tracers and Trek taking off all the tracers and everything. It felt like your sternum everything. It felt like your sternum everything. It felt like your sternum broke open and your soul left your body broke open and your soul left your body broke open and your soul left your body and it was the true ego death and it and it was the true ego death and it and it was the true ego death and it went from screaming thrashing to went from screaming thrashing to went from screaming thrashing to complete bliss and love and affection complete bliss and love and affection complete bliss and love and affection and empathy and compassion and empathy and compassion and empathy and compassion and everything. And I woke up and I looked everything. And I woke up and I looked everything. And I woke up and I looked at him and I could not believe the way I at him and I could not believe the way I at him and I could not believe the way I instantly I mean the most sober you've instantly I mean the most sober you've instantly I mean the most sober you've ever been. You're not on any medication, ever been. You're not on any medication, ever been. You're not on any medication, not cannabis, not an aderall, not cannabis, not an aderall, not cannabis, not an aderall, nothing. You can't be on any medication nothing. You can't be on any medication nothing. You can't be on any medication when you go down there. So this is true when you go down there. So this is true when you go down there. So this is true sobriety at its finest. And when you sobriety at its finest. And when you sobriety at its finest. And when you wake up, it's exactly like the wake up, it's exactly like the wake up, it's exactly like the electrocution. Everything is more vibrant. The table Everything is more vibrant. The table Everything is more vibrant. The table edges are slick and clean. Like I can edges are slick and clean. Like I can edges are slick and clean. Like I can feel the taste and the texture. And I feel the taste and the texture. And I feel the taste and the texture. And I can feel the energy coming out of can feel the energy coming out of can feel the energy coming out of everybody. And it's like I can tell her everybody. And it's like I can tell her everybody. And it's like I can tell her I can go home and I can confess I can go home and I can confess I can go home and I can confess everything right now because I everything right now because I everything right now because I understand that I have done more good understand that I have done more good understand that I have done more good than bad and she's going to see it. She than bad and she's going to see it. She than bad and she's going to see it. She just has to see the new me. And we went just has to see the new me. And we went just has to see the new me. And we went home and you know everything kind of home and you know everything kind of home and you know everything kind of unfolded and all my past indiscretions unfolded and all my past indiscretions unfolded and all my past indiscretions came to life and it was it was the came to life and it was it was the came to life and it was it was the darkest moment for me because I didn't darkest moment for me because I didn't darkest moment for me because I didn't think she was going to take me back and think she was going to take me back and think she was going to take me back and she ends up pulling my sunglasses off. she ends up pulling my sunglasses off. she ends up pulling my sunglasses off. She pulls them off and looks me and She pulls them off and looks me and She pulls them off and looks me and essentially collapsed in my arms. Like I essentially collapsed in my arms. Like I essentially collapsed in my arms. Like I was back. I'd been gone for 15 years and was back. I'd been gone for 15 years and was back. I'd been gone for 15 years and now I'm home and the greatest thing now I'm home and the greatest thing now I'm home and the greatest thing that's ever happened to me. And if I that's ever happened to me. And if I that's ever happened to me. And if I wouldn't have gone down to Mexico, there wouldn't have gone down to Mexico, there wouldn't have gone down to Mexico, there was no talk therapy. There was no was no talk therapy. There was no was no talk therapy. There was no meditation. There was no cold plunge. It meditation. There was no cold plunge. It meditation. There was no cold plunge. It was going to get me there. It was going to get me there. It was going to get me there. It was something stronger than me. And when you something stronger than me. And when you something stronger than me. And when you look back, I'd been building that look back, I'd been building that look back, I'd been building that physical vessel, this mental resilient physical vessel, this mental resilient physical vessel, this mental resilient vessel this entire time. So nothing vessel this entire time. So nothing vessel this entire time. So nothing could break me. And I needed something could break me. And I needed something could break me. And I needed something stronger than that to break me. And the stronger than that to break me. And the stronger than that to break me. And the moment it did, my whole life changed. moment it did, my whole life changed. moment it did, my whole life changed. Everything changed. And I really became Everything changed. And I really became Everything changed. And I really became an advocate for the medicine because I'd an advocate for the medicine because I'd an advocate for the medicine because I'd been there. I've been sitting in my been there. I've been sitting in my been there. I've been sitting in my guest room with that pistol in my lap guest room with that pistol in my lap guest room with that pistol in my lap staring around the ceiling wondering staring around the ceiling wondering staring around the ceiling wondering where my brain matter is going to go and where my brain matter is going to go and where my brain matter is going to go and what my wife's going to see and how what my wife's going to see and how what my wife's going to see and how she's going to have to clean it up and she's going to have to clean it up and she's going to have to clean it up and resell the house and just all the resell the house and just all the resell the house and just all the things. I mean, that's where you're at things. I mean, that's where you're at things. I mean, that's where you're at and that's where a lot of guys are and that's where a lot of guys are and that's where a lot of guys are and they don't believe they can get a breath they don't believe they can get a breath they don't believe they can get a breath of fresh air. And that medicine will of fresh air. And that medicine will of fresh air. And that medicine will give it to you. It is not a cure all. give it to you. It is not a cure all. give it to you. It is not a cure all. you have to go back and restructure your you have to go back and restructure your you have to go back and restructure your entire life and cut out the toxicity. entire life and cut out the toxicity. entire life and cut out the toxicity. And that was one of the most powerful And that was one of the most powerful And that was one of the most powerful things we did is I came back from that things we did is I came back from that things we did is I came back from that medicine. I sit down the edge of that medicine. I sit down the edge of that medicine. I sit down the edge of that bed with my wife after we had gone bed with my wife after we had gone bed with my wife after we had gone through everything I had done and I went through everything I had done and I went through everything I had done and I went through my phone and we blocked and through my phone and we blocked and through my phone and we blocked and deleted about 150 people out of my life. deleted about 150 people out of my life. deleted about 150 people out of my life. Best thing I ever did. Like you're never Best thing I ever did. Like you're never Best thing I ever did. Like you're never coming back in here. I've been trying to coming back in here. I've been trying to coming back in here. I've been trying to foster and save that relationship the foster and save that relationship the foster and save that relationship the better part of a decade. better part of a decade. better part of a decade. I'm not doing it anymore. you're robbing I'm not doing it anymore. you're robbing I'm not doing it anymore. you're robbing bandwidth and you're robbing the little bandwidth and you're robbing the little bandwidth and you're robbing the little time I have left on this planet that I'm time I have left on this planet that I'm time I have left on this planet that I'm going to try to devote to my family going to try to devote to my family going to try to devote to my family because I have to reearn this seat at because I have to reearn this seat at because I have to reearn this seat at the table every single day. And it gave the table every single day. And it gave the table every single day. And it gave me the ability to do that. And I came me the ability to do that. And I came me the ability to do that. And I came home, started preaching about the home, started preaching about the home, started preaching about the medicine, and then as I started to tell medicine, and then as I started to tell medicine, and then as I started to tell guys, you'd see guys that were guys, you'd see guys that were guys, you'd see guys that were interested and they were like, "Well, if interested and they were like, "Well, if interested and they were like, "Well, if it worked for him, cuz I'm a true it worked for him, cuz I'm a true it worked for him, cuz I'm a true believer, I'm devout." And they're like, believer, I'm devout." And they're like, believer, I'm devout." And they're like, "If it worked for him, it'll work for "If it worked for him, it'll work for "If it worked for him, it'll work for me." But they're scared to go. So, I was me." But they're scared to go. So, I was me." But they're scared to go. So, I was probably home maybe a month or two. I probably home maybe a month or two. I probably home maybe a month or two. I went right back down and I essentially went right back down and I essentially went right back down and I essentially hosted one. I'm cooking breakfast for hosted one. I'm cooking breakfast for hosted one. I'm cooking breakfast for the boys. I'm cleaning snot off of them. the boys. I'm cleaning snot off of them. the boys. I'm cleaning snot off of them. I'm doing the whole thing. Just trying I'm doing the whole thing. Just trying I'm doing the whole thing. Just trying to push them. And slowly but surely, you to push them. And slowly but surely, you to push them. And slowly but surely, you start saving guys 10 guys at a time over start saving guys 10 guys at a time over start saving guys 10 guys at a time over and over. And you know, that's really and over. And you know, that's really and over. And you know, that's really all because of Marcus and Amber. If they all because of Marcus and Amber. If they all because of Marcus and Amber. If they would not have made that little would not have made that little would not have made that little infomercial airing out all their dirty infomercial airing out all their dirty infomercial airing out all their dirty laundry and how open and transparent he laundry and how open and transparent he laundry and how open and transparent he was, like that is not the Navy Seal way. was, like that is not the Navy Seal way. was, like that is not the Navy Seal way. That is not how you're supposed to do That is not how you're supposed to do That is not how you're supposed to do it. And when he did it, it was so it. And when he did it, it was so it. And when he did it, it was so empowering to me. I mean, I looked up to empowering to me. I mean, I looked up to empowering to me. I mean, I looked up to him. I mean, he was on his second him. I mean, he was on his second him. I mean, he was on his second deployment when I came in. And you know, deployment when I came in. And you know, deployment when I came in. And you know, Marcus is larger than life to me. So, Marcus is larger than life to me. So, Marcus is larger than life to me. So, when you see that openness, that when you see that openness, that when you see that openness, that transparency, I can do that. I can do that, too. And I can do that. I can do that, too. And I can do that. I can do that, too. And if I do that, some kid going through the if I do that, some kid going through the if I do that, some kid going through the exact same thing as me, that's stuck on exact same thing as me, that's stuck on exact same thing as me, that's stuck on that island alone, will see me and go, that island alone, will see me and go, that island alone, will see me and go, if he can do it, I can do it. You got to if he can do it, I can do it. You got to if he can do it, I can do it. You got to want to change. And you have to put want to change. And you have to put want to change. And you have to put steps in place to where you can live steps in place to where you can live steps in place to where you can live at full value. the morning routine. I at full value. the morning routine. I at full value. the morning routine. I don't break it because I know what don't break it because I know what don't break it because I know what happens if I don't have it. The worst happens if I don't have it. The worst happens if I don't have it. The worst I've ever been. I wasn't living that I've ever been. I wasn't living that I've ever been. I wasn't living that morning routine. I was still working morning routine. I was still working morning routine. I was still working out, but it was chaotic at best, right? out, but it was chaotic at best, right? out, but it was chaotic at best, right? Like my range wasn't there. My combives Like my range wasn't there. My combives Like my range wasn't there. My combives wasn't there. I slowly let it drift away wasn't there. I slowly let it drift away wasn't there. I slowly let it drift away to where I was a shell of myself. And to where I was a shell of myself. And to where I was a shell of myself. And once I got that breath of fresh air, I once I got that breath of fresh air, I once I got that breath of fresh air, I am never going back. I mean, I just came am never going back. I mean, I just came am never going back. I mean, I just came back on Saturday. I went back down back on Saturday. I went back down back on Saturday. I went back down again. Took down a bunch of veterans, a again. Took down a bunch of veterans, a again. Took down a bunch of veterans, a bunch of civilians that were down there. bunch of civilians that were down there. bunch of civilians that were down there. And it's so interesting to see because And it's so interesting to see because And it's so interesting to see because you have fighter pilots that are down you have fighter pilots that are down you have fighter pilots that are down there. You have normal housewives that there. You have normal housewives that there. You have normal housewives that have drinking problems, toxic marriage, have drinking problems, toxic marriage, have drinking problems, toxic marriage, sexual abuse, all this different stuff. sexual abuse, all this different stuff. sexual abuse, all this different stuff. And everybody's ended up the exact same And everybody's ended up the exact same And everybody's ended up the exact same spot. We've tried everything. We tried spot. We've tried everything. We tried spot. We've tried everything. We tried the drugs, we tried the talk therapy, the drugs, we tried the talk therapy, the drugs, we tried the talk therapy, the cold plunges, the saunas, all that. the cold plunges, the saunas, all that. the cold plunges, the saunas, all that. And it's helping, but it's not getting And it's helping, but it's not getting And it's helping, but it's not getting us over the goal line. And when those us over the goal line. And when those us over the goal line. And when those people wake up the very next day, they people wake up the very next day, they people wake up the very next day, they are at total rock bottom. And when they are at total rock bottom. And when they are at total rock bottom. And when they come out of that five amo DMT, they come out of that five amo DMT, they come out of that five amo DMT, they their feet don't hit the ground for their feet don't hit the ground for their feet don't hit the ground for months. You are on cloud9 and you cannot months. You are on cloud9 and you cannot months. You are on cloud9 and you cannot believe how good you feel. I just want believe how good you feel. I just want believe how good you feel. I just want the world to be able to experience that. the world to be able to experience that. the world to be able to experience that. It doesn't matter what trauma you have It doesn't matter what trauma you have It doesn't matter what trauma you have going on. It's not a Navy Seal medicine going on. It's not a Navy Seal medicine going on. It's not a Navy Seal medicine or a medicine for special operations. or a medicine for special operations. or a medicine for special operations. This is a medicine to save humanity. And This is a medicine to save humanity. And This is a medicine to save humanity. And if you were at the bottom of the barrel if you were at the bottom of the barrel if you were at the bottom of the barrel right now, they'll save you. I mean, I right now, they'll save you. I mean, I right now, they'll save you. I mean, I went on 60 pills a day. I'm not on went on 60 pills a day. I'm not on went on 60 pills a day. I'm not on anything. Not a single pain med. I mean, anything. Not a single pain med. I mean, anything. Not a single pain med. I mean, I've got more screws in me than Home I've got more screws in me than Home I've got more screws in me than Home Depot. And I feel like a million bucks, Depot. And I feel like a million bucks, Depot. And I feel like a million bucks, but you know, for me, my family deserved it. you know, for me, my family deserved it. you know, for me, my family deserved it. And if I have to go down there and go And if I have to go down there and go And if I have to go down there and go through all that trauma over a 5day through all that trauma over a 5day through all that trauma over a 5day period to give them a better version of period to give them a better version of period to give them a better version of myself, I'll do it every single time. myself, I'll do it every single time. myself, I'll do it every single time. That juice is so worth the squeeze. But That juice is so worth the squeeze. But That juice is so worth the squeeze. But it's scary, man. It is because you're it's scary, man. It is because you're it's scary, man. It is because you're afraid. And when I talk to guys, they're afraid. And when I talk to guys, they're afraid. And when I talk to guys, they're so afraid they're going to come out of so afraid they're going to come out of so afraid they're going to come out of it and be a pacifist. it and be a pacifist. it and be a pacifist. They're afraid they're going to lose the They're afraid they're going to lose the They're afraid they're going to lose the edge. And like, well, what if you did edge. And like, well, what if you did edge. And like, well, what if you did that medicine while you were in the that medicine while you were in the that medicine while you were in the teams? Could you still do that job? teams? Could you still do that job? teams? Could you still do that job? 100%. I just wouldn't have drugg him home with I just wouldn't have drugg him home with I just wouldn't have drugg him home with me. I could have done that job and me. I could have done that job and me. I could have done that job and empowered it off and I could have done empowered it off and I could have done empowered it off and I could have done my same routine now and I could have my same routine now and I could have my same routine now and I could have went home and been a full-time husband went home and been a full-time husband went home and been a full-time husband and a full-time father. I could still and a full-time father. I could still and a full-time father. I could still compartmentalize it when I went to work compartmentalize it when I went to work compartmentalize it when I went to work and I could just focus on work because and I could just focus on work because and I could just focus on work because I'm running on dials and not switches. I'm running on dials and not switches. I'm running on dials and not switches. You can't just turn it on, shut it off. You can't just turn it on, shut it off. You can't just turn it on, shut it off. You can't. You got to be able to back it You can't. You got to be able to back it You can't. You got to be able to back it off slowly. That's why I use that drive off slowly. That's why I use that drive off slowly. That's why I use that drive into work every day. I'm not thinking into work every day. I'm not thinking into work every day. I'm not thinking about my family in three, two, one. All about my family in three, two, one. All about my family in three, two, one. All I'm thinking about is a lift because I'm thinking about is a lift because I'm thinking about is a lift because that's the only priority I have. Once a that's the only priority I have. Once a that's the only priority I have. Once a lift is done, what's the piece of lift is done, what's the piece of lift is done, what's the piece of content we're shooting? What's the content we're shooting? What's the content we're shooting? What's the training course we're doing? Who do I training course we're doing? Who do I training course we're doing? Who do I need to be when I walk through that need to be when I walk through that need to be when I walk through that threshold? And that medicine really gave threshold? And that medicine really gave threshold? And that medicine really gave me the ability to navigate between those me the ability to navigate between those me the ability to navigate between those spaces better than anything else I've spaces better than anything else I've spaces better than anything else I've ever found. And I'm so thankful for it. ever found. And I'm so thankful for it. ever found. And I'm so thankful for it. I know it sounds hokey and I am not that I know it sounds hokey and I am not that I know it sounds hokey and I am not that guy. You know, yoga and, you know, guy. You know, yoga and, you know, guy. You know, yoga and, you know, crystal, I'm not that dude. And it's crystal, I'm not that dude. And it's crystal, I'm not that dude. And it's very fufu. A lot of it is. And a lot of very fufu. A lot of it is. And a lot of very fufu. A lot of it is. And a lot of people practicing that stuff, they push people practicing that stuff, they push people practicing that stuff, they push it so far out and left that you think it so far out and left that you think it so far out and left that you think that you're ended up like one of the that you're ended up like one of the that you're ended up like one of the lost boys. You run around the rainforest lost boys. You run around the rainforest lost boys. You run around the rainforest with feathers hanging out of your hair. with feathers hanging out of your hair. with feathers hanging out of your hair. It's not like that. It's not like that It's not like that. It's not like that It's not like that. It's not like that at all. It's an amazing facility. It's at all. It's an amazing facility. It's at all. It's an amazing facility. It's an amazing program. And I'm just so an amazing program. And I'm just so an amazing program. And I'm just so thankful that they had thankful that they had thankful that they had they had the ability to share that they had the ability to share that they had the ability to share that message. If they wouldn't have, we'd be message. If they wouldn't have, we'd be message. If they wouldn't have, we'd be in the exact same position. I think in the exact same position. I think in the exact same position. I think they've put in I think three or four they've put in I think three or four they've put in I think three or four thousand people through that medicine in thousand people through that medicine in thousand people through that medicine in the last I think three years. They're the last I think three years. They're the last I think three years. They're absolutely saving people's lives. It's absolutely saving people's lives. It's absolutely saving people's lives. It's uh been remarkable to see the growth of uh been remarkable to see the growth of uh been remarkable to see the growth of Veteran Solutions. Again, I have no Veteran Solutions. Again, I have no Veteran Solutions. Again, I have no formal affiliation. It's just something formal affiliation. It's just something formal affiliation. It's just something that I observed and I really uh that I observed and I really uh that I observed and I really uh respect and my colleague who's been a respect and my colleague who's been a respect and my colleague who's been a guest on this podcast, Dr. Nolan guest on this podcast, Dr. Nolan guest on this podcast, Dr. Nolan Williams. He's a triple board certified Williams. He's a triple board certified Williams. He's a triple board certified physician. He's my colleague at physician. He's my colleague at physician. He's my colleague at Stanford. And um you know couple Stanford. And um you know couple Stanford. And um you know couple of reflections that I think perhaps are of reflections that I think perhaps are of reflections that I think perhaps are also important for people listening to also important for people listening to also important for people listening to hear because um you said go down to hear because um you said go down to hear because um you said go down there it's done in Mexico uh because there it's done in Mexico uh because there it's done in Mexico uh because it's still not legalized in the United it's still not legalized in the United it's still not legalized in the United States. Um it requires supervision. Uh States. Um it requires supervision. Uh States. Um it requires supervision. Uh this is very different even than this is very different even than this is very different even than psilocybin MDMA LSD. There's there's psilocybin MDMA LSD. There's there's psilocybin MDMA LSD. There's there's really no recreational use of these really no recreational use of these really no recreational use of these things uh that is reasonable or safe. things uh that is reasonable or safe. things uh that is reasonable or safe. So, just I'm not saying that just to So, just I'm not saying that just to So, just I'm not saying that just to protect myself. I'm saying that to protect myself. I'm saying that to protect myself. I'm saying that to protect people listening. Um, that said, protect people listening. Um, that said, protect people listening. Um, that said, you know, Nolan and I have talked a lot you know, Nolan and I have talked a lot you know, Nolan and I have talked a lot about this. He's the one scanning guys about this. He's the one scanning guys about this. He's the one scanning guys that go down there and come back. And, that go down there and come back. And, that go down there and come back. And, um, I think it's fair to say that pretty I think it's fair to say that pretty I think it's fair to say that pretty much every positive shift, whether it's much every positive shift, whether it's much every positive shift, whether it's an improvement or a cure from a mental an improvement or a cure from a mental an improvement or a cure from a mental health issue, health issue, health issue, is brain plasticity. Something gets is brain plasticity. Something gets is brain plasticity. Something gets rewired. And these are tools to enable rewired. And these are tools to enable rewired. And these are tools to enable brain plasticity. And I think it's brain plasticity. And I think it's brain plasticity. And I think it's helpful perhaps for people to hear it helpful perhaps for people to hear it helpful perhaps for people to hear it that way because psychedelic sounds like that way because psychedelic sounds like that way because psychedelic sounds like um tie-dye sounds like kaleidoscope, um tie-dye sounds like kaleidoscope, um tie-dye sounds like kaleidoscope, sounds like magic carpet, sounds like sounds like magic carpet, sounds like sounds like magic carpet, sounds like the 60s, sounds like people staring at the 60s, sounds like people staring at the 60s, sounds like people staring at the sun, burning their eyes out, and the sun, burning their eyes out, and the sun, burning their eyes out, and then talking about how they've seen God then talking about how they've seen God then talking about how they've seen God and everyone else needs to have the same and everyone else needs to have the same and everyone else needs to have the same experience, summer love, dirty feet, and experience, summer love, dirty feet, and experience, summer love, dirty feet, and all that. Okay. all that. Okay. all that. Okay. &gt;&gt; Um it is amazing to me that the veterans &gt;&gt; Um it is amazing to me that the veterans &gt;&gt; Um it is amazing to me that the veterans community and a bipartisan effort. I community and a bipartisan effort. I community and a bipartisan effort. I will say this is one of the few truly will say this is one of the few truly will say this is one of the few truly bipartisan efforts out there. bipartisan efforts out there. bipartisan efforts out there. Everything's so polarized. But former Everything's so polarized. But former Everything's so polarized. But former Governor Rick Perry of Texas, who is Governor Rick Perry of Texas, who is Governor Rick Perry of Texas, who is self-described knuckle drug dragging self-described knuckle drug dragging self-described knuckle drug dragging Republican. He said that. I'm not saying Republican. He said that. I'm not saying Republican. He said that. I'm not saying that about him. He says it every time. that about him. He says it every time. that about him. He says it every time. Has fully embraced Ibagain and what Has fully embraced Ibagain and what Has fully embraced Ibagain and what heart medicine sometimes called the MDMA heart medicine sometimes called the MDMA heart medicine sometimes called the MDMA therapies as well. has been really therapies as well. has been really therapies as well. has been really working with people on the Democratic working with people on the Democratic working with people on the Democratic side of the aisle to try and uh get FDA side of the aisle to try and uh get FDA side of the aisle to try and uh get FDA approval for this stuff in the United approval for this stuff in the United approval for this stuff in the United States first for the treatment of States first for the treatment of States first for the treatment of veterans and other people with substance veterans and other people with substance veterans and other people with substance use and severe trauma issues use and severe trauma issues use and severe trauma issues first and then it will be explored how first and then it will be explored how first and then it will be explored how this could wick out into the broader this could wick out into the broader this could wick out into the broader population. But I just think of them as population. But I just think of them as population. But I just think of them as incredibly powerful tools for brain incredibly powerful tools for brain incredibly powerful tools for brain plasticity. Um, and then maybe that just plasticity. Um, and then maybe that just plasticity. Um, and then maybe that just kind of softens for people in their kind of softens for people in their kind of softens for people in their minds a little bit of what just how wild minds a little bit of what just how wild minds a little bit of what just how wild and crazy it is. I mean, the experiences and crazy it is. I mean, the experiences and crazy it is. I mean, the experiences are extreme. As you said, it's are extreme. As you said, it's are extreme. As you said, it's challenging to be in the Ibagane. I've challenging to be in the Ibagane. I've challenging to be in the Ibagane. I've heard that from everyone who's done it. heard that from everyone who's done it. heard that from everyone who's done it. Uh, I haven't yet done I gain at some Uh, I haven't yet done I gain at some Uh, I haven't yet done I gain at some point I will, but I've certainly um done point I will, but I've certainly um done point I will, but I've certainly um done therapeutic uh sessions with MDMA, therapeutic uh sessions with MDMA, therapeutic uh sessions with MDMA, therapeutic and highdosily, and it's can therapeutic and highdosily, and it's can therapeutic and highdosily, and it's can be terrifying and you need to be someone be terrifying and you need to be someone be terrifying and you need to be someone there to help guide you through it at there to help guide you through it at there to help guide you through it at times. But I'm so happy that Marcus and times. But I'm so happy that Marcus and times. But I'm so happy that Marcus and Amber uh undertook this project that you Amber uh undertook this project that you Amber uh undertook this project that you joined up with that project and the joined up with that project and the joined up with that project and the Netflix movie. We'll provide a link to Netflix movie. We'll provide a link to Netflix movie. We'll provide a link to it if it's out. Otherwise, we'll just it if it's out. Otherwise, we'll just it if it's out. Otherwise, we'll just cue people to the fact that they should cue people to the fact that they should cue people to the fact that they should definitely watch this. It's extremely definitely watch this. It's extremely definitely watch this. It's extremely compelling um an important story for compelling um an important story for compelling um an important story for people to hear. I can't help but mention people to hear. I can't help but mention people to hear. I can't help but mention just because um I've had the great just because um I've had the great just because um I've had the great uh experience of being able to uh experience of being able to uh experience of being able to interact with so many people around this interact with so many people around this interact with so many people around this and the effort is so wholehearted and is and the effort is so wholehearted and is and the effort is so wholehearted and is so um deeply rooted in trying to help so um deeply rooted in trying to help so um deeply rooted in trying to help people and I think that's really people and I think that's really people and I think that's really important for people to hear too because important for people to hear too because important for people to hear too because anytime there's a business association anytime there's a business association anytime there's a business association with things people all start to color with things people all start to color with things people all start to color that it's just there's just so much pure that it's just there's just so much pure that it's just there's just so much pure intent in all of this. I also have intent in all of this. I also have intent in all of this. I also have gotten to know Sarah Wilkinson a little gotten to know Sarah Wilkinson a little gotten to know Sarah Wilkinson a little bit. Um bit. Um bit. Um &gt;&gt; she's amazing. &gt;&gt; she's amazing. &gt;&gt; she's amazing. &gt;&gt; She's amazing. Chad's wife. Um uh &gt;&gt; She's amazing. Chad's wife. Um uh &gt;&gt; She's amazing. Chad's wife. Um uh first through Veteran Solutions and um first through Veteran Solutions and um first through Veteran Solutions and um you know she she's an amazing woman and you know she she's an amazing woman and you know she she's an amazing woman and you know and I think it's been you know and I think it's been you know and I think it's been challenging to see all these guys that challenging to see all these guys that challenging to see all these guys that he was friends with get better, right? he was friends with get better, right? he was friends with get better, right? And it's so tragic that someone has And it's so tragic that someone has And it's so tragic that someone has to take their own life for things to take their own life for things to take their own life for things like this to eventually get stimulated. like this to eventually get stimulated. like this to eventually get stimulated. But the amount of good that Veteran But the amount of good that Veteran But the amount of good that Veteran Solutions is catalyzing is really Solutions is catalyzing is really Solutions is catalyzing is really spectacular. And so I'm glad we're spectacular. And so I'm glad we're spectacular. And so I'm glad we're taking some time to talk about it. I taking some time to talk about it. I taking some time to talk about it. I think it's been discussed on other think it's been discussed on other think it's been discussed on other podcasts. I think this movement is just podcasts. I think this movement is just podcasts. I think this movement is just going to grow. I think it's broken going to grow. I think it's broken going to grow. I think it's broken through now and hopefully this will through now and hopefully this will through now and hopefully this will continue to help it break through. continue to help it break through. continue to help it break through. &gt;&gt; When the whole thing first started, John &gt;&gt; When the whole thing first started, John &gt;&gt; When the whole thing first started, John Shank and Bonnie Cohen reached out about Shank and Bonnie Cohen reached out about Shank and Bonnie Cohen reached out about doing the film in Ways and War. And they doing the film in Ways and War. And they doing the film in Ways and War. And they actually kind of tricked me to be a part actually kind of tricked me to be a part actually kind of tricked me to be a part of it. They told me that Marcus and of it. They told me that Marcus and of it. They told me that Marcus and Amber were spearheading this project. So Amber were spearheading this project. So Amber were spearheading this project. So I was like, if Marcus and Amber in, I'm I was like, if Marcus and Amber in, I'm I was like, if Marcus and Amber in, I'm in. I owe them anyway. They saved me. in. I owe them anyway. They saved me. in. I owe them anyway. They saved me. I'm into it. I'm into it. I'm into it. That wasn't really the case. They That wasn't really the case. They That wasn't really the case. They spearheaded me. I'm on board. And then spearheaded me. I'm on board. And then spearheaded me. I'm on board. And then he convinced Marcus and Amber to join on he convinced Marcus and Amber to join on he convinced Marcus and Amber to join on board. And now it's essentially his board. And now it's essentially his board. And now it's essentially his whole story, unfiltered, unbiased. My whole story, unfiltered, unbiased. My whole story, unfiltered, unbiased. My whole story and then us going back for whole story and then us going back for whole story and then us going back for my buddy Maddie and how all our lives my buddy Maddie and how all our lives my buddy Maddie and how all our lives are entangled in teams and just all the are entangled in teams and just all the are entangled in teams and just all the trauma we all share and how we're all trauma we all share and how we're all trauma we all share and how we're all getting through it. But you know, it getting through it. But you know, it getting through it. But you know, it kills addiction in one shot, which is kills addiction in one shot, which is kills addiction in one shot, which is crazy. People addicted to heroin. Like I crazy. People addicted to heroin. Like I crazy. People addicted to heroin. Like I dipped Copenhagen for 17 years. Never dipped Copenhagen for 17 years. Never dipped Copenhagen for 17 years. Never wanted to quit. And I woke up the very wanted to quit. And I woke up the very wanted to quit. And I woke up the very next morning from Ian and I've never had next morning from Ian and I've never had next morning from Ian and I've never had a dip. So a dip. So a dip. So &gt;&gt; that's so wild. &gt;&gt; that's so wild. &gt;&gt; that's so wild. &gt;&gt; And I want to dip. like I miss it and as &gt;&gt; And I want to dip. like I miss it and as &gt;&gt; And I want to dip. like I miss it and as soon as I smell it, I can't do it. It's soon as I smell it, I can't do it. It's soon as I smell it, I can't do it. It's like I didn't drink coffee for six like I didn't drink coffee for six like I didn't drink coffee for six months. It's like I want to drink coffee months. It's like I want to drink coffee months. It's like I want to drink coffee and then I have no desire. My energy and then I have no desire. My energy and then I have no desire. My energy levels are through the roof. Like levels are through the roof. Like levels are through the roof. Like everything is better. Like I kind of everything is better. Like I kind of everything is better. Like I kind of just want to be normal again. It's like just want to be normal again. It's like just want to be normal again. It's like slowly but surely introduce coffee and slowly but surely introduce coffee and slowly but surely introduce coffee and whatever else. But you have no whatever else. But you have no whatever else. But you have no addictions. And I was at the bottom of addictions. And I was at the bottom of addictions. And I was at the bottom of the barrel. I mean I was taking extreme the barrel. I mean I was taking extreme the barrel. I mean I was taking extreme doses of gabapentin, doses of gabapentin, doses of gabapentin, tramodol, tordol, everything else. And tramodol, tordol, everything else. And tramodol, tordol, everything else. And you know, Tramodol is not habit forming. you know, Tramodol is not habit forming. you know, Tramodol is not habit forming. Yeah. Take it for 12 years and tell me Yeah. Take it for 12 years and tell me Yeah. Take it for 12 years and tell me it's not like it most certainly is. And it's not like it most certainly is. And it's not like it most certainly is. And to be able to whitewash all of that gone to be able to whitewash all of that gone to be able to whitewash all of that gone in one shot. I mean, the doctors, I was in one shot. I mean, the doctors, I was in one shot. I mean, the doctors, I was never getting off those meds. Never. never getting off those meds. Never. never getting off those meds. Never. Like, if you want to function in Like, if you want to function in Like, if you want to function in society, you have to take these society, you have to take these society, you have to take these medications for the rest of your life. medications for the rest of your life. medications for the rest of your life. And I was fine with it. I'm totally And I was fine with it. I'm totally And I was fine with it. I'm totally good. And then on the backside, you see good. And then on the backside, you see good. And then on the backside, you see that it doesn't matter if I was drinking that it doesn't matter if I was drinking that it doesn't matter if I was drinking a 12-pack a day or if I was just popping a 12-pack a day or if I was just popping a 12-pack a day or if I was just popping these 60 pills. I was under the these 60 pills. I was under the these 60 pills. I was under the influence of something all day, every influence of something all day, every influence of something all day, every day for 15 years. That's not how I want day for 15 years. That's not how I want day for 15 years. That's not how I want to be. It's not how I want to live my to be. It's not how I want to live my to be. It's not how I want to live my next 40 years. It's like it's really put next 40 years. It's like it's really put next 40 years. It's like it's really put me in a position where I'm so hyper me in a position where I'm so hyper me in a position where I'm so hyper aware everything that I input and then aware everything that I input and then aware everything that I input and then everything that I output. Like it everything that I output. Like it everything that I output. Like it gives you the it gives you complete gives you the it gives you complete gives you the it gives you complete control. And I think some guys just need control. And I think some guys just need control. And I think some guys just need this. They need that breath of fresh this. They need that breath of fresh this. They need that breath of fresh air. They need that instant relief to air. They need that instant relief to air. They need that instant relief to go, "Okay, go, "Okay, go, "Okay, okay, I could live with this now." And if you I could live with this now." And if you I could live with this now." And if you just keep living that positive just keep living that positive just keep living that positive lifestyle, it'll become your new norm, lifestyle, it'll become your new norm, lifestyle, it'll become your new norm, right? But you have to really want to right? But you have to really want to right? But you have to really want to change for me, I've never found anything change for me, I've never found anything change for me, I've never found anything that powerful in my life. And because a that powerful in my life. And because a that powerful in my life. And because a lot of guys are scared. They're scared lot of guys are scared. They're scared lot of guys are scared. They're scared about going down to Mexico and whatever about going down to Mexico and whatever about going down to Mexico and whatever it is. There's a 25 person staff in that it is. There's a 25 person staff in that it is. There's a 25 person staff in that house with you. Three paramedics, three house with you. Three paramedics, three house with you. Three paramedics, three RNs. They got cardiac s. They have RNs. They got cardiac s. They have RNs. They got cardiac s. They have everybody in there. The chefs in there everybody in there. The chefs in there everybody in there. The chefs in there are amazing. Michelin star quality, the are amazing. Michelin star quality, the are amazing. Michelin star quality, the food you eat, and there's indoor food you eat, and there's indoor food you eat, and there's indoor swimming pools. There's a Raiki lady in swimming pools. There's a Raiki lady in swimming pools. There's a Raiki lady in there that will crack your soul open in there that will crack your soul open in there that will crack your soul open in 15 seconds flat. I never thought Reiki 15 seconds flat. I never thought Reiki 15 seconds flat. I never thought Reiki was a thing until she puts her hands on was a thing until she puts her hands on was a thing until she puts her hands on you. The massage therapy, the breath you. The massage therapy, the breath you. The massage therapy, the breath work. I mean, it's a whole holistic work. I mean, it's a whole holistic work. I mean, it's a whole holistic approach. But approach. But approach. But because you've never just you've never because you've never just you've never because you've never just you've never allowed yourself to be vulnerable in allowed yourself to be vulnerable in allowed yourself to be vulnerable in that position and once you are, they that position and once you are, they that position and once you are, they just start to unravel you so fast. And just start to unravel you so fast. And just start to unravel you so fast. And that medicine is really the catalyst for that medicine is really the catalyst for that medicine is really the catalyst for the whole thing. And once you see what the whole thing. And once you see what the whole thing. And once you see what you can be, like I can be the same guy you can be, like I can be the same guy you can be, like I can be the same guy that I was now. I can just control him. that I was now. I can just control him. that I was now. I can just control him. I think that's what a lot of guys lose I think that's what a lot of guys lose I think that's what a lot of guys lose when they leave the team. Like, well, when they leave the team. Like, well, when they leave the team. Like, well, I've built myself into this because of I've built myself into this because of I've built myself into this because of that. Well, I can't take that with me. that. Well, I can't take that with me. that. Well, I can't take that with me. So, what do I do with this? My wife So, what do I do with this? My wife So, what do I do with this? My wife doesn't want this. I don't want this. My doesn't want this. I don't want this. My doesn't want this. I don't want this. My kids can't build a relationship with kids can't build a relationship with kids can't build a relationship with this. What am I supposed to do now? And this. What am I supposed to do now? And this. What am I supposed to do now? And that's when people make those rash that's when people make those rash that's when people make those rash decisions. They don't know where to go. decisions. They don't know where to go. decisions. They don't know where to go. And I think that's what's so powerful to And I think that's what's so powerful to And I think that's what's so powerful to medicine is that's the only thing medicine is that's the only thing medicine is that's the only thing stronger than the ego you've built up stronger than the ego you've built up stronger than the ego you've built up purpose built is that medicine. Yeah. purpose built is that medicine. Yeah. purpose built is that medicine. Yeah. Changed my life for sure. It's been Changed my life for sure. It's been Changed my life for sure. It's been great. Where my mind goes is, you know, um Where my mind goes is, you know, um Where my mind goes is, you know, um people who aren't in the military um people who aren't in the military um people who aren't in the military um these days are also really struggling these days are also really struggling these days are also really struggling also. I point out um and you know the also. I point out um and you know the also. I point out um and you know the United States in particular like we're United States in particular like we're United States in particular like we're at a pretty dark moment. It took we're at a pretty dark moment. It took we're at a pretty dark moment. It took me a while to actually like really me a while to actually like really me a while to actually like really internalize that. I was like man like internalize that. I was like man like internalize that. I was like man like it like last week the Charlie Kirk like it like last week the Charlie Kirk like it like last week the Charlie Kirk thing that or same week or just a few thing that or same week or just a few thing that or same week or just a few days before that woman getting killed on days before that woman getting killed on days before that woman getting killed on the light rail. Um you got conflicts all the light rail. Um you got conflicts all the light rail. Um you got conflicts all over the world. you've got a ton of over the world. you've got a ton of over the world. you've got a ton of domestic unrest and people have come on domestic unrest and people have come on domestic unrest and people have come on this podcast and argued that you know in this podcast and argued that you know in this podcast and argued that you know in the last century there were a lot more the last century there were a lot more the last century there were a lot more deaths due to war and this kind of thing deaths due to war and this kind of thing deaths due to war and this kind of thing and you know statistics and is are one and you know statistics and is are one and you know statistics and is are one thing and they're important but um thing and they're important but um thing and they're important but um seeing people murdered seeing people murdered seeing people murdered in cold blood in either very deliberate in cold blood in either very deliberate in cold blood in either very deliberate or in what seemed like almost kind of or in what seemed like almost kind of or in what seemed like almost kind of like random like okay there was a person like random like okay there was a person like random like okay there was a person there so he killed her if there was there so he killed her if there was there so he killed her if there was someone else they might kill maybe not someone else they might kill maybe not someone else they might kill maybe not who knows what the motivation was who knows what the motivation was who knows what the motivation was you know and And to think about how you know and And to think about how you know and And to think about how traumas like that, just the pain of the traumas like that, just the pain of the traumas like that, just the pain of the world can be lifted. It's hard to world can be lifted. It's hard to world can be lifted. It's hard to imagine it happening in mass, right? imagine it happening in mass, right? imagine it happening in mass, right? It's hard. And yet, I think we all deep It's hard. And yet, I think we all deep It's hard. And yet, I think we all deep down know that has to happen. And I down know that has to happen. And I down know that has to happen. And I think an attention to what young people think an attention to what young people think an attention to what young people are exposed to and trying to save them are exposed to and trying to save them are exposed to and trying to save them is, you know, the best thing about our is, you know, the best thing about our is, you know, the best thing about our species, right? Protect our young, make species, right? Protect our young, make species, right? Protect our young, make them put them into a world that's better them put them into a world that's better them put them into a world that's better than the way we found it. And than the way we found it. And than the way we found it. And at the same time, I what you're at the same time, I what you're at the same time, I what you're describing is kind of a it sounds describing is kind of a it sounds describing is kind of a it sounds like the medicine, for lack of a like the medicine, for lack of a like the medicine, for lack of a better way to put it, that the society better way to put it, that the society better way to put it, that the society and like this like kind of global and like this like kind of global and like this like kind of global consciousness really needs. I I've said consciousness really needs. I I've said consciousness really needs. I I've said before and I'll say it again. I think before and I'll say it again. I think before and I'll say it again. I think if you look at humans across history, if you look at humans across history, if you look at humans across history, we've always had conflict. We've always we've always had conflict. We've always we've always had conflict. We've always created trauma for each other. We've not created trauma for each other. We've not created trauma for each other. We've not ever really been perfect ever really been perfect ever really been perfect ever. We're not perfect. We're flawed. ever. We're not perfect. We're flawed. ever. We're not perfect. We're flawed. We're all flawed. I think that's We're all flawed. I think that's We're all flawed. I think that's important to remember. And that things important to remember. And that things important to remember. And that things will improve over time. Perhaps this can will improve over time. Perhaps this can will improve over time. Perhaps this can be like a saw to up and to the right be like a saw to up and to the right be like a saw to up and to the right kind of graph. But you wonder if there kind of graph. But you wonder if there kind of graph. But you wonder if there was going to be a massive shift in was going to be a massive shift in was going to be a massive shift in collective consciousness and people were collective consciousness and people were collective consciousness and people were going to really heal their traumas and going to really heal their traumas and going to really heal their traumas and really start to see other people really start to see other people really start to see other people differently. Um that that's going to differently. Um that that's going to differently. Um that that's going to require some very powerful tools. And I require some very powerful tools. And I require some very powerful tools. And I just can't help but think there is no just can't help but think there is no just can't help but think there is no magic solution. people have to want to magic solution. people have to want to magic solution. people have to want to change and on and on. But um the Ibegan change and on and on. But um the Ibegan change and on and on. But um the Ibegan sounds like a special tool different sounds like a special tool different sounds like a special tool different than the other psychedelics because of than the other psychedelics because of than the other psychedelics because of the amount of attention and detail the amount of attention and detail the amount of attention and detail that's required to keep people safe that's required to keep people safe that's required to keep people safe while they do it. You need you know while they do it. You need you know while they do it. You need you know heart monitoring and it's a medical heart monitoring and it's a medical heart monitoring and it's a medical treatment in many ways. I think we treatment in many ways. I think we treatment in many ways. I think we should probably talk about it and frame should probably talk about it and frame should probably talk about it and frame it that way going forward. It's a it that way going forward. It's a it that way going forward. It's a medical treatment. The word psychedelic medical treatment. The word psychedelic medical treatment. The word psychedelic is a very loaded phrase and it's one of is a very loaded phrase and it's one of is a very loaded phrase and it's one of the things that I worry about in terms the things that I worry about in terms the things that I worry about in terms of trying to get ibeain and other of trying to get ibeain and other of trying to get ibeain and other treatments um implemented more broadly treatments um implemented more broadly treatments um implemented more broadly in the same way that when about 10 years in the same way that when about 10 years in the same way that when about 10 years ago we would think about breath work and ago we would think about breath work and ago we would think about breath work and I want to study respiration physiology I want to study respiration physiology I want to study respiration physiology in my lab calling it respiration in my lab calling it respiration in my lab calling it respiration physiology you know we have a clinical physiology you know we have a clinical physiology you know we have a clinical trial that we published on that if we trial that we published on that if we trial that we published on that if we called it breath work it's kind of wacky called it breath work it's kind of wacky called it breath work it's kind of wacky you call it respiration physiology which you call it respiration physiology which you call it respiration physiology which is also true people are more willing to is also true people are more willing to is also true people are more willing to embrace it so these to me are embrace it so these to me are embrace it so these to me are neuroplasticity the tools to help rewire neuroplasticity the tools to help rewire neuroplasticity the tools to help rewire one's brain for the better. And I am one's brain for the better. And I am one's brain for the better. And I am very hopeful that what you've done, I very hopeful that what you've done, I very hopeful that what you've done, I mean, again, thank you. You know, it's mean, again, thank you. You know, it's mean, again, thank you. You know, it's like, you know, we always thank people like, you know, we always thank people like, you know, we always thank people for their service, but here now you've for their service, but here now you've for their service, but here now you've got people that served who are now got people that served who are now got people that served who are now going into this highly novel, at least going into this highly novel, at least going into this highly novel, at least for Americans, a treatment to help cure for Americans, a treatment to help cure for Americans, a treatment to help cure trauma and addiction. And you guys are trauma and addiction. And you guys are trauma and addiction. And you guys are first in and Marcus and Amber are, you first in and Marcus and Amber are, you first in and Marcus and Amber are, you know, early and first in. And um and know, early and first in. And um and know, early and first in. And um and people will argue, you know, these people will argue, you know, these people will argue, you know, these things have been around for a long time things have been around for a long time things have been around for a long time in native cultures in the and in native cultures in the and in native cultures in the and in jungles. And I will say just like jungles. And I will say just like jungles. And I will say just like meditation, just like yoga nidra, just meditation, just like yoga nidra, just meditation, just like yoga nidra, just like hydrotherapy, light therapy, it's like hydrotherapy, light therapy, it's like hydrotherapy, light therapy, it's exactly because it's been shrouded in exactly because it's been shrouded in exactly because it's been shrouded in complicated language that it isn't more complicated language that it isn't more complicated language that it isn't more broadly implemented. And I'm willing to broadly implemented. And I'm willing to broadly implemented. And I'm willing to say that a thousand times over. If if we say that a thousand times over. If if we say that a thousand times over. If if we truly care about people, we don't care truly care about people, we don't care truly care about people, we don't care what it's called. Sure, we want to uh what it's called. Sure, we want to uh what it's called. Sure, we want to uh pay respect to people that developed pay respect to people that developed pay respect to people that developed these things long ago, but enough is these things long ago, but enough is these things long ago, but enough is enough. like it's not about getting enough. like it's not about getting enough. like it's not about getting credit, it's about getting it out there. credit, it's about getting it out there. credit, it's about getting it out there. &gt;&gt; And you're exactly right. When you say &gt;&gt; And you're exactly right. When you say &gt;&gt; And you're exactly right. When you say psychedelics, everybody automatically psychedelics, everybody automatically psychedelics, everybody automatically labels it a certain way. And one of the labels it a certain way. And one of the labels it a certain way. And one of the best quotes I've ever heard is we gave best quotes I've ever heard is we gave best quotes I've ever heard is we gave uh we gave I gave to my buddy Maddie and uh we gave I gave to my buddy Maddie and uh we gave I gave to my buddy Maddie and he woke up the next day and he goes, he woke up the next day and he goes, he woke up the next day and he goes, "There is nothing recreational about "There is nothing recreational about "There is nothing recreational about that." Nope. There isn't. that." Nope. There isn't. that." Nope. There isn't. &gt;&gt; Terrifying. &gt;&gt; Terrifying. &gt;&gt; Terrifying. &gt;&gt; It can be. Some people wake up and it's &gt;&gt; It can be. Some people wake up and it's &gt;&gt; It can be. Some people wake up and it's bliss the entire time. And I'm so glad bliss the entire time. And I'm so glad bliss the entire time. And I'm so glad you have that. you have that. you have that. But if you were laying in Stanford right But if you were laying in Stanford right But if you were laying in Stanford right now and you gave me I gain hooked up the now and you gave me I gain hooked up the now and you gave me I gain hooked up the heart rate monitors, you were running heart rate monitors, you were running heart rate monitors, you were running the study, they wouldn't bat an eye the study, they wouldn't bat an eye the study, they wouldn't bat an eye like, "Oh yeah, it's the same thing. like, "Oh yeah, it's the same thing. like, "Oh yeah, it's the same thing. &gt;&gt; You have the same people around you. &gt;&gt; You have the same people around you. &gt;&gt; You have the same people around you. They're taking detailed notes. They're taking detailed notes. They're taking detailed notes. Everything you say, I mean Everything you say, I mean Everything you say, I mean this, you might as well be at a clinic. this, you might as well be at a clinic. this, you might as well be at a clinic. &gt;&gt; You are. It's in a beautiful house, &gt;&gt; You are. It's in a beautiful house, &gt;&gt; You are. It's in a beautiful house, beautiful staff, and the entire thing. beautiful staff, and the entire thing. beautiful staff, and the entire thing. But &gt;&gt; that's what it is. This is a treatment. &gt;&gt; that's what it is. This is a treatment. &gt;&gt; that's what it is. This is a treatment. This is not a bunch of guys eating, This is not a bunch of guys eating, This is not a bunch of guys eating, smoking, doing whatever peyote in the smoking, doing whatever peyote in the smoking, doing whatever peyote in the middle of the desert. It's not what that middle of the desert. It's not what that middle of the desert. It's not what that is. This is a very structured thing is. This is a very structured thing is. This is a very structured thing because you have some serious trauma. I because you have some serious trauma. I because you have some serious trauma. I think a lot of people label it like, think a lot of people label it like, think a lot of people label it like, "Oh, this is for guys with PTSD." I "Oh, this is for guys with PTSD." I "Oh, this is for guys with PTSD." I didn't go down there for PTSD. I went didn't go down there for PTSD. I went didn't go down there for PTSD. I went down there for whatever had I've turned down there for whatever had I've turned down there for whatever had I've turned into I was trying to get rid of that. into I was trying to get rid of that. into I was trying to get rid of that. And I'll tell you before, And I'll tell you before, And I'll tell you before, nothing in my military career has ever nothing in my military career has ever nothing in my military career has ever come up. None of it. That's not what come up. None of it. That's not what come up. None of it. That's not what haunts me. That's not what plagues me at haunts me. That's not what plagues me at haunts me. That's not what plagues me at night. It's not what keeps me up till 2, night. It's not what keeps me up till 2, night. It's not what keeps me up till 2, three in the morning. It's not that. And three in the morning. It's not that. And three in the morning. It's not that. And I've resolved all the things that was I've resolved all the things that was I've resolved all the things that was troubling me. And it's because that troubling me. And it's because that troubling me. And it's because that medicine is so powerful. I just hope medicine is so powerful. I just hope medicine is so powerful. I just hope more people will get a hold of it. more people will get a hold of it. more people will get a hold of it. And I think if we had the right people And I think if we had the right people And I think if we had the right people putting out the right message on the putting out the right message on the putting out the right message on the right platforms, people they get a hold right platforms, people they get a hold right platforms, people they get a hold of it. So many people want to hear hate of it. So many people want to hear hate of it. So many people want to hear hate speech. &gt;&gt; Like negativity goes a lot more than &gt;&gt; Like negativity goes a lot more than &gt;&gt; Like negativity goes a lot more than positivity a lot of times because people positivity a lot of times because people positivity a lot of times because people hang on to that. It's like, you know, I hang on to that. It's like, you know, I hang on to that. It's like, you know, I read something they were talking about read something they were talking about read something they were talking about the um the best public speakers in human the um the best public speakers in human the um the best public speakers in human history and Hitler was in the top five. history and Hitler was in the top five. history and Hitler was in the top five. And they're like, well, just imagine if And they're like, well, just imagine if And they're like, well, just imagine if he was preaching positivity. He could he was preaching positivity. He could he was preaching positivity. He could have turned that entire country and have turned that entire country and have turned that entire country and really given them something to hang on really given them something to hang on really given them something to hang on to. He just didn't. And you wish that he to. He just didn't. And you wish that he to. He just didn't. And you wish that he would have been preaching the gospel. would have been preaching the gospel. would have been preaching the gospel. You wish he would have been preaching You wish he would have been preaching You wish he would have been preaching love and kindness for all of humanity. love and kindness for all of humanity. love and kindness for all of humanity. And then what would have happened in And then what would have happened in And then what would have happened in World War II? Wouldn't happen. World War II? Wouldn't happen. World War II? Wouldn't happen. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Humans have an appetite for &gt;&gt; Yeah. Humans have an appetite for &gt;&gt; Yeah. Humans have an appetite for that uh anger. There's a famous for that uh anger. There's a famous for that uh anger. There's a famous experiment by a guy named Robert Heath. experiment by a guy named Robert Heath. experiment by a guy named Robert Heath. He was a neuroscientist and neurosurgeon He was a neuroscientist and neurosurgeon He was a neuroscientist and neurosurgeon and um very controversial guy for all and um very controversial guy for all and um very controversial guy for all sorts of reasons. But he ran an sorts of reasons. But he ran an sorts of reasons. But he ran an experiment on humans where he was in the experiment on humans where he was in the experiment on humans where he was in the brain stimulating different brain areas brain stimulating different brain areas brain stimulating different brain areas and um uh he would implant little and um uh he would implant little and um uh he would implant little electrodes in humans and um people had electrodes in humans and um people had electrodes in humans and um people had the opportunity then later to stimulate the opportunity then later to stimulate the opportunity then later to stimulate different brain areas and different brain areas and different brain areas and different brain areas when stimulated evoke brain areas when stimulated evoke brain areas when stimulated evoke different subjective experiences. So different subjective experiences. So different subjective experiences. So they'd hit a lever, they'd feel kind of they'd hit a lever, they'd feel kind of they'd hit a lever, they'd feel kind of drunk, hit another lever, they'd feel drunk, hit another lever, they'd feel drunk, hit another lever, they'd feel sexual arousal, hit another lever, sexual arousal, hit another lever, sexual arousal, hit another lever, they'd feel laughter, others they'd feel they'd feel laughter, others they'd feel they'd feel laughter, others they'd feel less well. Do you know the number one less well. Do you know the number one less well. Do you know the number one brain area? There weren't many subjects brain area? There weren't many subjects brain area? There weren't many subjects in this. It's difficult experiment to in this. It's difficult experiment to in this. It's difficult experiment to do. But the number one brain area that do. But the number one brain area that do. But the number one brain area that these subjects all wanted to hit again these subjects all wanted to hit again these subjects all wanted to hit again and again and again was an area of the and again and again was an area of the and again and again was an area of the what's called the midline phalamus that what's called the midline phalamus that what's called the midline phalamus that evokes feelings of mild anger and evokes feelings of mild anger and evokes feelings of mild anger and frustration. It's linked to the dopamine system and It's linked to the dopamine system and It's linked to the dopamine system and it's associated with drive and it's what it's associated with drive and it's what it's associated with drive and it's what we learn if we're adaptive to funnel we learn if we're adaptive to funnel we learn if we're adaptive to funnel into creating things, building things, into creating things, building things, into creating things, building things, doing things. But it's very clear that doing things. But it's very clear that doing things. But it's very clear that we are hardwired to be pulled into we are hardwired to be pulled into we are hardwired to be pulled into environments and discourses that evoke environments and discourses that evoke environments and discourses that evoke anger. I feel like anger and numbing out anger. I feel like anger and numbing out anger. I feel like anger and numbing out are the two most dangerous things. And are the two most dangerous things. And are the two most dangerous things. And look, I love social media, teach on look, I love social media, teach on look, I love social media, teach on social media, but being online makes it social media, but being online makes it social media, but being online makes it very easy to feel anger very easy to feel anger very easy to feel anger and to numb out. And you know it's the and to numb out. And you know it's the and to numb out. And you know it's the ultimate drug really to offer that in my ultimate drug really to offer that in my ultimate drug really to offer that in my opinion. And then there's this other opinion. And then there's this other opinion. And then there's this other lane of life, right, which is harder to lane of life, right, which is harder to lane of life, right, which is harder to access. Um where the real richness is, access. Um where the real richness is, access. Um where the real richness is, where the real stuff is, where real where the real stuff is, where real where the real stuff is, where real meaning comes from, where time doesn't meaning comes from, where time doesn't meaning comes from, where time doesn't just disappear and where you build just disappear and where you build just disappear and where you build things that are lasting and that with if things that are lasting and that with if things that are lasting and that with if I die in 10 seconds, I'll know I die in 10 seconds, I'll know I die in 10 seconds, I'll know that I'd spent some time in that lane that I'd spent some time in that lane that I'd spent some time in that lane enough to know that like that's where enough to know that like that's where enough to know that like that's where the really good stuff is. And it's a bit the really good stuff is. And it's a bit the really good stuff is. And it's a bit more difficult or a lot more difficult more difficult or a lot more difficult more difficult or a lot more difficult to access, but that's real life. to access, but that's real life. to access, but that's real life. &gt;&gt; And the rest is uh is a game that's &gt;&gt; And the rest is uh is a game that's &gt;&gt; And the rest is uh is a game that's being played on us that takes advantage being played on us that takes advantage being played on us that takes advantage of some hard wiring that I wish didn't of some hard wiring that I wish didn't of some hard wiring that I wish didn't exist, but it exists in all of us. I exist, but it exists in all of us. I exist, but it exists in all of us. I think if we knew that existed in think if we knew that existed in think if we knew that existed in all of us, just like we have an appetite all of us, just like we have an appetite all of us, just like we have an appetite for sugar, for sugar, for sugar, &gt;&gt; you know, it's hardwired, uh that we &gt;&gt; you know, it's hardwired, uh that we &gt;&gt; you know, it's hardwired, uh that we would make better choices. So, I'm would make better choices. So, I'm would make better choices. So, I'm so glad that you've done I gain and DMT so glad that you've done I gain and DMT so glad that you've done I gain and DMT in that setting and that you guys are in that setting and that you guys are in that setting and that you guys are getting the message out there. And I getting the message out there. And I getting the message out there. And I don't know what the broader don't know what the broader don't know what the broader implementation looks like, but I like to implementation looks like, but I like to implementation looks like, but I like to think that with collaboration with think that with collaboration with think that with collaboration with Nolan, what's Veteran Solutions, Ambio, Nolan, what's Veteran Solutions, Ambio, Nolan, what's Veteran Solutions, Ambio, and other clinics like it and really and other clinics like it and really and other clinics like it and really good for once, really good politicians good for once, really good politicians good for once, really good politicians on both sides of the aisle arguing for on both sides of the aisle arguing for on both sides of the aisle arguing for this. I'm hopeful. I fully support my this. I'm hopeful. I fully support my this. I'm hopeful. I fully support my tax dollars going to uh the expansion of tax dollars going to uh the expansion of tax dollars going to uh the expansion of this. I really do. this. I really do. this. I really do. &gt;&gt; They've been spending a lot of time in &gt;&gt; They've been spending a lot of time in &gt;&gt; They've been spending a lot of time in the beltway getting funding, you know, the beltway getting funding, you know, the beltway getting funding, you know, clinical trials, research, doing the clinical trials, research, doing the clinical trials, research, doing the entire thing. And they've got a whole entire thing. And they've got a whole entire thing. And they've got a whole coalition now. Navy Seal Foundation coalition now. Navy Seal Foundation coalition now. Navy Seal Foundation stepped up, a Green Bree Foundation, I stepped up, a Green Bree Foundation, I stepped up, a Green Bree Foundation, I think uh might be the Recon Foundation think uh might be the Recon Foundation think uh might be the Recon Foundation and Wounded Warrior Project. They all and Wounded Warrior Project. They all and Wounded Warrior Project. They all came coalition. They're all going to get came coalition. They're all going to get came coalition. They're all going to get behind this and all kind of push the behind this and all kind of push the behind this and all kind of push the exact same message. Let's get the exact same message. Let's get the exact same message. Let's get the funding. Let's get the research. Let's funding. Let's get the research. Let's funding. Let's get the research. Let's prove that it works. and hopefully bring prove that it works. and hopefully bring prove that it works. and hopefully bring it to the US. Like we have to start with it to the US. Like we have to start with it to the US. Like we have to start with the veterans because it's smaller the veterans because it's smaller the veterans because it's smaller population, less than 1% of the population, less than 1% of the population, less than 1% of the population. Let's target them. Let's get population. Let's target them. Let's get population. Let's target them. Let's get first responders and let's open this first responders and let's open this first responders and let's open this thing up. And you know, Marcus is doing thing up. And you know, Marcus is doing thing up. And you know, Marcus is doing a lot to really beat that war drum. And a lot to really beat that war drum. And a lot to really beat that war drum. And I'm just so thankful. One of the things I'm just so thankful. One of the things I'm just so thankful. One of the things he said when we went down there cuz you he said when we went down there cuz you he said when we went down there cuz you don't realize how palpable toxicity is. Like you want how palpable toxicity is. Like you want how palpable toxicity is. Like you want to be hateful sometimes and it like hurt to be hateful sometimes and it like hurt to be hateful sometimes and it like hurt people hurt people. You've been hurt and people hurt people. You've been hurt and people hurt people. You've been hurt and now you want someone else to feel that now you want someone else to feel that now you want someone else to feel that exact same thing. Soon you see something exact same thing. Soon you see something exact same thing. Soon you see something hateful on social media. What's the hateful on social media. What's the hateful on social media. What's the first thing you do? You go to the first thing you do? You go to the first thing you do? You go to the comment section. You read, "Yep, I feel comment section. You read, "Yep, I feel comment section. You read, "Yep, I feel that too. I like that comment. I'm gonna that too. I like that comment. I'm gonna that too. I like that comment. I'm gonna comment underneath it." Yep. You comment underneath it." Yep. You comment underneath it." Yep. You just start to project that hate over and just start to project that hate over and just start to project that hate over and over and over again. If I say, "Look at over and over again. If I say, "Look at over and over again. If I say, "Look at it. I'm not going to get involved in it. I'm not going to get involved in it. I'm not going to get involved in that. Actually, I'm just going to that. Actually, I'm just going to that. Actually, I'm just going to unfollow this person because every time unfollow this person because every time unfollow this person because every time I see you're saying something hateful, I see you're saying something hateful, I see you're saying something hateful, slow but surely, it's getting out that slow but surely, it's getting out that slow but surely, it's getting out that toxicity. Allows the best form of toxicity. Allows the best form of toxicity. Allows the best form of you to continue to go forward. you to continue to go forward. you to continue to go forward. Yeah. I mean, you have to you got to Yeah. I mean, you have to you got to Yeah. I mean, you have to you got to protect your peace. You got to surround protect your peace. You got to surround protect your peace. You got to surround yourself with positive people that are yourself with positive people that are yourself with positive people that are better than you that want to try to drag better than you that want to try to drag better than you that want to try to drag you up that hill. And thank God for you up that hill. And thank God for you up that hill. And thank God for people like that because man, I mean, if people like that because man, I mean, if people like that because man, I mean, if you haven't been there, if you have not you haven't been there, if you have not you haven't been there, if you have not been that only guy on the island alone, been that only guy on the island alone, been that only guy on the island alone, just cuz I mean, I often say it, I was just cuz I mean, I often say it, I was just cuz I mean, I often say it, I was the first guy in the SEAL teams to the first guy in the SEAL teams to the first guy in the SEAL teams to suffer depression, anxiety, and suicide suffer depression, anxiety, and suicide suffer depression, anxiety, and suicide ideation because I'd never heard of it ideation because I'd never heard of it ideation because I'd never heard of it before, right? So, I'm in my living room before, right? So, I'm in my living room before, right? So, I'm in my living room just my wife's not there and we talk just my wife's not there and we talk just my wife's not there and we talk about dogs. One of the number one about dogs. One of the number one about dogs. One of the number one reasons I never did it was when I would reasons I never did it was when I would reasons I never did it was when I would get to the point where I had made up my get to the point where I had made up my get to the point where I had made up my mind that dog would walk in that room mind that dog would walk in that room mind that dog would walk in that room and drop his head on my lap and look at and drop his head on my lap and look at and drop his head on my lap and look at me. &gt;&gt; Not today. I get up and I go on a walk &gt;&gt; Not today. I get up and I go on a walk &gt;&gt; Not today. I get up and I go on a walk with the dog. with the dog. with the dog. &gt;&gt; Is your Japanese mastiff? &gt;&gt; Is your Japanese mastiff? &gt;&gt; Is your Japanese mastiff? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Amazing breed, folks. I just learned &gt;&gt; Amazing breed, folks. I just learned &gt;&gt; Amazing breed, folks. I just learned about it today. I absolutely want one of about it today. I absolutely want one of about it today. I absolutely want one of these. What is the proper name? these. What is the proper name? these. What is the proper name? &gt;&gt; Tossa Enu. They are beautiful beasts. &gt;&gt; Tossa Enu. They are beautiful beasts. &gt;&gt; Tossa Enu. They are beautiful beasts. &gt;&gt; They are amazing. Yeah. So, my &gt;&gt; They are amazing. Yeah. So, my &gt;&gt; They are amazing. Yeah. So, my wife's uh first husband Danny, they had wife's uh first husband Danny, they had wife's uh first husband Danny, they had a Japanese mastiff and an old English a Japanese mastiff and an old English a Japanese mastiff and an old English bulldog. So, when he passed, I met Py 3 bulldog. So, when he passed, I met Py 3 bulldog. So, when he passed, I met Py 3 years later. Those are the dogs I years later. Those are the dogs I years later. Those are the dogs I inherited. And you couldn't pick a inherited. And you couldn't pick a inherited. And you couldn't pick a better dog breed. It was the most better dog breed. It was the most better dog breed. It was the most beautiful dog I've ever seen in my like beautiful dog I've ever seen in my like beautiful dog I've ever seen in my like a Bengal tiger. 200 lb, but a gentle a Bengal tiger. 200 lb, but a gentle a Bengal tiger. 200 lb, but a gentle giant. One of those things when you walk giant. One of those things when you walk giant. One of those things when you walk in the house and that thing sees you, in the house and that thing sees you, in the house and that thing sees you, your heart just goes to 180. You're your heart just goes to 180. You're your heart just goes to 180. You're like, I'm so happy to be home and see like, I'm so happy to be home and see like, I'm so happy to be home and see this dog right now. It's like it pulls this dog right now. It's like it pulls this dog right now. It's like it pulls you out of a depression. I mean, therapy you out of a depression. I mean, therapy you out of a depression. I mean, therapy dogs are a real thing. And, dogs are a real thing. And, dogs are a real thing. And, &gt;&gt; you know, shout out to the Red Cross. I &gt;&gt; you know, shout out to the Red Cross. I &gt;&gt; you know, shout out to the Red Cross. I didn't know what the Red Cross did in, I didn't know what the Red Cross did in, I didn't know what the Red Cross did in, you know, 2020. Like, what do you do? you know, 2020. Like, what do you do? you know, 2020. Like, what do you do? &gt;&gt; They bring in dogs in a hospital bed is &gt;&gt; They bring in dogs in a hospital bed is &gt;&gt; They bring in dogs in a hospital bed is what they do for sure. They did it for what they do for sure. They did it for what they do for sure. They did it for me. And there's nothing like laying in me. And there's nothing like laying in me. And there's nothing like laying in the hospital bed. You've been throwing the hospital bed. You've been throwing the hospital bed. You've been throwing up for a week and you're just you don't up for a week and you're just you don't up for a week and you're just you don't have your cell phone. You can't call have your cell phone. You can't call have your cell phone. You can't call your wife. And they bring in some giant your wife. And they bring in some giant your wife. And they bring in some giant St. Bernard that jumps into bed with St. Bernard that jumps into bed with St. Bernard that jumps into bed with you. And it is heaven on earth. It is. you. And it is heaven on earth. It is. you. And it is heaven on earth. It is. It's like that little bit gets you It's like that little bit gets you It's like that little bit gets you through the hump. Mhm. through the hump. Mhm. through the hump. Mhm. &gt;&gt; What do you bring me tomorrow? Like we &gt;&gt; What do you bring me tomorrow? Like we &gt;&gt; What do you bring me tomorrow? Like we get some cocker spaniels like bring them get some cocker spaniels like bring them get some cocker spaniels like bring them in here. I don't care what it is now. in here. I don't care what it is now. in here. I don't care what it is now. It's like I just need I need a dog. I It's like I just need I need a dog. I It's like I just need I need a dog. I need something that makes me feel need something that makes me feel need something that makes me feel better. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; dogs are amazing. &gt;&gt; dogs are amazing. &gt;&gt; dogs are amazing. &gt;&gt; They are an old English bulldog just &gt;&gt; They are an old English bulldog just &gt;&gt; They are an old English bulldog just like Costello. I mean that's like Costello. I mean that's like Costello. I mean that's those are my people, my creatures. those are my people, my creatures. those are my people, my creatures. &gt;&gt; Um I just might get a Japanese mastiff. &gt;&gt; Um I just might get a Japanese mastiff. &gt;&gt; Um I just might get a Japanese mastiff. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk about &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk about &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk about your standards. M your standards. M your standards. M &gt;&gt; I've heard you say worst situation is &gt;&gt; I've heard you say worst situation is &gt;&gt; I've heard you say worst situation is being a big fish in a small pond. being a big fish in a small pond. being a big fish in a small pond. &gt;&gt; Not many people say that. &gt;&gt; Not many people say that. &gt;&gt; Not many people say that. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about standards. Uh first &gt;&gt; Let's talk about standards. Uh first &gt;&gt; Let's talk about standards. Uh first starting with physical standards and starting with physical standards and starting with physical standards and let's actually get back to the program let's actually get back to the program let's actually get back to the program just briefly. Um you mentioned the just briefly. Um you mentioned the just briefly. Um you mentioned the 5day a week program. A little while ago 5day a week program. A little while ago 5day a week program. A little while ago I saw you put out um it's a fit test I saw you put out um it's a fit test I saw you put out um it's a fit test basically that's designed to be done basically that's designed to be done basically that's designed to be done anytime. No preparation after you've anytime. No preparation after you've anytime. No preparation after you've done uh it's GBRS. done uh it's GBRS. done uh it's GBRS. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Is your program. I'm going to sign up &gt;&gt; Is your program. I'm going to sign up &gt;&gt; Is your program. I'm going to sign up for this. This is not a promotional. I'm for this. This is not a promotional. I'm for this. This is not a promotional. I'm just going to do it. I'm going to pay just going to do it. I'm going to pay just going to do it. I'm going to pay full price. I'm going to insist on full price. I'm going to insist on full price. I'm going to insist on paying full price like everyone else and paying full price like everyone else and paying full price like everyone else and doing this because I turn 50 in about a doing this because I turn 50 in about a doing this because I turn 50 in about a week and I want to stay fit going week and I want to stay fit going week and I want to stay fit going forward. And um let me see if I got this forward. And um let me see if I got this forward. And um let me see if I got this right. It involves a broad jump, right. It involves a broad jump, right. It involves a broad jump, &gt;&gt; some pull-ups, some push-ups. Would you &gt;&gt; some pull-ups, some push-ups. Would you &gt;&gt; some pull-ups, some push-ups. Would you walk us through what the test is and walk us through what the test is and walk us through what the test is and what the program actually provides? Um what the program actually provides? Um what the program actually provides? Um because I know a lot of people listening because I know a lot of people listening because I know a lot of people listening are already exercising and are attached are already exercising and are attached are already exercising and are attached to their program, right? guys are like to their program, right? guys are like to their program, right? guys are like they want more lower bicep, rear delt they want more lower bicep, rear delt they want more lower bicep, rear delt stuff, but this is different. This is stuff, but this is different. This is stuff, but this is different. This is about allaround functional fitness about allaround functional fitness about allaround functional fitness &gt;&gt; at any age, men or women. &gt;&gt; at any age, men or women. &gt;&gt; at any age, men or women. &gt;&gt; So, what's the program? &gt;&gt; So, what's the program? &gt;&gt; So, what's the program? &gt;&gt; So, we started that program. It's like a &gt;&gt; So, we started that program. It's like a &gt;&gt; So, we started that program. It's like a recovery from injury, right? I'm just recovery from injury, right? I'm just recovery from injury, right? I'm just trying to maintain a high standard. I've trying to maintain a high standard. I've trying to maintain a high standard. I've had a high standard physically I've had a high standard physically I've had a high standard physically since I was 17, right? I've gotten since I was 17, right? I've gotten since I was 17, right? I've gotten better. I've had really high better. I've had really high better. I've had really high points and low points coming back from points and low points coming back from points and low points coming back from injury, but I wanted something to be injury, but I wanted something to be injury, but I wanted something to be able to maintain a high standard. And able to maintain a high standard. And able to maintain a high standard. And when we got out, you start working with when we got out, you start working with when we got out, you start working with SWAT teams, SEAL teams, every team in SWAT teams, SEAL teams, every team in SWAT teams, SEAL teams, every team in between, firemen, and everybody else. between, firemen, and everybody else. between, firemen, and everybody else. And it's such a physical component that And it's such a physical component that And it's such a physical component that cannot be ignored. But so many people in cannot be ignored. But so many people in cannot be ignored. But so many people in the 80s, 90s, even early 2000s, like the 80s, 90s, even early 2000s, like the 80s, 90s, even early 2000s, like good is good enough. Like, you ever seen good is good enough. Like, you ever seen good is good enough. Like, you ever seen the show Rescue Me? the show Rescue Me? the show Rescue Me? &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Dennis Liry and a bunch of guys, a bunch &gt;&gt; Dennis Liry and a bunch of guys, a bunch &gt;&gt; Dennis Liry and a bunch of guys, a bunch of firemen in New York, and they had the of firemen in New York, and they had the of firemen in New York, and they had the fat firemen, big handlebar mustaches, fat firemen, big handlebar mustaches, fat firemen, big handlebar mustaches, you had the young guys, and you see all you had the young guys, and you see all you had the young guys, and you see all this stuff. Now, if you look at the this stuff. Now, if you look at the this stuff. Now, if you look at the majority of firemen, they look like majority of firemen, they look like majority of firemen, they look like professional. They look like professional. They look like professional. They look like CrossFitters. Like, they're in shape CrossFitters. Like, they're in shape CrossFitters. Like, they're in shape because they understand, we've got so because they understand, we've got so because they understand, we've got so much data on human potential and how to much data on human potential and how to much data on human potential and how to get there. Nutrition, sleep, recovery, get there. Nutrition, sleep, recovery, get there. Nutrition, sleep, recovery, training protocols, and they realize training protocols, and they realize training protocols, and they realize that you are your first lifeline. Your that you are your first lifeline. Your that you are your first lifeline. Your physical vessel is the thing you can get physical vessel is the thing you can get physical vessel is the thing you can get in the airport through TSA. I can get in the airport through TSA. I can get in the airport through TSA. I can get in the White House. I don't need to bring the White House. I don't need to bring the White House. I don't need to bring any tools with me. This is a really, any tools with me. This is a really, any tools with me. This is a really, really good tool and it's always with me really good tool and it's always with me really good tool and it's always with me if I keep it at a high level. So, we're if I keep it at a high level. So, we're if I keep it at a high level. So, we're going through here and you know, the going through here and you know, the going through here and you know, the majority of the military screen test and majority of the military screen test and majority of the military screen test and SWAT teams, it's all body weight, SWAT teams, it's all body weight, SWAT teams, it's all body weight, push-ups, pull-ups, running, SEAL teams, push-ups, pull-ups, running, SEAL teams, push-ups, pull-ups, running, SEAL teams, and special operations swim test, and special operations swim test, and special operations swim test, and that's about it. You'll do O courses and that's about it. You'll do O courses and that's about it. You'll do O courses and some other stuff, but the majority of some other stuff, but the majority of some other stuff, but the majority of it, that's just what it is. Well, that's it, that's just what it is. Well, that's it, that's just what it is. Well, that's not reality. You don't walk around, not reality. You don't walk around, not reality. You don't walk around, there's no weigh in. You don't walk in there's no weigh in. You don't walk in there's no weigh in. You don't walk in a pair of board shorts and weigh in. in a pair of board shorts and weigh in. in a pair of board shorts and weigh in. You're wearing body armor, helmets, You're wearing body armor, helmets, You're wearing body armor, helmets, you know, pano night vision. It's a lot you know, pano night vision. It's a lot you know, pano night vision. It's a lot of heavy stuff you have to carry. So, of heavy stuff you have to carry. So, of heavy stuff you have to carry. So, you're always under an extreme load, you're always under an extreme load, you're always under an extreme load, but the physical standard was so high as but the physical standard was so high as but the physical standard was so high as a tier one level. I mean, the entire a tier one level. I mean, the entire a tier one level. I mean, the entire force is, but you have to maintain such force is, but you have to maintain such force is, but you have to maintain such a high level because everybody else is a high level because everybody else is a high level because everybody else is around you. So, when I'm looking at all around you. So, when I'm looking at all around you. So, when I'm looking at all these guys, SWAT team guys, like if you these guys, SWAT team guys, like if you these guys, SWAT team guys, like if you had a physical standard, every SWAT team had a physical standard, every SWAT team had a physical standard, every SWAT team in the country held. If the lowest dude in the country held. If the lowest dude in the country held. If the lowest dude on team could pass this test, the top on team could pass this test, the top on team could pass this test, the top guys are at the super elite level. guys are at the super elite level. guys are at the super elite level. You're so well-rounded, you can solve You're so well-rounded, you can solve You're so well-rounded, you can solve anything physically. And that's one of anything physically. And that's one of anything physically. And that's one of the big things in the military. You the big things in the military. You the big things in the military. You never want to have to say no. Can you 25 never want to have to say no. Can you 25 never want to have to say no. Can you 25 guys get up over this mountain and guys get up over this mountain and guys get up over this mountain and assault that target by 04 in the assault that target by 04 in the assault that target by 04 in the morning? If if it can be done morning? If if it can be done morning? If if it can be done physically, we can do it no matter what. physically, we can do it no matter what. physically, we can do it no matter what. We'll find a way. Move heaven and earth. We'll find a way. Move heaven and earth. We'll find a way. Move heaven and earth. We'll get it done. It's really, really We'll get it done. It's really, really We'll get it done. It's really, really hard to make a good decision on the hard to make a good decision on the hard to make a good decision on the backside when you are so physically backside when you are so physically backside when you are so physically taxed cuz no decision you're ever going taxed cuz no decision you're ever going taxed cuz no decision you're ever going to make is without being under extreme to make is without being under extreme to make is without being under extreme duress. If we elevate the physical duress. If we elevate the physical duress. If we elevate the physical standard, we can make better standard, we can make better standard, we can make better mental. I mean, we can we can make mental. I mean, we can we can make mental. I mean, we can we can make better decisions through mental clarity better decisions through mental clarity better decisions through mental clarity when we're not just sucking wind. when we're not just sucking wind. when we're not just sucking wind. &gt;&gt; Also true very much so in civilian life, &gt;&gt; Also true very much so in civilian life, &gt;&gt; Also true very much so in civilian life, right? &gt;&gt; Everywhere like ENTs, I mean, business, &gt;&gt; Everywhere like ENTs, I mean, business, &gt;&gt; Everywhere like ENTs, I mean, business, entrepreneurship, school teachers, entrepreneurship, school teachers, entrepreneurship, school teachers, everybody, right? If you're not everybody, right? If you're not everybody, right? If you're not physically labored, you can make better physically labored, you can make better physically labored, you can make better decisions. So, that's the whole goal. decisions. So, that's the whole goal. decisions. So, that's the whole goal. &gt;&gt; I don't care if you're a 45-year-old &gt;&gt; I don't care if you're a 45-year-old &gt;&gt; I don't care if you're a 45-year-old fireman that has an extra 35 lbs of fireman that has an extra 35 lbs of fireman that has an extra 35 lbs of weight on you or if you're a 19-year-old weight on you or if you're a 19-year-old weight on you or if you're a 19-year-old kid who's in their prime. If you have to kid who's in their prime. If you have to kid who's in their prime. If you have to run up 10 flights of stairs carrying run up 10 flights of stairs carrying run up 10 flights of stairs carrying that hose, when you get to the top, that hose, when you get to the top, that hose, when you get to the top, execute a good decision. The guy who's execute a good decision. The guy who's execute a good decision. The guy who's heart rate isn't at 180 is going to make heart rate isn't at 180 is going to make heart rate isn't at 180 is going to make a better decision. They just are, and we a better decision. They just are, and we a better decision. They just are, and we all know it. So, let's set a standard all know it. So, let's set a standard all know it. So, let's set a standard that, you know, I don't care if it's that, you know, I don't care if it's that, you know, I don't care if it's Wednesday, if it's 2:00 in the morning Wednesday, if it's 2:00 in the morning Wednesday, if it's 2:00 in the morning on a Saturday, if you spring out of bed on a Saturday, if you spring out of bed on a Saturday, if you spring out of bed and take this test, you should be able and take this test, you should be able and take this test, you should be able to pass it no matter what. Now, what to pass it no matter what. Now, what to pass it no matter what. Now, what level are we trying to adhere? As high level are we trying to adhere? As high level are we trying to adhere? As high as humanly possible. If I hit the elite as humanly possible. If I hit the elite as humanly possible. If I hit the elite standard right now, in 3 weeks, I should standard right now, in 3 weeks, I should standard right now, in 3 weeks, I should hit the elite again. If I start to taper hit the elite again. If I start to taper hit the elite again. If I start to taper off, why? Lack of sleep, poor nutrition, off, why? Lack of sleep, poor nutrition, off, why? Lack of sleep, poor nutrition, you know, just really crazy OPT tempmpo. you know, just really crazy OPT tempmpo. you know, just really crazy OPT tempmpo. I'm in the red the whole time. Okay, I'm in the red the whole time. Okay, I'm in the red the whole time. Okay, maybe I need to take a couple days off, maybe I need to take a couple days off, maybe I need to take a couple days off, get back on my training plan to maintain get back on my training plan to maintain get back on my training plan to maintain that high level. But we do a broad jump. that high level. But we do a broad jump. that high level. But we do a broad jump. So power output on the floor in a So power output on the floor in a So power output on the floor in a dynamic fashion, landing, propriception. dynamic fashion, landing, propriception. dynamic fashion, landing, propriception. &gt;&gt; So just have people stand on a line, &gt;&gt; So just have people stand on a line, &gt;&gt; So just have people stand on a line, jump as far forward as they possibly jump as far forward as they possibly jump as far forward as they possibly can. And this the lowest standard is can. And this the lowest standard is can. And this the lowest standard is your height. Is that right? So if I'm 6' your height. Is that right? So if I'm 6' your height. Is that right? So if I'm 6' tall, I should be able to broad jump tall, I should be able to broad jump tall, I should be able to broad jump past &gt;&gt; 6 foot. &gt;&gt; 6 foot. &gt;&gt; 6 foot. &gt;&gt; What's the next level up from that? &gt;&gt; What's the next level up from that? &gt;&gt; What's the next level up from that? &gt;&gt; 1 foot. &gt;&gt; 1 foot. &gt;&gt; 1 foot. &gt;&gt; One foot past your height. &gt;&gt; One foot past your height. &gt;&gt; One foot past your height. &gt;&gt; Yep. So 7t would be, you know, middle of &gt;&gt; Yep. So 7t would be, you know, middle of &gt;&gt; Yep. So 7t would be, you know, middle of the road. If I can jump 8 ft, that's the road. If I can jump 8 ft, that's the road. If I can jump 8 ft, that's really the standard. Like for me, I'm really the standard. Like for me, I'm really the standard. Like for me, I'm trying to get to a 10ft broad jump. trying to get to a 10ft broad jump. trying to get to a 10ft broad jump. &gt;&gt; Like I want to hit 10 feet and I want to &gt;&gt; Like I want to hit 10 feet and I want to &gt;&gt; Like I want to hit 10 feet and I want to hold that as long as humanly possible. hold that as long as humanly possible. hold that as long as humanly possible. &gt;&gt; And you can swing your arms, no running &gt;&gt; And you can swing your arms, no running &gt;&gt; And you can swing your arms, no running start, but you just swing your arms start, but you just swing your arms start, but you just swing your arms forward, jump, forward, jump, forward, jump, &gt;&gt; swing your arms, jump, feet low to the &gt;&gt; swing your arms, jump, feet low to the &gt;&gt; swing your arms, jump, feet low to the ground, dynamic fashion. And I always ground, dynamic fashion. And I always ground, dynamic fashion. And I always tell the guys, in reality, you are not tell the guys, in reality, you are not tell the guys, in reality, you are not going to have time to negotiate the going to have time to negotiate the going to have time to negotiate the obstacle. You are not going to be able obstacle. You are not going to be able obstacle. You are not going to be able to run up to that ditch and stop and to run up to that ditch and stop and to run up to that ditch and stop and look at and go, "Okay, I need to get I look at and go, "Okay, I need to get I look at and go, "Okay, I need to get I need to back it up a little bit." You're need to back it up a little bit." You're need to back it up a little bit." You're going to have to go as a cop chasing going to have to go as a cop chasing going to have to go as a cop chasing this kid down this city park. You're this kid down this city park. You're this kid down this city park. You're going to have to scale that 8ft fence going to have to scale that 8ft fence going to have to scale that 8ft fence right now. Not look for a step stool. right now. Not look for a step stool. right now. Not look for a step stool. Not, oh, what can I climb on to get over Not, oh, what can I climb on to get over Not, oh, what can I climb on to get over this? You're going to have to hit that this? You're going to have to hit that this? You're going to have to hit that thing at full value and go up and over thing at full value and go up and over thing at full value and go up and over it. You should have the physical ability it. You should have the physical ability it. You should have the physical ability to do that. So, we have a broad jump and to do that. So, we have a broad jump and to do that. So, we have a broad jump and a lot of people, Vernon has a really a lot of people, Vernon has a really a lot of people, Vernon has a really good thing about monkey bars. Like, good thing about monkey bars. Like, good thing about monkey bars. Like, everybody was swinging on monkey bars everybody was swinging on monkey bars everybody was swinging on monkey bars when you're a kid in a certain point in when you're a kid in a certain point in when you're a kid in a certain point in adulthood, you stop doing it. But you'll adulthood, you stop doing it. But you'll adulthood, you stop doing it. But you'll look at your kid, 9 years old, swing on look at your kid, 9 years old, swing on look at your kid, 9 years old, swing on monkey bars, you're like, "Oh, you're monkey bars, you're like, "Oh, you're monkey bars, you're like, "Oh, you're doing it wrong. Do it this way." Well, doing it wrong. Do it this way." Well, doing it wrong. Do it this way." Well, jump up there and show them. If you jump up there and show them. If you jump up there and show them. If you haven't been on monkey bars in 40 years, haven't been on monkey bars in 40 years, haven't been on monkey bars in 40 years, expect to be humbled really, really expect to be humbled really, really expect to be humbled really, really fast. &gt;&gt; It's like lose it or use it or lose it, &gt;&gt; It's like lose it or use it or lose it, &gt;&gt; It's like lose it or use it or lose it, it's going to happen. So, we're always it's going to happen. So, we're always it's going to happen. So, we're always trying to test ourselves like what is trying to test ourselves like what is trying to test ourselves like what is going to make me a dynamic participant going to make me a dynamic participant going to make me a dynamic participant throughout the whole process. Broad throughout the whole process. Broad throughout the whole process. Broad jumps a really good expression. We have jumps a really good expression. We have jumps a really good expression. We have that in the SEAL teams. We had a legacy that in the SEAL teams. We had a legacy that in the SEAL teams. We had a legacy test. It was a bodyweight bench press. test. It was a bodyweight bench press. test. It was a bodyweight bench press. NFL. It's 225 bench press. It's not fair NFL. It's 225 bench press. It's not fair NFL. It's 225 bench press. It's not fair for me to give 225 to a kid that weighs for me to give 225 to a kid that weighs for me to give 225 to a kid that weighs 160 lbs. So, 160 lbs. So, 160 lbs. So, &gt;&gt; or 140 lb woman or 50 lb woman. Yeah. &gt;&gt; or 140 lb woman or 50 lb woman. Yeah. &gt;&gt; or 140 lb woman or 50 lb woman. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Your body weight though. And we go &gt;&gt; Your body weight though. And we go &gt;&gt; Your body weight though. And we go minimum standard 10 repetitions. minimum standard 10 repetitions. minimum standard 10 repetitions. &gt;&gt; 10 repetition single set with your body &gt;&gt; 10 repetition single set with your body &gt;&gt; 10 repetition single set with your body weight. &gt;&gt; That's minimum standard. 15 next level &gt;&gt; That's minimum standard. 15 next level &gt;&gt; That's minimum standard. 15 next level up. 20 plus is elite. If you can bench up. 20 plus is elite. If you can bench up. 20 plus is elite. If you can bench press your body weight 20 times, you are press your body weight 20 times, you are press your body weight 20 times, you are in top tier. in top tier. in top tier. &gt;&gt; This is full range of movement. Bar &gt;&gt; This is full range of movement. Bar &gt;&gt; This is full range of movement. Bar touches your chest, you press that all touches your chest, you press that all touches your chest, you press that all the way to a straight arm. the way to a straight arm. the way to a straight arm. &gt;&gt; All the way. So 20 reps on that. &gt;&gt; All the way. So 20 reps on that. &gt;&gt; All the way. So 20 reps on that. Pull-ups with no weight. And we do that Pull-ups with no weight. And we do that Pull-ups with no weight. And we do that because so many guys have so many because so many guys have so many because so many guys have so many injuries, so many shoulder injuries. And injuries, so many shoulder injuries. And injuries, so many shoulder injuries. And if your technique isn't there and you're if your technique isn't there and you're if your technique isn't there and you're dropping out of the hole, I don't want dropping out of the hole, I don't want dropping out of the hole, I don't want you to dislocate and jam up a shoulder. you to dislocate and jam up a shoulder. you to dislocate and jam up a shoulder. So pull-ups are in there. We have a So pull-ups are in there. We have a So pull-ups are in there. We have a farmer's carry. farmer's carry. farmer's carry. &gt;&gt; How many pull-ups? Sorry. the uh &gt;&gt; How many pull-ups? Sorry. the uh &gt;&gt; How many pull-ups? Sorry. the uh &gt;&gt; 10, 15, and 20 plus. &gt;&gt; 10, 15, and 20 plus. &gt;&gt; 10, 15, and 20 plus. &gt;&gt; So 10 with your body weight, 15 is the &gt;&gt; So 10 with your body weight, 15 is the &gt;&gt; So 10 with your body weight, 15 is the next level up, and then 20 plus is next level up, and then 20 plus is next level up, and then 20 plus is elite. Okay. elite. Okay. elite. Okay. &gt;&gt; Y and in a perfect word, we do it with &gt;&gt; Y and in a perfect word, we do it with &gt;&gt; Y and in a perfect word, we do it with weight. In the SEAL teams, we add weight weight. In the SEAL teams, we add weight weight. In the SEAL teams, we add weight to it. But for everybody, if you can do to it. But for everybody, if you can do to it. But for everybody, if you can do 20 straight dead hang pull-ups, you're 20 straight dead hang pull-ups, you're 20 straight dead hang pull-ups, you're at the top physical game. There's less at the top physical game. There's less at the top physical game. There's less &gt;&gt; no kip. Uh chin clears the bar. &gt;&gt; no kip. Uh chin clears the bar. &gt;&gt; no kip. Uh chin clears the bar. &gt;&gt; Chin clears the bar. &gt;&gt; Chin clears the bar. &gt;&gt; Chin clears the bar. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; We do a farmer's carry. So with your &gt;&gt; We do a farmer's carry. So with your &gt;&gt; We do a farmer's carry. So with your body weight, so if you weigh 200 lb, you body weight, so if you weigh 200 lb, you body weight, so if you weigh 200 lb, you have 100 lb dumbbell in each hand. You have 100 lb dumbbell in each hand. You have 100 lb dumbbell in each hand. You get up and you walk it as far as you get up and you walk it as far as you get up and you walk it as far as you can. I'd have to look at the exact feet can. I'd have to look at the exact feet can. I'd have to look at the exact feet measurement, but I think the Elite is measurement, but I think the Elite is measurement, but I think the Elite is almost 300 ft. almost 300 ft. almost 300 ft. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; 275 and 250 somewhere around there. And &gt;&gt; 275 and 250 somewhere around there. And &gt;&gt; 275 and 250 somewhere around there. And it's not an easy thing to do, but we it's not an easy thing to do, but we it's not an easy thing to do, but we work so much grip for the pull-ups and work so much grip for the pull-ups and work so much grip for the pull-ups and everything else. Like grip matters. We everything else. Like grip matters. We everything else. Like grip matters. We say that a lot. say that a lot. say that a lot. &gt;&gt; It's very hard to climb up a caving &gt;&gt; It's very hard to climb up a caving &gt;&gt; It's very hard to climb up a caving ladder on the side of a cruise ship when ladder on the side of a cruise ship when ladder on the side of a cruise ship when it's underway. Your grip is the only it's underway. Your grip is the only it's underway. Your grip is the only thing that's going to get you there. So, thing that's going to get you there. So, thing that's going to get you there. So, we really put a lot of focus on griping. we really put a lot of focus on griping. we really put a lot of focus on griping. Firemen need it. Cops need it. If I'm Firemen need it. Cops need it. If I'm Firemen need it. Cops need it. If I'm trying to if I'm trying to manipulate a trying to if I'm trying to manipulate a trying to if I'm trying to manipulate a full grown man through time and space full grown man through time and space full grown man through time and space against their will, your grip is a key against their will, your grip is a key against their will, your grip is a key factor in that. factor in that. factor in that. &gt;&gt; You ask anybody who grapples. When &gt;&gt; You ask anybody who grapples. When &gt;&gt; You ask anybody who grapples. When somebody who grapples and you know how somebody who grapples and you know how somebody who grapples and you know how to use it, grabs a hold of you, you to use it, grabs a hold of you, you to use it, grabs a hold of you, you instantly know you're in a world of instantly know you're in a world of instantly know you're in a world of hurt. &gt;&gt; You grab some NCAA wrestling, he grabs a &gt;&gt; You grab some NCAA wrestling, he grabs a &gt;&gt; You grab some NCAA wrestling, he grabs a hold of you, the first thing you feel is hold of you, the first thing you feel is hold of you, the first thing you feel is his hands. Oh no, I'm just grabbing a his hands. Oh no, I'm just grabbing a his hands. Oh no, I'm just grabbing a hold of a grizzly bear right now. This hold of a grizzly bear right now. This hold of a grizzly bear right now. This is not going to be good. We need is not going to be good. We need is not going to be good. We need everybody to have that same strength. everybody to have that same strength. everybody to have that same strength. &gt;&gt; Also, someone's got to open the pickle &gt;&gt; Also, someone's got to open the pickle &gt;&gt; Also, someone's got to open the pickle jar. &gt;&gt; Exactly. Got to be able to open the &gt;&gt; Exactly. Got to be able to open the &gt;&gt; Exactly. Got to be able to open the pickle jar. But when you pick up that pickle jar. But when you pick up that pickle jar. But when you pick up that weight, everything's in there. Your core weight, everything's in there. Your core weight, everything's in there. Your core is in there. Your posture really is in there. Your posture really is in there. Your posture really matters. Upright. I've got to be able to matters. Upright. I've got to be able to matters. Upright. I've got to be able to control my breathing. Ocular focus. control my breathing. Ocular focus. control my breathing. Ocular focus. Where am I looking? And then how long Where am I looking? And then how long Where am I looking? And then how long can I hold on to this? I've got to keep can I hold on to this? I've got to keep can I hold on to this? I've got to keep a rigid frame. I can't lean over and let a rigid frame. I can't lean over and let a rigid frame. I can't lean over and let it take control of me. I can't lean it take control of me. I can't lean it take control of me. I can't lean back. I've got to be present throughout back. I've got to be present throughout back. I've got to be present throughout the entire movement. And then just push. the entire movement. And then just push. the entire movement. And then just push. So, we've got that. We've got a trap bar So, we've got that. We've got a trap bar So, we've got that. We've got a trap bar deadlift. We use a trap bar because the deadlift. We use a trap bar because the deadlift. We use a trap bar because the majority of guys in that career, they've majority of guys in that career, they've majority of guys in that career, they've already got some injuries stacked up. already got some injuries stacked up. already got some injuries stacked up. And we actually put 45 pound bumper And we actually put 45 pound bumper And we actually put 45 pound bumper plates to pull from a little bit of an plates to pull from a little bit of an plates to pull from a little bit of an elevation because I've got a really long elevation because I've got a really long elevation because I've got a really long torso. And the big thing we push in that torso. And the big thing we push in that torso. And the big thing we push in that program is we want you to be able to program is we want you to be able to program is we want you to be able to train 52 weeks out of the year. There is train 52 weeks out of the year. There is train 52 weeks out of the year. There is no offseason for a fireman. There's no offseason for a fireman. There's no offseason for a fireman. There's no offseason for a SWAT team guy. There's offseason for a SWAT team guy. There's offseason for a SWAT team guy. There's no offseason for an Army Ranger. And if no offseason for an Army Ranger. And if no offseason for an Army Ranger. And if you get jammed up in the gym, and I've you get jammed up in the gym, and I've you get jammed up in the gym, and I've done it really bad, the mission doesn't done it really bad, the mission doesn't done it really bad, the mission doesn't care. You have to go anyway. And now care. You have to go anyway. And now care. You have to go anyway. And now you're not at 100%. and the entire you're not at 100%. and the entire you're not at 100%. and the entire patrol in you're thinking about your patrol in you're thinking about your patrol in you're thinking about your lower back and if you're going to be lower back and if you're going to be lower back and if you're going to be able to be able to perform on target. We able to be able to perform on target. We able to be able to perform on target. We can't have that. We're trying to can't have that. We're trying to can't have that. We're trying to increase your confidence. Never decrease increase your confidence. Never decrease increase your confidence. Never decrease it. So that's why you pull from that. it. So that's why you pull from that. it. So that's why you pull from that. That is one and a half times your body That is one and a half times your body That is one and a half times your body weight is the minimum standard weight is the minimum standard weight is the minimum standard &gt;&gt; for how many repetitions? &gt;&gt; for how many repetitions? &gt;&gt; for how many repetitions? &gt;&gt; Five. &gt;&gt; Five. &gt;&gt; Five. &gt;&gt; One and a half times your body weight. &gt;&gt; One and a half times your body weight. &gt;&gt; One and a half times your body weight. Okay. &gt;&gt; And then two times your body weight. I &gt;&gt; And then two times your body weight. I &gt;&gt; And then two times your body weight. I think it's two and a half times your think it's two and a half times your think it's two and a half times your body weight is the elite for a set of body weight is the elite for a set of body weight is the elite for a set of five. You know, you can obviously do five. You know, you can obviously do five. You know, you can obviously do more. I think I did a set of 12 in that more. I think I did a set of 12 in that more. I think I did a set of 12 in that video, but it's just video, but it's just video, but it's just &gt;&gt; can I pick up double body weight under &gt;&gt; can I pick up double body weight under &gt;&gt; can I pick up double body weight under control without slamming on the ground, control without slamming on the ground, control without slamming on the ground, proper form in control the entire time. proper form in control the entire time. proper form in control the entire time. &gt;&gt; So, we add in all those. So, the broad &gt;&gt; So, we add in all those. So, the broad &gt;&gt; So, we add in all those. So, the broad jump, the farmer's carry, the bodyweight jump, the farmer's carry, the bodyweight jump, the farmer's carry, the bodyweight bench, the pull-ups, bench, the pull-ups, bench, the pull-ups, the trap bar deadlift, and we have an the trap bar deadlift, and we have an the trap bar deadlift, and we have an 800 meter run. 800 meter run. 800 meter run. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; We also have a plank for time. So, a &gt;&gt; We also have a plank for time. So, a &gt;&gt; We also have a plank for time. So, a minute and a half, 2 minutes. No, it's 2 minute and a half, 2 minutes. No, it's 2 minute and a half, 2 minutes. No, it's 2 minutes, 2 and 1/2 minutes, and 3 minutes, 2 and 1/2 minutes, and 3 minutes, 2 and 1/2 minutes, and 3 minutes. &gt;&gt; Arms planking. however you want to hold &gt;&gt; Arms planking. however you want to hold &gt;&gt; Arms planking. however you want to hold it. &gt;&gt; And we were going to do sit-ups &gt;&gt; And we were going to do sit-ups &gt;&gt; And we were going to do sit-ups originally, but sit-ups is such a hip originally, but sit-ups is such a hip originally, but sit-ups is such a hip flexor dominant position because I have flexor dominant position because I have flexor dominant position because I have that long torso. If I don't anchor my that long torso. If I don't anchor my that long torso. If I don't anchor my feet, 50 sit-ups is really, really hard feet, 50 sit-ups is really, really hard feet, 50 sit-ups is really, really hard for me. And how do you gauge it? Are for me. And how do you gauge it? Are for me. And how do you gauge it? Are your hands interlocked behind your back? your hands interlocked behind your back? your hands interlocked behind your back? There's a whole bunch of different ways There's a whole bunch of different ways There's a whole bunch of different ways to cheat it. It's very hard to cheat a to cheat it. It's very hard to cheat a to cheat it. It's very hard to cheat a plank, but your core is so important. plank, but your core is so important. plank, but your core is so important. &gt;&gt; And that's something that Vernon got me &gt;&gt; And that's something that Vernon got me &gt;&gt; And that's something that Vernon got me doing. I had a lot of lower back doing. I had a lot of lower back doing. I had a lot of lower back injuries, as we all do. I started injuries, as we all do. I started injuries, as we all do. I started walking around with my core at like 40 walking around with my core at like 40 walking around with my core at like 40 to 50% flexed all day, every day. my to 50% flexed all day, every day. my to 50% flexed all day, every day. my lower back issues went away instantly. lower back issues went away instantly. lower back issues went away instantly. So, I walk around with a little bit of So, I walk around with a little bit of So, I walk around with a little bit of tension all day long. Just imagine tension all day long. Just imagine tension all day long. Just imagine walking around the pool with your shirt walking around the pool with your shirt walking around the pool with your shirt off. A little bit of tension in your abs off. A little bit of tension in your abs off. A little bit of tension in your abs and it protects my lower back. So, we and it protects my lower back. So, we and it protects my lower back. So, we always say be an active participant always say be an active participant always say be an active participant throughout the entire movement. I'm throughout the entire movement. I'm throughout the entire movement. I'm never going to let my core go to jello never going to let my core go to jello never going to let my core go to jello because then my lower back will spasm. because then my lower back will spasm. because then my lower back will spasm. Everything is locked in. Everything is Everything is locked in. Everything is Everything is locked in. Everything is in control. My intensity is there. My in control. My intensity is there. My in control. My intensity is there. My focus is there. And I've blocked out all focus is there. And I've blocked out all focus is there. And I've blocked out all the stray voltage. So, we get through the stray voltage. So, we get through the stray voltage. So, we get through that and then we do an 800 meter run. I that and then we do an 800 meter run. I that and then we do an 800 meter run. I wanted to do 400 meter repeats. Do a 400 wanted to do 400 meter repeats. Do a 400 wanted to do 400 meter repeats. Do a 400 stop. As long as it took you to run, stop. As long as it took you to run, stop. As long as it took you to run, execute another one in the same amount execute another one in the same amount execute another one in the same amount of time. Well, the SWAT team, they have of time. Well, the SWAT team, they have of time. Well, the SWAT team, they have an 800 meter run. We're like, well, an 800 meter run. We're like, well, an 800 meter run. We're like, well, since you already do it, I don't need a since you already do it, I don't need a since you already do it, I don't need a guy that can run a marathon. I need a guy that can run a marathon. I need a guy that can run a marathon. I need a guy that can throw a 200lb guy over his guy that can throw a 200lb guy over his guy that can throw a 200lb guy over his shoulders, run him up 10 flights of shoulders, run him up 10 flights of shoulders, run him up 10 flights of stairs, and make a good decision. So, stairs, and make a good decision. So, stairs, and make a good decision. So, being a marathon runner, while it might being a marathon runner, while it might being a marathon runner, while it might be great for you, it doesn't really give be great for you, it doesn't really give be great for you, it doesn't really give me everything I need. And you really me everything I need. And you really me everything I need. And you really need that hybrid athlete. And that 800 need that hybrid athlete. And that 800 need that hybrid athlete. And that 800 meter I didn't realize. And then I meter I didn't realize. And then I meter I didn't realize. And then I talked to everybody who's a distance talked to everybody who's a distance talked to everybody who's a distance runner. The 800 is brutal. runner. The 800 is brutal. runner. The 800 is brutal. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; It's too fast to fully sprint and you &gt;&gt; It's too fast to fully sprint and you &gt;&gt; It's too fast to fully sprint and you can't slow down because that time metric can't slow down because that time metric can't slow down because that time metric I think is 315, 3 minutes, and 245 to be I think is 315, 3 minutes, and 245 to be I think is 315, 3 minutes, and 245 to be the elite. So I think I'm in like the elite. So I think I'm in like the elite. So I think I'm in like the 240 range right now, but I haven't ran 240 range right now, but I haven't ran 240 range right now, but I haven't ran since I snapped my hip. Other than since I snapped my hip. Other than since I snapped my hip. Other than sprints, I don't distant run because it sprints, I don't distant run because it sprints, I don't distant run because it hurts my hip too bad. But I'm able to hurts my hip too bad. But I'm able to hurts my hip too bad. But I'm able to get through it. I've got a laundry list get through it. I've got a laundry list get through it. I've got a laundry list of injuries. And we did that entire test of injuries. And we did that entire test of injuries. And we did that entire test cold war boore. We basically wrote it cold war boore. We basically wrote it cold war boore. We basically wrote it down. And the whole thing when I sit down. And the whole thing when I sit down. And the whole thing when I sit down with Vernon, I was like, I need down with Vernon, I was like, I need down with Vernon, I was like, I need something to drive to. I do better when something to drive to. I do better when something to drive to. I do better when there's a target goal on the wall. Like there's a target goal on the wall. Like there's a target goal on the wall. Like two years ago was a 400 lb bench press. two years ago was a 400 lb bench press. two years ago was a 400 lb bench press. I have never been able to bench press I have never been able to bench press I have never been able to bench press 400 lb. I've missed it every time. My 400 lb. I've missed it every time. My 400 lb. I've missed it every time. My shoulders are all blown out. And I was shoulders are all blown out. And I was shoulders are all blown out. And I was like, with all the injuries, I want to like, with all the injuries, I want to like, with all the injuries, I want to press 400 lb one time before I hang it press 400 lb one time before I hang it press 400 lb one time before I hang it up forever. Retrain the entire year. Hit up forever. Retrain the entire year. Hit up forever. Retrain the entire year. Hit 407. Racked it. Now what? I need to hold 407. Racked it. Now what? I need to hold 407. Racked it. Now what? I need to hold a high standard. What is it? Well, if I a high standard. What is it? Well, if I a high standard. What is it? Well, if I was on a SEAL team or a SWAT team and was on a SEAL team or a SWAT team and was on a SEAL team or a SWAT team and every dude could pass that test. We have every dude could pass that test. We have every dude could pass that test. We have a physical dynasty because not everyone a physical dynasty because not everyone a physical dynasty because not everyone can. But it gives you something. You can. But it gives you something. You can. But it gives you something. You look at me and it's like I've got a look at me and it's like I've got a look at me and it's like I've got a laundry list of injuries, dude. I'm on laundry list of injuries, dude. I'm on laundry list of injuries, dude. I'm on the wrong side of 40 right now. I've the wrong side of 40 right now. I've the wrong side of 40 right now. I've never taken my foot off the gas and never taken my foot off the gas and never taken my foot off the gas and neither should you. You're 22 years old. neither should you. You're 22 years old. neither should you. You're 22 years old. You should be running circles around me. You should be running circles around me. You should be running circles around me. And if you're not, just because you And if you're not, just because you And if you're not, just because you don't care enough, like no one has don't care enough, like no one has don't care enough, like no one has slapped you. That's the whole concept of slapped you. That's the whole concept of slapped you. That's the whole concept of be a pro. be a pro. be a pro. Everything I'm doing is putting me in Everything I'm doing is putting me in Everything I'm doing is putting me in position to be the best version of position to be the best version of position to be the best version of myself because the team deserves it. myself because the team deserves it. myself because the team deserves it. Everything I do, everything I say, Everything I do, everything I say, Everything I do, everything I say, everything I represent should be putting everything I represent should be putting everything I represent should be putting the group in a better position. And for the group in a better position. And for the group in a better position. And for us, because it's such a dangerous job, us, because it's such a dangerous job, us, because it's such a dangerous job, your physical readiness, it can't be your physical readiness, it can't be your physical readiness, it can't be ignored. That is the one thing that ignored. That is the one thing that ignored. That is the one thing that everyone should be able to count on. And everyone should be able to count on. And everyone should be able to count on. And they should look at you. Well, I know they should look at you. Well, I know they should look at you. Well, I know John cares. Look at him. Like, he didn't John cares. Look at him. Like, he didn't John cares. Look at him. Like, he didn't wake up like that. That dude is in the wake up like that. That dude is in the wake up like that. That dude is in the gym 5 days a week because he wants to be gym 5 days a week because he wants to be gym 5 days a week because he wants to be the best fireman he can possibly be. And the best fireman he can possibly be. And the best fireman he can possibly be. And that's what we push out. And the that's what we push out. And the that's what we push out. And the standards have been great. A lot of guys standards have been great. A lot of guys standards have been great. A lot of guys get super humbled by them and you know get super humbled by them and you know get super humbled by them and you know some guys lie because I see their some guys lie because I see their some guys lie because I see their numbers like there's no way you did numbers like there's no way you did numbers like there's no way you did that. But it keeps them honest. that. But it keeps them honest. that. But it keeps them honest. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's tough. I mean I looked at &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's tough. I mean I looked at &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's tough. I mean I looked at those numbers. I mean I think most those numbers. I mean I think most those numbers. I mean I think most people who've been training regularly people who've been training regularly people who've been training regularly will find that maybe two or three of the will find that maybe two or three of the will find that maybe two or three of the things come naturally to them and others things come naturally to them and others things come naturally to them and others are difficult cuz everyone's got are difficult cuz everyone's got are difficult cuz everyone's got different like I have a really short different like I have a really short different like I have a really short torso, long arm. So certain things are torso, long arm. So certain things are torso, long arm. So certain things are easier, certain things are harder. Like easier, certain things are harder. Like easier, certain things are harder. Like I think that's what I really like about I think that's what I really like about I think that's what I really like about it. It's spread out across the table so it. It's spread out across the table so it. It's spread out across the table so that no one person can dominate just by that no one person can dominate just by that no one person can dominate just by virtue of some, you know, previous sport virtue of some, you know, previous sport virtue of some, you know, previous sport history or natural proclivity based on history or natural proclivity based on history or natural proclivity based on body shape or something. Um, how often body shape or something. Um, how often body shape or something. Um, how often are you having people self test on this? are you having people self test on this? are you having people self test on this? &gt;&gt; We tell the guys whenever they're ready. &gt;&gt; We tell the guys whenever they're ready. &gt;&gt; We tell the guys whenever they're ready. We did a 12week block on it and I've We did a 12week block on it and I've We did a 12week block on it and I've been traveling a lot so haven't really been traveling a lot so haven't really been traveling a lot so haven't really been able to retest. We're coming up on been able to retest. We're coming up on been able to retest. We're coming up on it maybe next two weeks or so. it maybe next two weeks or so. it maybe next two weeks or so. &gt;&gt; Going to retest just to see where it's &gt;&gt; Going to retest just to see where it's &gt;&gt; Going to retest just to see where it's at. But that was the interesting thing at. But that was the interesting thing at. But that was the interesting thing is I call back to the command to our is I call back to the command to our is I call back to the command to our strength conditioning coaches and I strength conditioning coaches and I strength conditioning coaches and I pulled out all my scores from a test pulled out all my scores from a test pulled out all my scores from a test that's very similar. Bodyweight that's very similar. Bodyweight that's very similar. Bodyweight bench, max pull-ups, did the whole bench, max pull-ups, did the whole bench, max pull-ups, did the whole thing. My numbers now 15 years later, thing. My numbers now 15 years later, thing. My numbers now 15 years later, some are better than they were when I some are better than they were when I some are better than they were when I was in my 20s. was in my 20s. was in my 20s. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; And it's like I'm not training for that. &gt;&gt; And it's like I'm not training for that. &gt;&gt; And it's like I'm not training for that. This is just the program. It keeps me at This is just the program. It keeps me at This is just the program. It keeps me at a super high level. We had um we had a super high level. We had um we had a super high level. We had um we had a doctor from Duke University come down doctor from Duke University come down doctor from Duke University come down and do uh some CQB testing on me and we and do uh some CQB testing on me and we and do uh some CQB testing on me and we had to test V2 max. I haven't trained had to test V2 max. I haven't trained had to test V2 max. I haven't trained for V2 max in 20 years and my V2 max is for V2 max in 20 years and my V2 max is for V2 max in 20 years and my V2 max is still on the top 00001% of the earth. still on the top 00001% of the earth. still on the top 00001% of the earth. All elite athletes. I don't train V2 max All elite athletes. I don't train V2 max All elite athletes. I don't train V2 max and I my breathing is so inefficient. and I my breathing is so inefficient. and I my breathing is so inefficient. And that's what he laughed about. You're And that's what he laughed about. You're And that's what he laughed about. You're ultrasounding my diaphragm. He's like ultrasounding my diaphragm. He's like ultrasounding my diaphragm. He's like your breathing's terrible but it your breathing's terrible but it your breathing's terrible but it translates to where your V2 max is translates to where your V2 max is translates to where your V2 max is awesome. He's like you can live forever. awesome. He's like you can live forever. awesome. He's like you can live forever. That's that's how we determine how long That's that's how we determine how long That's that's how we determine how long you're going to live for as V2 max and you're going to live for as V2 max and you're going to live for as V2 max and your V2 max is through the roof. I don't your V2 max is through the roof. I don't your V2 max is through the roof. I don't train it. If you just do the program, train it. If you just do the program, train it. If you just do the program, maintain it consistently, it'll give you maintain it consistently, it'll give you maintain it consistently, it'll give you such a well-rounded approach to such a well-rounded approach to such a well-rounded approach to everything. And you know, that's the big everything. And you know, that's the big everything. And you know, that's the big thing is I don't want to have to say no. thing is I don't want to have to say no. thing is I don't want to have to say no. Hey, can you pick that up? Yeah. Can you Hey, can you pick that up? Yeah. Can you Hey, can you pick that up? Yeah. Can you jump over that? Yeah. Can you move that jump over that? Yeah. Can you move that jump over that? Yeah. Can you move that out of the way? Yep. Can you move him out of the way? Yep. Can you move him out of the way? Yep. Can you move him through time and space? Yep. through time and space? Yep. through time and space? Yep. &gt;&gt; Also helps cuz you have kids and they, &gt;&gt; Also helps cuz you have kids and they, &gt;&gt; Also helps cuz you have kids and they, you know, you know, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. swimming, playing, running around &gt;&gt; Yeah. swimming, playing, running around &gt;&gt; Yeah. swimming, playing, running around and also setting a high standard within and also setting a high standard within and also setting a high standard within family. &gt;&gt; You know, I think um there are always &gt;&gt; You know, I think um there are always &gt;&gt; You know, I think um there are always two sides to the fitness nutrition two sides to the fitness nutrition two sides to the fitness nutrition conversation. One is conversation. One is conversation. One is &gt;&gt; I'll just say it, you know, I feel like &gt;&gt; I'll just say it, you know, I feel like &gt;&gt; I'll just say it, you know, I feel like the standards in the United States have the standards in the United States have the standards in the United States have drifted so far in terms of what we drifted so far in terms of what we drifted so far in terms of what we consider healthy, um what we're willing consider healthy, um what we're willing consider healthy, um what we're willing to accept. uh my dad who is not you know to accept. uh my dad who is not you know to accept. uh my dad who is not you know he's a first generation immigrant here he's a first generation immigrant here he's a first generation immigrant here I'll never forget in the I think it was I'll never forget in the I think it was I'll never forget in the I think it was like in the mid 90s or something he said like in the mid 90s or something he said like in the mid 90s or something he said to me he said you know today I went he to me he said you know today I went he to me he said you know today I went he was talking about himself he said I was talking about himself he said I was talking about himself he said I went to the movies and I uh and I saw went to the movies and I uh and I saw went to the movies and I uh and I saw people in pajamas I was like what do you people in pajamas I was like what do you people in pajamas I was like what do you mean he's like people go to the movies mean he's like people go to the movies mean he's like people go to the movies now like as if they just woke up in now like as if they just woke up in now like as if they just woke up in their slippers and pajamas and I said oh their slippers and pajamas and I said oh their slippers and pajamas and I said oh yeah and he said um this is the yeah and he said um this is the yeah and he said um this is the beginning of the end he said because beginning of the end he said because beginning of the end he said because when that slips then pretty soon it's when that slips then pretty soon it's when that slips then pretty soon it's like you're willing to tolerate things like you're willing to tolerate things like you're willing to tolerate things on the street you know then people on the street you know then people on the street you know then people aren't weeding their lawns and then aren't weeding their lawns and then aren't weeding their lawns and then pretty soon, you know, it just breeds pretty soon, you know, it just breeds pretty soon, you know, it just breeds this general um disinterest in this general um disinterest in this general um disinterest in taking care of things and then, you taking care of things and then, you taking care of things and then, you know, I can't link it directly to people know, I can't link it directly to people know, I can't link it directly to people going to the movies in their pajamas, going to the movies in their pajamas, going to the movies in their pajamas, but and everyone likes to be but and everyone likes to be but and everyone likes to be comfortable. So, I don't think he was comfortable. So, I don't think he was comfortable. So, I don't think he was saying everyone should avoid wearing saying everyone should avoid wearing saying everyone should avoid wearing sweatpants, but I think what he was sweatpants, but I think what he was sweatpants, but I think what he was saying is, you know, etiquette and saying is, you know, etiquette and saying is, you know, etiquette and self-care and self-respect is projected self-care and self-respect is projected self-care and self-respect is projected outward. So, that's one side of it, outward. So, that's one side of it, outward. So, that's one side of it, right? um we have a 30 35% of the United right? um we have a 30 35% of the United right? um we have a 30 35% of the United States is obese not just overweight but States is obese not just overweight but States is obese not just overweight but obese. on the other side is the obese. on the other side is the obese. on the other side is the opportunity, right? So, it's always good opportunity, right? So, it's always good opportunity, right? So, it's always good to think about the opportunity and um to think about the opportunity and um to think about the opportunity and um the program that you're offering it the program that you're offering it the program that you're offering it clearly is great for first responders clearly is great for first responders clearly is great for first responders and people with high intensity, high and people with high intensity, high and people with high intensity, high demand um work, but the reason I'm demand um work, but the reason I'm demand um work, but the reason I'm interested in it is because I want to be interested in it is because I want to be interested in it is because I want to be fit for the next 50 years. And so, I'm fit for the next 50 years. And so, I'm fit for the next 50 years. And so, I'm going to try it because um I want to going to try it because um I want to going to try it because um I want to train to be able to do these things when train to be able to do these things when train to be able to do these things when I'm 70 or 80 or 90. I figure if I get I'm 70 or 80 or 90. I figure if I get I'm 70 or 80 or 90. I figure if I get out that far, it's kind of like how out that far, it's kind of like how out that far, it's kind of like how could I possibly do it then? Well, by could I possibly do it then? Well, by could I possibly do it then? Well, by doing it every day until then, right? doing it every day until then, right? doing it every day until then, right? That's, you know, it's obvious. The That's, you know, it's obvious. The That's, you know, it's obvious. The solution is obvious. So, is this a solution is obvious. So, is this a solution is obvious. So, is this a program that women, men, um, anyone program that women, men, um, anyone program that women, men, um, anyone could do. And is the and the training could do. And is the and the training could do. And is the and the training doesn't just center around these doesn't just center around these doesn't just center around these movements. It centers around the 5day a movements. It centers around the 5day a movements. It centers around the 5day a week program. week program. week program. &gt;&gt; And my understanding is there's tutorial &gt;&gt; And my understanding is there's tutorial &gt;&gt; And my understanding is there's tutorial in there. Like you get some you get some in there. Like you get some you get some in there. Like you get some you get some support cuz I think this is really support cuz I think this is really support cuz I think this is really what's missing from most online programs what's missing from most online programs what's missing from most online programs because anyone can go to YouTube or look because anyone can go to YouTube or look because anyone can go to YouTube or look online and go, you know, what's the we online and go, you know, what's the we online and go, you know, what's the we even have a foundational fitness even have a foundational fitness even have a foundational fitness protocol is what I've been, you know, protocol is what I've been, you know, protocol is what I've been, you know, doing for the last 30 something years. doing for the last 30 something years. doing for the last 30 something years. And I'm, you know, starting to modify And I'm, you know, starting to modify And I'm, you know, starting to modify that now based on the GBRS, uh, and this that now based on the GBRS, uh, and this that now based on the GBRS, uh, and this fit test. But it's a whole other thing fit test. But it's a whole other thing fit test. But it's a whole other thing to have support and have people working to have support and have people working to have support and have people working with you because this is about not being with you because this is about not being with you because this is about not being the only fish in the pond. the only fish in the pond. the only fish in the pond. &gt;&gt; One of the things that program does &gt;&gt; One of the things that program does &gt;&gt; One of the things that program does better than anything else I've ever seen better than anything else I've ever seen better than anything else I've ever seen is there's probably 800 to a,000 is there's probably 800 to a,000 is there's probably 800 to a,000 movement tutorials that are either movement tutorials that are either movement tutorials that are either guided by me with Vernon doing all the guided by me with Vernon doing all the guided by me with Vernon doing all the coaching cues. Big toe down, feel this, coaching cues. Big toe down, feel this, coaching cues. Big toe down, feel this, roll this hip over, you'll feel this. roll this hip over, you'll feel this. roll this hip over, you'll feel this. He's he navigates it so well verbally He's he navigates it so well verbally He's he navigates it so well verbally and physically you can watch him. He'll and physically you can watch him. He'll and physically you can watch him. He'll manipulate me demonstrating exactly what manipulate me demonstrating exactly what manipulate me demonstrating exactly what you'll feel and touch. Then the message you'll feel and touch. Then the message you'll feel and touch. Then the message board on the backside. So when you board on the backside. So when you board on the backside. So when you finish the workout, everybody else who's finish the workout, everybody else who's finish the workout, everybody else who's done that workout, all you know, done that workout, all you know, done that workout, all you know, thousands of people, they comment on how thousands of people, they comment on how thousands of people, they comment on how they're feeling and he'll read that and they're feeling and he'll read that and they're feeling and he'll read that and he's like, "Hey guys, looks like he's like, "Hey guys, looks like he's like, "Hey guys, looks like everybody's getting a little fatigued everybody's getting a little fatigued everybody's getting a little fatigued after the last couple weeks after this, after the last couple weeks after this, after the last couple weeks after this, you know, this power block we just did. you know, this power block we just did. you know, this power block we just did. Hey, we're going to taper off for the Hey, we're going to taper off for the Hey, we're going to taper off for the next five days. We're going to regroup next five days. We're going to regroup next five days. We're going to regroup and following Monday, we're going to and following Monday, we're going to and following Monday, we're going to push and this is what we're going to push and this is what we're going to push and this is what we're going to do." So, he'll sprinkle in more running. do." So, he'll sprinkle in more running. do." So, he'll sprinkle in more running. &gt;&gt; You know, when summertime comes around, &gt;&gt; You know, when summertime comes around, &gt;&gt; You know, when summertime comes around, we'll start to we'll start to we'll start to &gt;&gt; add in a little bit more, but we add in &gt;&gt; add in a little bit more, but we add in &gt;&gt; add in a little bit more, but we add in the 20-minute walks every day so the 20-minute walks every day so the 20-minute walks every day so everybody gets them right after you everybody gets them right after you everybody gets them right after you leave. I steal a bunch of stuff from leave. I steal a bunch of stuff from leave. I steal a bunch of stuff from you. Like, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] can of sunglasses. Let's you. Like, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] can of sunglasses. Let's you. Like, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] can of sunglasses. Let's get some vitamin D. Straighten my eyes get some vitamin D. Straighten my eyes get some vitamin D. Straighten my eyes first thing in the morning. Set first thing in the morning. Set first thing in the morning. Set circadian rhythm. I do the same thing at circadian rhythm. I do the same thing at circadian rhythm. I do the same thing at night. It's like they've all been saying night. It's like they've all been saying night. It's like they've all been saying the same thing, man. Like, if you just the same thing, man. Like, if you just the same thing, man. Like, if you just make it part of your routine, and make it part of your routine, and make it part of your routine, and Schwarzenegger says it, too. Like, hey, Schwarzenegger says it, too. Like, hey, Schwarzenegger says it, too. Like, hey, did you work out yesterday? Uh-huh. I'm did you work out yesterday? Uh-huh. I'm did you work out yesterday? Uh-huh. I'm going to work out tomorrow and the next going to work out tomorrow and the next going to work out tomorrow and the next day. I brush my teeth twice a day, too. day. I brush my teeth twice a day, too. day. I brush my teeth twice a day, too. I'm going to continue doing it. It's I'm going to continue doing it. It's I'm going to continue doing it. It's part of my routine, and I'm not going to part of my routine, and I'm not going to part of my routine, and I'm not going to miss it. I've been doing this and I miss it. I've been doing this and I miss it. I've been doing this and I haven't missed session for six years, haven't missed session for six years, haven't missed session for six years, and I am not going to miss one tomorrow. and I am not going to miss one tomorrow. and I am not going to miss one tomorrow. Why would I? You're seeing what it's Why would I? You're seeing what it's Why would I? You're seeing what it's doing for me. I mean, I've got a laundry doing for me. I mean, I've got a laundry doing for me. I mean, I've got a laundry list of injuries and I'm still to list of injuries and I'm still to list of injuries and I'm still to perform at a super high level because perform at a super high level because perform at a super high level because I'm not taking my foot off the gas. I'm not taking my foot off the gas. I'm not taking my foot off the gas. There's nothing magical about me. I'm a There's nothing magical about me. I'm a There's nothing magical about me. I'm a I'm the most normal dude you'll ever I'm the most normal dude you'll ever I'm the most normal dude you'll ever meet. But, I mean, we have 65, 70 year meet. But, I mean, we have 65, 70 year meet. But, I mean, we have 65, 70 year olds on that program. And if you can't olds on that program. And if you can't olds on that program. And if you can't do one, if you have a limitation, so do one, if you have a limitation, so do one, if you have a limitation, so do we. You can do a dropown menu and we. You can do a dropown menu and we. You can do a dropown menu and there'll be 40 different exercises to there'll be 40 different exercises to there'll be 40 different exercises to pick from. So if I go to a hotel gym, I pick from. So if I go to a hotel gym, I pick from. So if I go to a hotel gym, I don't have it. Very first thing I do, I don't have it. Very first thing I do, I don't have it. Very first thing I do, I walk down, I scan the whole thing, I walk down, I scan the whole thing, I walk down, I scan the whole thing, I send it to Vernon, he's like, "Ooh, only send it to Vernon, he's like, "Ooh, only send it to Vernon, he's like, "Ooh, only dumbbells to 50, huh?" I was like, dumbbells to 50, huh?" I was like, dumbbells to 50, huh?" I was like, "Yeah." And he'll send me a workout "Yeah." And he'll send me a workout "Yeah." And he'll send me a workout &gt;&gt; or I'll just drop down the menu like, &gt;&gt; or I'll just drop down the menu like, &gt;&gt; or I'll just drop down the menu like, "Okay, well, because today's my leg day, "Okay, well, because today's my leg day, "Okay, well, because today's my leg day, I'm actually going to do Friday's I'm actually going to do Friday's I'm actually going to do Friday's workout and I'll shift Thursday because workout and I'll shift Thursday because workout and I'll shift Thursday because I'll be home my home gym. I'll do I'll be home my home gym. I'll do I'll be home my home gym. I'll do Thursday's workout on Friday." Thursday's workout on Friday." Thursday's workout on Friday." &gt;&gt; Flexible. &gt;&gt; Flexible. &gt;&gt; Flexible. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's flexible. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's flexible. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's flexible. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so important. I mean I think &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so important. I mean I think &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so important. I mean I think really I mean standards are what we all really I mean standards are what we all really I mean standards are what we all need for ourselves and standards are need for ourselves and standards are need for ourselves and standards are what honestly I think this country needs what honestly I think this country needs what honestly I think this country needs and it's tricky because within this and it's tricky because within this and it's tricky because within this new administration you know the new administration you know the new administration you know the whole notion of Maha quickly got um kind whole notion of Maha quickly got um kind whole notion of Maha quickly got um kind of stained by the by the politicizing of stained by the by the politicizing of stained by the by the politicizing of like the motives and all that like it in like the motives and all that like it in like the motives and all that like it in the end people need to eat better train the end people need to eat better train the end people need to eat better train better and there are real medical issues better and there are real medical issues better and there are real medical issues out there people are contending with out there people are contending with out there people are contending with But just imagine if people actually But just imagine if people actually But just imagine if people actually started to take their physical body started to take their physical body started to take their physical body seriously. You know, this is something I seriously. You know, this is something I seriously. You know, this is something I really want I'm going to say it again I really want I'm going to say it again I really want I'm going to say it again later, but I want to say it now very later, but I want to say it now very later, but I want to say it now very clearly. One thing that I think is so clearly. One thing that I think is so clearly. One thing that I think is so absolutely clear from everything you've absolutely clear from everything you've absolutely clear from everything you've said about your backstory, said about your backstory, said about your backstory, where you're at now, the Ibegan work, where you're at now, the Ibegan work, where you're at now, the Ibegan work, your care for first responders, your care for first responders, your care for first responders, your care for your teammates, your family, is care for your teammates, your family, is care for your teammates, your family, is that you take yourself seriously. that you take yourself seriously. that you take yourself seriously. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So for you, it's a Yeah. I think most &gt;&gt; So for you, it's a Yeah. I think most &gt;&gt; So for you, it's a Yeah. I think most people take their feelings seriously. people take their feelings seriously. people take their feelings seriously. They take their responses to what's They take their responses to what's They take their responses to what's going on in their life seriously. You going on in their life seriously. You going on in their life seriously. You know, that at the center of our know, that at the center of our know, that at the center of our consciousness, a previous guest said, consciousness, a previous guest said, consciousness, a previous guest said, you know, is our ego, the us, the you know, is our ego, the us, the you know, is our ego, the us, the me, the we're all like that to some me, the we're all like that to some me, the we're all like that to some extent. But taking oneself seriously as a form But taking oneself seriously as a form But taking oneself seriously as a form of self-respect of self-respect of self-respect and building up one's ability to support and building up one's ability to support and building up one's ability to support others and to do important things for others and to do important things for others and to do important things for other people in our life, our family, other people in our life, our family, other people in our life, our family, and for the world is so key. And I feel and for the world is so key. And I feel and for the world is so key. And I feel like taking oneself seriously is the like taking oneself seriously is the like taking oneself seriously is the cornerstone of everything I've heard you cornerstone of everything I've heard you cornerstone of everything I've heard you say today and everything you're doing say today and everything you're doing say today and everything you're doing that it it's not taking a feeling in a that it it's not taking a feeling in a that it it's not taking a feeling in a moment seriously. In fact, sometimes moment seriously. In fact, sometimes moment seriously. In fact, sometimes it's about doing that and sometimes it's about doing that and sometimes it's about doing that and sometimes it's about going no, I'm going to push that about going no, I'm going to push that about going no, I'm going to push that aside and I'm going to brush my teeth. aside and I'm going to brush my teeth. aside and I'm going to brush my teeth. I'm going to lean into that. I'm going I'm going to lean into that. I'm going I'm going to lean into that. I'm going to do not do what I prefer to do in the to do not do what I prefer to do in the to do not do what I prefer to do in the moment so that I can really show up. But moment so that I can really show up. But moment so that I can really show up. But that we need to take ourselves that we need to take ourselves that we need to take ourselves seriously. &gt;&gt; You do. You have to. And &gt;&gt; You do. You have to. And &gt;&gt; You do. You have to. And I have this big thing I do. I've been I have this big thing I do. I've been I have this big thing I do. I've been asked to do a lot of motivational asked to do a lot of motivational asked to do a lot of motivational speaking lately and a lot of that. And I speaking lately and a lot of that. And I speaking lately and a lot of that. And I tell this story about a kid that grows tell this story about a kid that grows tell this story about a kid that grows up want to be a fireman and how he got up want to be a fireman and how he got up want to be a fireman and how he got inspired by a fireman because that guy inspired by a fireman because that guy inspired by a fireman because that guy was a physical representation of what was a physical representation of what was a physical representation of what that kid thought a fireman would be. that kid thought a fireman would be. that kid thought a fireman would be. Looked apart, act apart. He's heroic as Looked apart, act apart. He's heroic as Looked apart, act apart. He's heroic as you might as well put a red cape on this you might as well put a red cape on this you might as well put a red cape on this kid and send him through the door. I kid and send him through the door. I kid and send him through the door. I mean, that's what it is. But that's you mean, that's what it is. But that's you mean, that's what it is. But that's you representing everything you think a representing everything you think a representing everything you think a fireman should be. I just what you say, fireman should be. I just what you say, fireman should be. I just what you say, what you wear, how you speak, do what you wear, how you speak, do what you wear, how you speak, do everything. So for me, anybody who I everything. So for me, anybody who I everything. So for me, anybody who I meet, I'm giving you both barrels right meet, I'm giving you both barrels right meet, I'm giving you both barrels right now because I am trying to live the now because I am trying to live the now because I am trying to live the actual life that I think I should be actual life that I think I should be actual life that I think I should be living that translates all the positive living that translates all the positive living that translates all the positive stuff I'm trying to put out. If you saw stuff I'm trying to put out. If you saw stuff I'm trying to put out. If you saw me and I was 50 lbs overweight at a bar me and I was 50 lbs overweight at a bar me and I was 50 lbs overweight at a bar drinking my 12th beer, talking about drinking my 12th beer, talking about drinking my 12th beer, talking about mental health, you wouldn't take me mental health, you wouldn't take me mental health, you wouldn't take me serious. &gt;&gt; Talking about how you were an Navy Seal &gt;&gt; Talking about how you were an Navy Seal &gt;&gt; Talking about how you were an Navy Seal back when back when back when &gt;&gt; that does nothing for them. &gt;&gt; that does nothing for them. &gt;&gt; that does nothing for them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's like that's not how I &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's like that's not how I &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's like that's not how I identify. Yeah, I did that job and yeah, identify. Yeah, I did that job and yeah, identify. Yeah, I did that job and yeah, you think that gives me credibility. I you think that gives me credibility. I you think that gives me credibility. I don't care about that a bit. That don't care about that a bit. That don't care about that a bit. That doesn't give me credibility. The way I doesn't give me credibility. The way I doesn't give me credibility. The way I live my life now, my daily routine gives live my life now, my daily routine gives live my life now, my daily routine gives me the credibility. Cuz no matter who me the credibility. Cuz no matter who me the credibility. Cuz no matter who you are, you can adopt that same you are, you can adopt that same you are, you can adopt that same lifestyle. That same routine, you can lifestyle. That same routine, you can lifestyle. That same routine, you can grab it as a housewife. You can wake up grab it as a housewife. You can wake up grab it as a housewife. You can wake up early and go out and do a 20-minute walk early and go out and do a 20-minute walk early and go out and do a 20-minute walk every single morning before your kids every single morning before your kids every single morning before your kids wake up. You're just refusing to do it. wake up. You're just refusing to do it. wake up. You're just refusing to do it. I don't know why, but I promise you if I don't know why, but I promise you if I don't know why, but I promise you if every single person ever watches this, every single person ever watches this, every single person ever watches this, you wake up and do a 20-minute walk in you wake up and do a 20-minute walk in you wake up and do a 20-minute walk in the morning and one after dinner and you the morning and one after dinner and you the morning and one after dinner and you do it for seven days on the eighth day, do it for seven days on the eighth day, do it for seven days on the eighth day, the world doesn't fall apart. It only the world doesn't fall apart. It only the world doesn't fall apart. It only gets better the more you do it. It just gets better the more you do it. It just gets better the more you do it. It just will. People just don't want to put in will. People just don't want to put in will. People just don't want to put in the work. They want this quick fix. They the work. They want this quick fix. They the work. They want this quick fix. They want Ozimpic. They want this. or they're want Ozimpic. They want this. or they're want Ozimpic. They want this. or they're saying, and I hear this and uh it's saying, and I hear this and uh it's saying, and I hear this and uh it's trickier for me because I'm late to the trickier for me because I'm late to the trickier for me because I'm late to the game on kids uh and family, but um game on kids uh and family, but um game on kids uh and family, but um mark my words, but in your case, you've mark my words, but in your case, you've mark my words, but in your case, you've already had kids. You got a wife, you have a had kids. You got a wife, you have a had kids. You got a wife, you have a functioning family and a very busy, functioning family and a very busy, functioning family and a very busy, demanding career and a previous career demanding career and a previous career demanding career and a previous career that carries with it incredible that carries with it incredible that carries with it incredible experiences, but also challenges that experiences, but also challenges that experiences, but also challenges that you're resolving now and you've resolved you're resolving now and you've resolved you're resolving now and you've resolved and you have a mission in the world. And and you have a mission in the world. And and you have a mission in the world. And so a lot of times I'll hear people say, so a lot of times I'll hear people say, so a lot of times I'll hear people say, "Well, that's easy for you to say cuz "Well, that's easy for you to say cuz "Well, that's easy for you to say cuz you don't have kids." And and I'm kind you don't have kids." And and I'm kind you don't have kids." And and I'm kind of muted at that moment. And I want to of muted at that moment. And I want to of muted at that moment. And I want to respond and say, "Listen, when I was a respond and say, "Listen, when I was a respond and say, "Listen, when I was a graduate student, I worked 100 hours a graduate student, I worked 100 hours a graduate student, I worked 100 hours a week, but I was in my 20s and I didn't week, but I was in my 20s and I didn't week, but I was in my 20s and I didn't have kids, so I have very little have kids, so I have very little have kids, so I have very little ammunition there." In your case, ammunition there." In your case, ammunition there." In your case, however, uh you have kids and you're however, uh you have kids and you're however, uh you have kids and you're getting up and you're doing two getting up and you're doing two getting up and you're doing two 20-minute walks and you're including 20-minute walks and you're including 20-minute walks and you're including your family in these practices, too. You your family in these practices, too. You your family in these practices, too. You said your evening walks with your wife said your evening walks with your wife said your evening walks with your wife are a crucial part of your connection. are a crucial part of your connection. are a crucial part of your connection. &gt;&gt; If anyone is struggling with building &gt;&gt; If anyone is struggling with building &gt;&gt; If anyone is struggling with building that bridge, especially guys transition that bridge, especially guys transition that bridge, especially guys transition out of the military or a career, you out of the military or a career, you out of the military or a career, you watch it with Tom Brady and everybody watch it with Tom Brady and everybody watch it with Tom Brady and everybody else when they leave the thing they were else when they leave the thing they were else when they leave the thing they were put on this earth to do, there is a fall put on this earth to do, there is a fall put on this earth to do, there is a fall from grace. It can't be ignored. And from grace. It can't be ignored. And from grace. It can't be ignored. And most of the time that splits with the most of the time that splits with the most of the time that splits with the wife, right? Like the person you are wife, right? Like the person you are wife, right? Like the person you are now, she's not used to being home and now, she's not used to being home and now, she's not used to being home and now you don't have anything. If you are now you don't have anything. If you are now you don't have anything. If you are struggling to rebuild that connection struggling to rebuild that connection struggling to rebuild that connection with your wife, with your partner, that with your wife, with your partner, that with your wife, with your partner, that 20-minute walk has saved my marriage. I 20-minute walk has saved my marriage. I 20-minute walk has saved my marriage. I have given it to thousands of people. have given it to thousands of people. have given it to thousands of people. That right there, if I could give That right there, if I could give That right there, if I could give everybody a gift, the power of that everybody a gift, the power of that everybody a gift, the power of that 20-minute walk, it's changed my whole 20-minute walk, it's changed my whole 20-minute walk, it's changed my whole life, man. That is the one constant life, man. That is the one constant life, man. That is the one constant thing I don't compromise on. I mean, thing I don't compromise on. I mean, thing I don't compromise on. I mean, even to the point where, as dumb as it even to the point where, as dumb as it even to the point where, as dumb as it may be, when I'm walking through the may be, when I'm walking through the may be, when I'm walking through the Atlanta airport, I don't get on the Atlanta airport, I don't get on the Atlanta airport, I don't get on the little conveyor belt. I'm not doing little conveyor belt. I'm not doing little conveyor belt. I'm not doing that. I'll walk from terminal E all the that. I'll walk from terminal E all the that. I'll walk from terminal E all the way to terminal A because it's a way to terminal A because it's a way to terminal A because it's a 20-minute power push. I do it and I film 20-minute power push. I do it and I film 20-minute power push. I do it and I film it on social media. I'm getting my steps it on social media. I'm getting my steps it on social media. I'm getting my steps in no matter what. I'm not on my phone. in no matter what. I'm not on my phone. in no matter what. I'm not on my phone. I'm showing you can find the time. I'm showing you can find the time. I'm showing you can find the time. Instead of sitting there at Starbucks Instead of sitting there at Starbucks Instead of sitting there at Starbucks for 45 minutes waiting on my flight, for 45 minutes waiting on my flight, for 45 minutes waiting on my flight, I'll just walk back and forth. I just I'll just walk back and forth. I just I'll just walk back and forth. I just got a 40-minute walk in straight. I'm got a 40-minute walk in straight. I'm got a 40-minute walk in straight. I'm good. So when I get back home, it's 2:30 good. So when I get back home, it's 2:30 good. So when I get back home, it's 2:30 in the morning. I don't feel guilty. I in the morning. I don't feel guilty. I in the morning. I don't feel guilty. I haven't done anything physical today. haven't done anything physical today. haven't done anything physical today. &gt;&gt; I wake up in the morning, 5:00 a.m., and &gt;&gt; I wake up in the morning, 5:00 a.m., and &gt;&gt; I wake up in the morning, 5:00 a.m., and I gear it up and I spin it again. You I gear it up and I spin it again. You I gear it up and I spin it again. You can find the time. can find the time. can find the time. Rarely. You have to make the time. Rarely. You have to make the time. Rarely. You have to make the time. &gt;&gt; If you're waiting for it just to pop up &gt;&gt; If you're waiting for it just to pop up &gt;&gt; If you're waiting for it just to pop up like, "Oh, here's a free 20-minute like, "Oh, here's a free 20-minute like, "Oh, here's a free 20-minute block." You're not going to have it. And block." You're not going to have it. And block." You're not going to have it. And people just That's the thing I can't get people just That's the thing I can't get people just That's the thing I can't get past. It's like, oh, you know, I can't past. It's like, oh, you know, I can't past. It's like, oh, you know, I can't wake up that early. wake up that early. wake up that early. You have a $1,000 smartphone that does You have a $1,000 smartphone that does You have a $1,000 smartphone that does anything. There's not a question you can anything. There's not a question you can anything. There's not a question you can ask it doesn't have the answer to. ask it doesn't have the answer to. ask it doesn't have the answer to. And there's a clock on it. If you set And there's a clock on it. If you set And there's a clock on it. If you set it, it'll go off. When it goes off, get it, it'll go off. When it goes off, get it, it'll go off. When it goes off, get out of bed. Like, I've been doing it my out of bed. Like, I've been doing it my out of bed. Like, I've been doing it my whole life. I don't understand it. They whole life. I don't understand it. They whole life. I don't understand it. They just don't want to. They've never felt just don't want to. They've never felt just don't want to. They've never felt the power of being in control of the power of being in control of the power of being in control of the small things. Why stacking up the microw small things. Why stacking up the microw small things. Why stacking up the microw lay out your clothes the night before? I lay out your clothes the night before? I lay out your clothes the night before? I mean, how many people wake up, you know, mean, how many people wake up, you know, mean, how many people wake up, you know, 20 minutes before they're supposed to 20 minutes before they're supposed to 20 minutes before they're supposed to leave the door and they're just frantic leave the door and they're just frantic leave the door and they're just frantic like, "Where's my black shirt? Where's like, "Where's my black shirt? Where's like, "Where's my black shirt? Where's my black shirt? Who are my shoes? Where my black shirt? Who are my shoes? Where my black shirt? Who are my shoes? Where are my car keys?" Like, that's a are my car keys?" Like, that's a are my car keys?" Like, that's a terrible way to start the day. But terrible way to start the day. But terrible way to start the day. But you're the one who's doing that. you're the one who's doing that. you're the one who's doing that. &gt;&gt; If you just spend 10 minutes the night &gt;&gt; If you just spend 10 minutes the night &gt;&gt; If you just spend 10 minutes the night before, take your shower, lay out the before, take your shower, lay out the before, take your shower, lay out the clothes, put them in the logical order clothes, put them in the logical order clothes, put them in the logical order you're about to get them dressed in next you're about to get them dressed in next you're about to get them dressed in next morning and go. You'd be surprised how morning and go. You'd be surprised how morning and go. You'd be surprised how fast you're actually making a cup of fast you're actually making a cup of fast you're actually making a cup of coffee. Like, man, I did my entire coffee. Like, man, I did my entire coffee. Like, man, I did my entire morning routine in less than five morning routine in less than five morning routine in less than five minutes. What would I do with my next 40? What would I do with my next 40? What would I do with my next 40? Whatever you want. Do 10 minutes of Whatever you want. Do 10 minutes of Whatever you want. Do 10 minutes of meditation. Sit there in a dark room and meditation. Sit there in a dark room and meditation. Sit there in a dark room and just tell yourself 10 things you're just tell yourself 10 things you're just tell yourself 10 things you're truly grateful for. Like, I am so glad I truly grateful for. Like, I am so glad I truly grateful for. Like, I am so glad I have my wife. I'm so glad I have two have my wife. I'm so glad I have two have my wife. I'm so glad I have two healthy kids. I'm so glad I have a healthy kids. I'm so glad I have a healthy kids. I'm so glad I have a company. I'm so glad I have two arms and company. I'm so glad I have two arms and company. I'm so glad I have two arms and two legs. I'm so glad I'm still alive. two legs. I'm so glad I'm still alive. two legs. I'm so glad I'm still alive. Cool. What are you going to do? I'm Cool. What are you going to do? I'm Cool. What are you going to do? I'm going to make the most out of it. Go to going to make the most out of it. Go to going to make the most out of it. Go to work and do that. People just don't want work and do that. People just don't want work and do that. People just don't want to make the time because they've never to make the time because they've never to make the time because they've never seen the example. So, a lot of stuff we seen the example. So, a lot of stuff we seen the example. So, a lot of stuff we try to put out is I'm trying to be a try to put out is I'm trying to be a try to put out is I'm trying to be a physical representation of what I'm physical representation of what I'm physical representation of what I'm trying to massproduce. trying to massproduce. trying to massproduce. Physically strong, mentally resilient, Physically strong, mentally resilient, Physically strong, mentally resilient, capable, patriotic Americans. That's capable, patriotic Americans. That's capable, patriotic Americans. That's what I'm trying to do. I just want you what I'm trying to do. I just want you what I'm trying to do. I just want you to have accountability. to have accountability. to have accountability. I've accounted for all my failures, all I've accounted for all my failures, all I've accounted for all my failures, all my successes, and everything else in my successes, and everything else in my successes, and everything else in between. And I'll show them exactly what between. And I'll show them exactly what between. And I'll show them exactly what happens when you do it wrong. And I happens when you do it wrong. And I happens when you do it wrong. And I think that's what a lot of people like think that's what a lot of people like think that's what a lot of people like the most about it is I will tell you all the most about it is I will tell you all the most about it is I will tell you all my deepest darkest secrets because my deepest darkest secrets because my deepest darkest secrets because you're going to learn a lot more from you're going to learn a lot more from you're going to learn a lot more from those than you are about climbing those than you are about climbing those than you are about climbing Everest, right? Like everybody wants to Everest, right? Like everybody wants to Everest, right? Like everybody wants to see the picture at the top of the see the picture at the top of the see the picture at the top of the mountain. They don't want to hear about, mountain. They don't want to hear about, mountain. They don't want to hear about, you know, how many sherpas you lost on you know, how many sherpas you lost on you know, how many sherpas you lost on the way to the top. They don't want to the way to the top. They don't want to the way to the top. They don't want to hear about that. I do. I want to hear about that. I do. I want to hear about that. I do. I want to hear about the real struggle. Like how hard about the real struggle. Like how hard about the real struggle. Like how hard is it to be you? Talk me through it. I is it to be you? Talk me through it. I is it to be you? Talk me through it. I can learn so much from the hardships of can learn so much from the hardships of can learn so much from the hardships of people and just unfortunately we're in a people and just unfortunately we're in a people and just unfortunately we're in a place now where not too many people a place now where not too many people a place now where not too many people are willing to share it. are willing to share it. are willing to share it. Yeah, just trying to help out as many Yeah, just trying to help out as many Yeah, just trying to help out as many people as possible before I hang this people as possible before I hang this people as possible before I hang this whole thing up and retire. whole thing up and retire. whole thing up and retire. &gt;&gt; Man, well, you are absolutely helping a &gt;&gt; Man, well, you are absolutely helping a &gt;&gt; Man, well, you are absolutely helping a ton of people and today's discussion is ton of people and today's discussion is ton of people and today's discussion is just going to amplify that. I have to just going to amplify that. I have to just going to amplify that. I have to say I'm immensely grateful for you. say I'm immensely grateful for you. say I'm immensely grateful for you. I felt a kinship with you from the very I felt a kinship with you from the very I felt a kinship with you from the very first time I saw you on Sean's podcast first time I saw you on Sean's podcast first time I saw you on Sean's podcast cuz you mentioned the skateboarding cuz you mentioned the skateboarding cuz you mentioned the skateboarding thing and I think I heard the words uh thing and I think I heard the words uh thing and I think I heard the words uh that you prefer dogs to people that you prefer dogs to people that you prefer dogs to people sometimes. I think you you've embraced sometimes. I think you you've embraced sometimes. I think you you've embraced people uh as well. um and your love of people uh as well. um and your love of people uh as well. um and your love of dogs. Uh that was the hook. And then uh dogs. Uh that was the hook. And then uh dogs. Uh that was the hook. And then uh we have some common friends in the we have some common friends in the we have some common friends in the team's community and um that I respect team's community and um that I respect team's community and um that I respect very much. Some of whom have been very much. Some of whom have been very much. Some of whom have been guests, others who are still behind the guests, others who are still behind the guests, others who are still behind the veil. But um veil. But um veil. But um your message is so important. your message is so important. your message is so important. You have very high standards for You have very high standards for You have very high standards for yourself and you meet those standards yourself and you meet those standards yourself and you meet those standards and you're constantly trying to meet and you're constantly trying to meet and you're constantly trying to meet and exceed those standards. And it's also exceed those standards. And it's also exceed those standards. And it's also very clear that you've learned this is very clear that you've learned this is very clear that you've learned this is this unconscious genius part about maybe this unconscious genius part about maybe this unconscious genius part about maybe it's teams, maybe it's just some people it's teams, maybe it's just some people it's teams, maybe it's just some people in it, but it's clearly very alive in it, but it's clearly very alive in it, but it's clearly very alive in you. You learn to use physical you. You learn to use physical you. You learn to use physical decisions, real world actionable, decisions, real world actionable, decisions, real world actionable, implementable decisions to create implementable decisions to create implementable decisions to create internal change so that you can engage internal change so that you can engage internal change so that you can engage with the world in more functional and with the world in more functional and with the world in more functional and more meaningful ways. It's like the more meaningful ways. It's like the more meaningful ways. It's like the waking up early thing. I confess I've waking up early thing. I confess I've waking up early thing. I confess I've been a little weak on the waking up been a little weak on the waking up been a little weak on the waking up early thing about prioritizing sleep and early thing about prioritizing sleep and early thing about prioritizing sleep and this kind of thing. And um there's also this kind of thing. And um there's also this kind of thing. And um there's also a strong anti-depressant effect of a strong anti-depressant effect of a strong anti-depressant effect of waking up early that I've noticed and waking up early that I've noticed and waking up early that I've noticed and that's exists in the literature. So I'm that's exists in the literature. So I'm that's exists in the literature. So I'm going to get back to that. I'm going to get back to that. I'm going to get back to that. I'm definitely going to do the GBRS program. definitely going to do the GBRS program. definitely going to do the GBRS program. I'm hoping other people will as well. Um I'm hoping other people will as well. Um I'm hoping other people will as well. Um again, it's not a promotional for that. again, it's not a promotional for that. again, it's not a promotional for that. I think how amazing would it be if as a I think how amazing would it be if as a I think how amazing would it be if as a country people started to really take country people started to really take country people started to really take their physical body seriously, not their physical body seriously, not their physical body seriously, not expect some, you know, package to arrive expect some, you know, package to arrive expect some, you know, package to arrive on their doorstep if they were to take on their doorstep if they were to take on their doorstep if they were to take that pill or that thing and suddenly that pill or that thing and suddenly that pill or that thing and suddenly they were going to be healthy and they were going to be healthy and they were going to be healthy and instead to really just lean into these instead to really just lean into these instead to really just lean into these 20-minute walks, sunlight, the GBRS 20-minute walks, sunlight, the GBRS 20-minute walks, sunlight, the GBRS programs, I was like an awesome way to programs, I was like an awesome way to programs, I was like an awesome way to get all-around fitness and to maintain get all-around fitness and to maintain get all-around fitness and to maintain that for a lifetime. I just want to that for a lifetime. I just want to that for a lifetime. I just want to thank you for everything you're doing. thank you for everything you're doing. thank you for everything you're doing. you you've definitely opened up on an you you've definitely opened up on an you you've definitely opened up on an emotional level to the world today and emotional level to the world today and emotional level to the world today and elsewhere. You've opened up uh your elsewhere. You've opened up uh your elsewhere. You've opened up uh your protocols. You've made it very clear protocols. You've made it very clear protocols. You've made it very clear that you're human, that you're not that you're human, that you're not that you're human, that you're not perfect, and that despite all that, perfect, and that despite all that, perfect, and that despite all that, you're still going to keep striving, you're still going to keep striving, you're still going to keep striving, striving. It's a it's a striving, striving. It's a it's a striving, striving. It's a it's a magnificent example at every level. So, magnificent example at every level. So, magnificent example at every level. So, I really grateful. I really grateful. I really grateful. &gt;&gt; I got some I want to give you &gt;&gt; I got some I want to give you &gt;&gt; I got some I want to give you &gt;&gt; for me. &gt;&gt; for me. &gt;&gt; for me. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Slide you those. &gt;&gt; Slide you those. &gt;&gt; Slide you those. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I'm going to tell you the &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I'm going to tell you the &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I'm going to tell you the backstory real quick. backstory real quick. backstory real quick. &gt;&gt; So, we started doing in-house embroidery &gt;&gt; So, we started doing in-house embroidery &gt;&gt; So, we started doing in-house embroidery &gt;&gt; and we wanted to do an American flag &gt;&gt; and we wanted to do an American flag &gt;&gt; and we wanted to do an American flag hat, &gt;&gt; but we sat down with Tyro Milikin. He &gt;&gt; but we sat down with Tyro Milikin. He &gt;&gt; but we sat down with Tyro Milikin. He runs all our stuff and we got an runs all our stuff and we got an runs all our stuff and we got an apprentice, Sophia, that does all our apprentice, Sophia, that does all our apprentice, Sophia, that does all our embroidery in house, six head embroidery in house, six head embroidery in house, six head embroidery machine, and we wanted to do an American machine, and we wanted to do an American machine, and we wanted to do an American flag hat. And I got so I'm going try not flag hat. And I got so I'm going try not flag hat. And I got so I'm going try not to get upset. I get so sick of people to get upset. I get so sick of people to get upset. I get so sick of people ordering American flag patches off ordering American flag patches off ordering American flag patches off Amazon from China in border stitching Amazon from China in border stitching Amazon from China in border stitching them on hats and letting that be a them on hats and letting that be a them on hats and letting that be a patriotic symbol. patriotic symbol. patriotic symbol. &gt;&gt; Is that how it's typically done? &gt;&gt; Is that how it's typically done? &gt;&gt; Is that how it's typically done? &gt;&gt; I mean, you can go to Amazon, I can buy &gt;&gt; I mean, you can go to Amazon, I can buy &gt;&gt; I mean, you can go to Amazon, I can buy 500 of those for 500 of those for 500 of those for &gt;&gt; And those are made in China. Yeah. Got &gt;&gt; And those are made in China. Yeah. Got &gt;&gt; And those are made in China. Yeah. Got it. &gt;&gt; And I can border stitch them on there. I &gt;&gt; And I can border stitch them on there. I &gt;&gt; And I can border stitch them on there. I can hot glue them on there. We've got can hot glue them on there. We've got can hot glue them on there. We've got this embroidery machine and Tyler's a this embroidery machine and Tyler's a this embroidery machine and Tyler's a wizard with just embroidery files and wizard with just embroidery files and wizard with just embroidery files and everything else. And we were like, everything else. And we were like, everything else. And we were like, "Let's make the American flag hat. It's "Let's make the American flag hat. It's "Let's make the American flag hat. It's not going to be a border stitch. it's not going to be a border stitch. it's not going to be a border stitch. it's not going to be a patch we sew on this not going to be a patch we sew on this not going to be a patch we sew on this thing. Like what's it going to be? And thing. Like what's it going to be? And thing. Like what's it going to be? And he looked right at me and he goes, I can he looked right at me and he goes, I can he looked right at me and he goes, I can make you the hat, but we are never going make you the hat, but we are never going make you the hat, but we are never going to make money on it. And I was like, I to make money on it. And I was like, I to make money on it. And I was like, I ain't about making money. And he's like, ain't about making money. And he's like, ain't about making money. And he's like, well, I can't massproduce them either. I well, I can't massproduce them either. I well, I can't massproduce them either. I was like, the hat and the story I'm was like, the hat and the story I'm was like, the hat and the story I'm going to tell is not meant for mass going to tell is not meant for mass going to tell is not meant for mass production. So when he launched those production. So when he launched those production. So when he launched those hats, that hat is almost 24,000 hats, that hat is almost 24,000 hats, that hat is almost 24,000 individual stitches. It takes 60 minutes individual stitches. It takes 60 minutes individual stitches. It takes 60 minutes just to make the flag. The quality just to make the flag. The quality just to make the flag. The quality control that goes inside that, if a control that goes inside that, if a control that goes inside that, if a single thread is pulled, rolled, single thread is pulled, rolled, single thread is pulled, rolled, anything, we cancel it. We toss it. anything, we cancel it. We toss it. anything, we cancel it. We toss it. But that hat and I see But that hat and I see But that hat and I see &gt;&gt; it was actually stitched into the back. &gt;&gt; it was actually stitched into the back. &gt;&gt; it was actually stitched into the back. No, it's not I see what you're saying. No, it's not I see what you're saying. No, it's not I see what you're saying. It's not a patch stitch onto a hat. It's not a patch stitch onto a hat. It's not a patch stitch onto a hat. It's it is the hat. it is the hat. it is the hat. &gt;&gt; It is. &gt;&gt; It is. &gt;&gt; It is. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Got it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Got it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Got it. &gt;&gt; You know, when we first dropped those &gt;&gt; You know, when we first dropped those &gt;&gt; You know, when we first dropped those things, I told everybody I was like, things, I told everybody I was like, things, I told everybody I was like, "This hat is for the people that get "This hat is for the people that get "This hat is for the people that get emotional when they hear the national emotional when they hear the national emotional when they hear the national anthem. This hat is for the people whose anthem. This hat is for the people whose anthem. This hat is for the people whose children say the pledge of allegiance children say the pledge of allegiance children say the pledge of allegiance with hand over heart. They go to the with hand over heart. They go to the with hand over heart. They go to the baseball games. They have a visceral baseball games. They have a visceral baseball games. They have a visceral response when they hear the national response when they hear the national response when they hear the national anthem played. They're not kneeling at anthem played. They're not kneeling at anthem played. They're not kneeling at football games. They're not playing all football games. They're not playing all football games. They're not playing all the left side and right side. They are the left side and right side. They are the left side and right side. They are patriotic Americans. And I told him, if patriotic Americans. And I told him, if patriotic Americans. And I told him, if you are going to wear this hat and let you are going to wear this hat and let you are going to wear this hat and let anything poisonous come out of your mouth while poisonous come out of your mouth while poisonous come out of your mouth while you're wearing that hat, I will fly you're wearing that hat, I will fly you're wearing that hat, I will fly there and I'll snatch it off your head. there and I'll snatch it off your head. there and I'll snatch it off your head. Everything you're going to do needs to Everything you're going to do needs to Everything you're going to do needs to represent what you think the essence of represent what you think the essence of represent what you think the essence of America is. Everything that flows out of America is. Everything that flows out of America is. Everything that flows out of your mouth while you're wearing that hat your mouth while you're wearing that hat your mouth while you're wearing that hat better be done with dignity and respect better be done with dignity and respect better be done with dignity and respect because a lot of brave men and women because a lot of brave men and women because a lot of brave men and women have sacrificed everything just for that have sacrificed everything just for that have sacrificed everything just for that little piece of cloth. So, we don't little piece of cloth. So, we don't little piece of cloth. So, we don't massproduce them. We drop them a couple massproduce them. We drop them a couple massproduce them. We drop them a couple times a year. We'll do like a be a pro times a year. We'll do like a be a pro times a year. We'll do like a be a pro drop a couple different times and they drop a couple different times and they drop a couple different times and they fly like wildfire. And it's so cool to fly like wildfire. And it's so cool to fly like wildfire. And it's so cool to see because the people that know, they see because the people that know, they see because the people that know, they know. Like we have done so much for that know. Like we have done so much for that know. Like we have done so much for that flag. And I hate seeing it being flag. And I hate seeing it being flag. And I hate seeing it being misrepresented in any way, shape, or misrepresented in any way, shape, or misrepresented in any way, shape, or form. You do it such in a beautiful form. You do it such in a beautiful form. You do it such in a beautiful light. I would love for you to have light. I would love for you to have light. I would love for you to have those. Most of those came from the boys those. Most of those came from the boys those. Most of those came from the boys at GBRS. And I know that when you wear at GBRS. And I know that when you wear at GBRS. And I know that when you wear them, you'll preach the gospel and them, you'll preach the gospel and them, you'll preach the gospel and you'll represent the American people in you'll represent the American people in you'll represent the American people in a beautiful way. But if you don't, I a beautiful way. But if you don't, I a beautiful way. But if you don't, I will fly out here and I'll snatch them will fly out here and I'll snatch them will fly out here and I'll snatch them off your head like I will anybody else. off your head like I will anybody else. off your head like I will anybody else. But I believe you. But those things But I believe you. But those things But I believe you. But those things those represent we've got a bunch of those represent we've got a bunch of those represent we've got a bunch of patriots and a bunch of veterans that patriots and a bunch of veterans that patriots and a bunch of veterans that work inside with us. So every time we do work inside with us. So every time we do work inside with us. So every time we do that drop, the entire the entire company that drop, the entire the entire company that drop, the entire the entire company we're 40ome people strong now. And when we're 40ome people strong now. And when we're 40ome people strong now. And when that hat comes out, everybody can feel that hat comes out, everybody can feel that hat comes out, everybody can feel it like beating the war drum on just it like beating the war drum on just it like beating the war drum on just being a good patriot. I know I isolated being a good patriot. I know I isolated being a good patriot. I know I isolated for just Americans, but the overall for just Americans, but the overall for just Americans, but the overall message is I want everyone to be a message is I want everyone to be a message is I want everyone to be a patriot. Everyone in the UK, Australia, patriot. Everyone in the UK, Australia, patriot. Everyone in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, France, if you have New Zealand, Canada, France, if you have New Zealand, Canada, France, if you have ownership and you are patriotic of where ownership and you are patriotic of where ownership and you are patriotic of where you come from, you represent it so much you come from, you represent it so much you come from, you represent it so much better than anyone else. If I've never better than anyone else. If I've never better than anyone else. If I've never met a person from Australia and I go met a person from Australia and I go met a person from Australia and I go there and I meet one person, it's a there and I meet one person, it's a there and I meet one person, it's a positive experience. For the rest of my positive experience. For the rest of my positive experience. For the rest of my days, I'll talk about that experience. days, I'll talk about that experience. days, I'll talk about that experience. So, when I wear that hat, I try to So, when I wear that hat, I try to So, when I wear that hat, I try to represent what I want the American represent what I want the American represent what I want the American people to be like. So when somebody people to be like. So when somebody people to be like. So when somebody meets me from, you know, Zimbabwe and meets me from, you know, Zimbabwe and meets me from, you know, Zimbabwe and I'm wearing that hat, that interaction I'm wearing that hat, that interaction I'm wearing that hat, that interaction is going to be the best I can possibly is going to be the best I can possibly is going to be the best I can possibly be because of the weight of that thing be because of the weight of that thing be because of the weight of that thing sitting on my head. Um, yeah, when I sitting on my head. Um, yeah, when I sitting on my head. Um, yeah, when I came out here, you know, I was telling came out here, you know, I was telling came out here, you know, I was telling the boys like, I got to I got to bring the boys like, I got to I got to bring the boys like, I got to I got to bring Andrew to Hatton. They spun him up real Andrew to Hatton. They spun him up real Andrew to Hatton. They spun him up real quick. We don't drop those things till quick. We don't drop those things till quick. We don't drop those things till November, but I wanted you to have the November, but I wanted you to have the November, but I wanted you to have the first one. So, thank you for everything first one. So, thank you for everything first one. So, thank you for everything and thanks for having me on, man. and thanks for having me on, man. and thanks for having me on, man. &gt;&gt; Oh, man. Thank you. I'm honored. I &gt;&gt; Oh, man. Thank you. I'm honored. I &gt;&gt; Oh, man. Thank you. I'm honored. I will uh wear it and I will uh I will uh wear it and I will uh I will uh wear it and I will uh I will meet and I will strive to exceed the meet and I will strive to exceed the meet and I will strive to exceed the standard that you describe and I fully standard that you describe and I fully standard that you describe and I fully believe that if I don't you'll come out believe that if I don't you'll come out believe that if I don't you'll come out here and kick my ass. That's uh that's here and kick my ass. That's uh that's here and kick my ass. That's uh that's part of the part of the deal. Uh we can part of the part of the deal. Uh we can part of the part of the deal. Uh we can also provide a link to uh where you guys also provide a link to uh where you guys also provide a link to uh where you guys make these. And um make these. And um make these. And um &gt;&gt; yeah, again I just really want to thank &gt;&gt; yeah, again I just really want to thank &gt;&gt; yeah, again I just really want to thank you. It's clear that quality and you. It's clear that quality and you. It's clear that quality and standards is in your DNA and it's in standards is in your DNA and it's in standards is in your DNA and it's in more importantly it's in everything you more importantly it's in everything you more importantly it's in everything you do right down to the hats. So, do right down to the hats. So, do right down to the hats. So, thank you so much, DJ. Come back again. thank you so much, DJ. Come back again. thank you so much, DJ. Come back again. &gt;&gt; I will. Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; I will. Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; I will. Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with DJ Shipley. To today's discussion with DJ Shipley. To today's discussion with DJ Shipley. To find links to his website, as well as find links to his website, as well as find links to his website, as well as the links to the fitness program that we the links to the fitness program that we the links to the fitness program that we described, please see the show note described, please see the show note described, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerost way to support us. In terrific zerost way to support us. In terrific zerost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. and you can now leave fivestar review. and you can now leave fivestar review. and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three-page protocols in the form of 1 to three-page protocols in the form of 1 to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with DJ Shipley. And today's discussion with DJ Shipley. And today's discussion with DJ Shipley. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]