Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my Stanford School of Medicine. And now, my conversation with Dr. Matthew Johnson. conversation with Dr. Matthew Johnson. conversation with Dr. Matthew Johnson. Well, Matthew, I've been looking forward Well, Matthew, I've been looking forward Well, Matthew, I've been looking forward to this for a long time. I'm a huge fan to this for a long time. I'm a huge fan to this for a long time. I'm a huge fan of your scientific work, and I'm here to of your scientific work, and I'm here to of your scientific work, and I'm here to learn from you. learn from you. learn from you. &gt;&gt; Likewise. Big fan, and happy to do this &gt;&gt; Likewise. Big fan, and happy to do this &gt;&gt; Likewise. Big fan, and happy to do this with you. Great. Well, thank you. My with you. Great. Well, thank you. My with you. Great. Well, thank you. My first question is a very basic one, first question is a very basic one, first question is a very basic one, which is what qualifies a substance to which is what qualifies a substance to which is what qualifies a substance to as a psychedelic? Nomenclature as a psychedelic? Nomenclature as a psychedelic? Nomenclature is a real challenge in this area of is a real challenge in this area of is a real challenge in this area of psychedelics. So, starting with the word psychedelics. So, starting with the word psychedelics. So, starting with the word psychedelic, it just psychedelic, it just psychedelic, it just if you're a pharmacologist, it's if you're a pharmacologist, it's if you're a pharmacologist, it's not very satisfying because that term not very satisfying because that term not very satisfying because that term really spans different pharmacological classes. spans different pharmacological classes. spans different pharmacological classes. In other words, if you're really In other words, if you're really In other words, if you're really concerned about receptor effects and the concerned about receptor effects and the concerned about receptor effects and the basic effects of a compound, it spans basic effects of a compound, it spans basic effects of a compound, it spans several com- classes of compounds. But, several com- classes of compounds. But, several com- classes of compounds. But, overall, so it's really more of a overall, so it's really more of a overall, so it's really more of a cultural term or uh cultural term or uh cultural term or uh it does have a relationship to drug it does have a relationship to drug it does have a relationship to drug effects, but it's at the at a very effects, but it's at the at a very effects, but it's at the at a very high level. So, all of the so-called high level. So, all of the so-called high level. So, all of the so-called psychedelics across these psychedelics across these psychedelics across these distinct uh classes distinct uh classes distinct uh classes that I can talk more about, um that I can talk more about, um that I can talk more about, um the way I put it is they all had the way I put it is they all had the way I put it is they all had the ability to profoundly alter one's sense ability to profoundly alter one's sense ability to profoundly alter one's sense of reality, and that can mean many of reality, and that can mean many of reality, and that can mean many things. Part of that is profoundly things. Part of that is profoundly things. Part of that is profoundly altering the sense of self, altering the sense of self, altering the sense of self, um acutely. So, when someone's on um acutely. So, when someone's on um acutely. So, when someone's on the psychedelic, um so, the different the psychedelic, um so, the different the psychedelic, um so, the different classes that can be the specific classes that can be the specific classes that can be the specific pharmacological classes that can be pharmacological classes that can be pharmacological classes that can be called a psychedelic are one that what called a psychedelic are one that what called a psychedelic are one that what are called the classic psychedelics. So, are called the classic psychedelics. So, are called the classic psychedelics. So, in the literature, you'll see that term in the literature, you'll see that term in the literature, you'll see that term and hallucinogen and psychedelic are all hallucinogen and psychedelic are all hallucinogen and psychedelic are all have traditionally been used have traditionally been used have traditionally been used synonymously. Um I think there was a little bit of a Um I think there was a little bit of a Um I think there was a little bit of a tendency to stay away from psychedelics tendency to stay away from psychedelics tendency to stay away from psychedelics of the baggage, but there's been a of the baggage, but there's been a of the baggage, but there's been a return to that in the last several years. But to that in the last several years. But to that in the last several years. But the classic psychedelics or classic the classic psychedelics or classic the classic psychedelics or classic hallucinogens are things like hallucinogens are things like hallucinogens are things like LSD, um psilocybin, which is in so-called um psilocybin, which is in so-called um psilocybin, which is in so-called magic mushrooms. It's in over 200 magic mushrooms. It's in over 200 magic mushrooms. It's in over 200 species that we know of so far of species that we know of so far of species that we know of so far of mushrooms. Uh mushrooms. Uh mushrooms. Uh dimethyltryptamine or DMT, which is in dimethyltryptamine or DMT, which is in dimethyltryptamine or DMT, which is in dozens and dozens of plants. dozens and dozens of plants. dozens and dozens of plants. Um mescaline, which is in the peyote Um mescaline, which is in the peyote Um mescaline, which is in the peyote cacti and some other cacti like San cacti and some other cacti like San cacti and some other cacti like San Pedro. And even amongst these classic Pedro. And even amongst these classic Pedro. And even amongst these classic psychedelics, um there are two structural um there are two structural um there are two structural classes. So, that's the chemistry. classes. So, that's the chemistry. classes. So, that's the chemistry. There's the tryptamine-based compounds There's the tryptamine-based compounds There's the tryptamine-based compounds like psilocybin and DMT. And then like psilocybin and DMT. And then like psilocybin and DMT. And then there's the phenethylamine-based there's the phenethylamine-based there's the phenethylamine-based compounds. So, these are the basic two compounds. So, these are the basic two compounds. So, these are the basic two basic building blocks that you're basic building blocks that you're basic building blocks that you're starting from, either a tryptamine starting from, either a tryptamine starting from, either a tryptamine structure or a phenethylamine structure. structure or a phenethylamine structure. structure or a phenethylamine structure. But that's just the chemistry. The all But that's just the chemistry. The all But that's just the chemistry. The all of the of the of the what's more important, or at least to what's more important, or at least to what's more important, or at least to someone like me, someone like me, someone like me, are the receptor effects. And then are the receptor effects. And then are the receptor effects. And then ultimately, that's going to have a ultimately, that's going to have a ultimately, that's going to have a relationship to the behavioral and relationship to the behavioral and relationship to the behavioral and subjective effects. So, all of these subjective effects. So, all of these subjective effects. So, all of these classic psychedelics serve as agonists classic psychedelics serve as agonists classic psychedelics serve as agonists or partial agonists at the serotonin 2A or partial agonists at the serotonin 2A or partial agonists at the serotonin 2A receptor, so subtype of serotonin receptor, so subtype of serotonin receptor, so subtype of serotonin receptor. Then you have these other classes of Then you have these other classes of Then you have these other classes of that you compounds that you could of that you compounds that you could of that you compounds that you could call psychedelic. call psychedelic. call psychedelic. Another big one would be the NMDA Another big one would be the NMDA Another big one would be the NMDA antagonists. So, this would include antagonists. So, this would include antagonists. So, this would include ketamine, PCP, and dextromethorphan, something PCP, and dextromethorphan, something PCP, and dextromethorphan, something I've done some research with, which I've done some research with, which I've done some research with, which folks might recognize from like folks might recognize from like folks might recognize from like robo-tripping, guzzling like, you know, robo-tripping, guzzling like, you know, robo-tripping, guzzling like, you know, uh cough syrup. A large overlap in the uh cough syrup. A large overlap in the uh cough syrup. A large overlap in the types of subjective effects that you get types of subjective effects that you get types of subjective effects that you get from those compounds compared to the 2A from those compounds compared to the 2A from those compounds compared to the 2A agonist classic psychedelics. agonist classic psychedelics. agonist classic psychedelics. Um but then you have another big one of Um but then you have another big one of Um but then you have another big one of MDMA, which really stands in a class by MDMA, which really stands in a class by MDMA, which really stands in a class by itself. So, it's been called an itself. So, it's been called an itself. So, it's been called an entactogen and uh What does that entactogen and uh What does that entactogen and uh What does that mean? It means like uh mean? It means like uh mean? It means like uh touching within. It sort of alludes the touching within. It sort of alludes the touching within. It sort of alludes the idea that it can really put someone in idea that it can really put someone in idea that it can really put someone in touch with their emotions. Um it's also touch with their emotions. Um it's also touch with their emotions. Um it's also been called an empathogen, meaning it been called an empathogen, meaning it been called an empathogen, meaning it can afford empathy. So, I get the can afford empathy. So, I get the can afford empathy. So, I get the impression that the psychedelic space is impression that the psychedelic space is impression that the psychedelic space is a enormous cloud of partially a enormous cloud of partially a enormous cloud of partially overlapping compounds. Right. Uh meaning overlapping compounds. Right. Uh meaning overlapping compounds. Right. Uh meaning some are impacting the serotonin system some are impacting the serotonin system some are impacting the serotonin system more than the dopamine system, others more than the dopamine system, others more than the dopamine system, others are impacting the dopamine system more are impacting the dopamine system more are impacting the dopamine system more than the than the serotonin system. than the than the serotonin system. than the than the serotonin system. Given that the definition of a Given that the definition of a Given that the definition of a psychedelic is that it profoundly alters psychedelic is that it profoundly alters psychedelic is that it profoundly alters sense of self, sense of self, sense of self, at least that's included as a partial at least that's included as a partial at least that's included as a partial definition. Mhm. I think of these as definition. Mhm. I think of these as definition. Mhm. I think of these as psychedelics as profoundly altering psychedelics as profoundly altering psychedelics as profoundly altering models, you know, you know, we're all models, you know, you know, we're all models, you know, you know, we're all you know, we're prediction machines and you know, we're prediction machines and you know, we're prediction machines and that's large so much of that is that's large so much of that is that's large so much of that is top-down and top-down and top-down and uh and psychedelics have a good way of psychedelics have a good way of psychedelics have a good way of you know, loosely speaking dissolving you know, loosely speaking dissolving you know, loosely speaking dissolving those models and one of if the if the models and one of if the if the models and one of if the if the reality &gt;&gt; us an example of one of like a model &gt;&gt; us an example of one of like a model &gt;&gt; us an example of one of like a model like a like I know that when like a like I know that when like a like I know that when um I throw a ball in the air, it falls down I throw a ball in the air, it falls down I throw a ball in the air, it falls down not up. This might sound extreme, but not up. This might sound extreme, but not up. This might sound extreme, but there are these cases it was over there are these cases it was over there are these cases it was over overblown and sort of the propaganda of overblown and sort of the propaganda of overblown and sort of the propaganda of the late '60s, early '70s, but the late '60s, early '70s, but the late '60s, early '70s, but there are credible cases of people and there are credible cases of people and there are credible cases of people and it's very atypical of it's very atypical of it's very atypical of sounds like they really thought they sounds like they really thought they sounds like they really thought they could fly and you know, jump out of a could fly and you know, jump out of a could fly and you know, jump out of a of a window. Now, of a window. Now, of a window. Now, far more people every year far more people every year far more people every year fall I mean, who knows, you know, they fall I mean, who knows, you know, they fall I mean, who knows, you know, they fall and die out of you know, they fall and die out of you know, they fall and die out of you know, from height because they're drunk, you from height because they're drunk, you from height because they're drunk, you know, so this is extremely rare, but you know, so this is extremely rare, but you know, so this is extremely rare, but you know, there are some like pretty know, there are some like pretty know, there are some like pretty convincing um convincing um convincing um cases. There was one research volunteer cases. There was one research volunteer cases. There was one research volunteer in our studies that uh in our studies that uh in our studies that uh it she it she it she looked like she was in one of our looked like she was in one of our looked like she was in one of our studies like she was trying to dive studies like she was trying to dive studies like she was trying to dive through a painting on the wall. She was through a painting on the wall. She was through a painting on the wall. She was fine, but she fine, but she fine, but she reviewing the video, it looked like reviewing the video, it looked like reviewing the video, it looked like she really thought that she was going to she really thought that she was going to she really thought that she was going to go through that painting and go through that painting and go through that painting and who knows? Yeah, so she was in the other who knows? Yeah, so she was in the other who knows? Yeah, so she was in the other dimension. Yeah, so they're violating dimension. Yeah, so they're violating dimension. Yeah, so they're violating these predictions. The reason I ask it these predictions. The reason I ask it these predictions. The reason I ask it the question the way I did is the question the way I did is the question the way I did is because um given the enormous cloud of because um given the enormous cloud of because um given the enormous cloud of different substances and given the range different substances and given the range different substances and given the range of previous experiences that people show up previous experiences that people show up previous experiences that people show up to a psychedelic experience with. to a psychedelic experience with. to a psychedelic experience with. Uh I feel like the ability to extract some I feel like the ability to extract some I feel like the ability to extract some universal themes is useful, universal themes is useful, universal themes is useful, especially for people who haven't done especially for people who haven't done especially for people who haven't done them before, right? Who might not have them before, right? Who might not have them before, right? Who might not have an understanding of what their effects an understanding of what their effects an understanding of what their effects are like. Can we just briefly touch on are like. Can we just briefly touch on are like. Can we just briefly touch on the serotonin system? Mhm. So, the serotonin system? Mhm. So, the serotonin system? Mhm. So, compounds like LSD, compounds like LSD, compounds like LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide, and lysergic acid diethylamide, and lysergic acid diethylamide, and psilocybin, my understanding is that they primarily my understanding is that they primarily my understanding is that they primarily target the serotonin system. target the serotonin system. target the serotonin system. How do they do that at a kind of general How do they do that at a kind of general How do they do that at a kind of general level? And why would increasing the level? And why would increasing the level? And why would increasing the activity of a particular serotonin activity of a particular serotonin activity of a particular serotonin receptor or batch of serotonin receptors receptor or batch of serotonin receptors receptor or batch of serotonin receptors lead to these profoundly different lead to these profoundly different lead to these profoundly different experiences that we're calling um experiences that we're calling um experiences that we're calling um model challenges, challenging model challenges, challenging model challenges, challenging pre-existing models and predictions. I pre-existing models and predictions. I pre-existing models and predictions. I mean, at the end of the day, it's a chemical at the end of the day, it's a chemical at the end of the day, it's a chemical and these receptors are scattered around and these receptors are scattered around and these receptors are scattered around the brain with billions of other the brain with billions of other the brain with billions of other receptors. Yeah. receptors. Yeah. receptors. Yeah. Uh what do we think is going on in a Uh what do we think is going on in a Uh what do we think is going on in a general sense? Yeah, yeah, and this is general sense? Yeah, yeah, and this is general sense? Yeah, yeah, and this is really the area of active exploration really the area of active exploration really the area of active exploration and we don't have great answers. We know and we don't have great answers. We know and we don't have great answers. We know a good amount about the receptor level a good amount about the receptor level a good amount about the receptor level pharmacology, Some things about post pharmacology, Some things about post pharmacology, Some things about post receptor signaling pathways. In other receptor signaling pathways. In other receptor signaling pathways. In other words, just fitting into the receptor, words, just fitting into the receptor, words, just fitting into the receptor, clearly, you know, serotonin itself is clearly, you know, serotonin itself is clearly, you know, serotonin itself is not psychedelic, you know, or else we'd not psychedelic, you know, or else we'd not psychedelic, you know, or else we'd be tripping all of us all the time. Cuz be tripping all of us all the time. Cuz be tripping all of us all the time. Cuz when I eat a bagel, I get serotonin when I eat a bagel, I get serotonin when I eat a bagel, I get serotonin release, right? release, right? release, right? &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; I mean, there's &gt;&gt; I mean, there's &gt;&gt; I mean, there's or turkey, I mean, there's tryptophan, or turkey, I mean, there's tryptophan, or turkey, I mean, there's tryptophan, right? Mhm. My understanding of right? Mhm. My understanding of right? Mhm. My understanding of serotonin is that in very broad serotonin is that in very broad serotonin is that in very broad strokes, that it generally leads to a strokes, that it generally leads to a strokes, that it generally leads to a state of being fairly it pushes the mind state of being fairly it pushes the mind state of being fairly it pushes the mind and body towards a state of contentment and body towards a state of contentment and body towards a state of contentment within the immediate experience. Whereas within the immediate experience. Whereas within the immediate experience. Whereas the dopamine system really places us the dopamine system really places us the dopamine system really places us into an external view of what's out into an external view of what's out into an external view of what's out there in the world and what's possible. there in the world and what's possible. there in the world and what's possible. Yeah. Is that fair? Yeah. Is that fair? Yeah. Is that fair? &gt;&gt; something. I mean, that's consistent &gt;&gt; something. I mean, that's consistent &gt;&gt; something. I mean, that's consistent with my understanding. And with my understanding. And with my understanding. And and I'll certainly not in terms of I and I'll certainly not in terms of I and I'll certainly not in terms of I don't primarily identify as a don't primarily identify as a don't primarily identify as a neuroscientist. I'll definitely tell neuroscientist. I'll definitely tell neuroscientist. I'll definitely tell the, you know, the viewers that we're the, you know, the viewers that we're the, you know, the viewers that we're here far more neuro domain here than mine, far more neuro domain here than mine, far more neuro domain here than mine, but in terms of how psychedelics and but in terms of how psychedelics and but in terms of how psychedelics and other drugs, you know, interface at the other drugs, you know, interface at the other drugs, you know, interface at the at the neuroscience level. at the neuroscience level. at the neuroscience level. &gt;&gt; free to explain it at the &gt;&gt; free to explain it at the &gt;&gt; free to explain it at the experiential level. Yeah. experiential level. Yeah. experiential level. Yeah. &gt;&gt; it doesn't have Let's say I were to come &gt;&gt; it doesn't have Let's say I were to come &gt;&gt; it doesn't have Let's say I were to come to one of your clinical trials, cuz to one of your clinical trials, cuz to one of your clinical trials, cuz these are clinical trials, right? And in these are clinical trials, right? And in these are clinical trials, right? And in your at your lab at Hopkins. your at your lab at Hopkins. your at your lab at Hopkins. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And uh would I need to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. And uh would I need to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. And uh would I need to be depressed or could I just be somebody depressed or could I just be somebody depressed or could I just be somebody who wanted to explore psychedelics? It who wanted to explore psychedelics? It who wanted to explore psychedelics? It we've had studies for we've had studies for we've had studies for all of these. And and a number of other all of these. And and a number of other all of these. And and a number of other disorders. So, healthy normal studies, disorders. So, healthy normal studies, disorders. So, healthy normal studies, the code for the code for the code for not a problem to fix, but we're all not a problem to fix, but we're all not a problem to fix, but we're all here. That's what's amazing about here. That's what's amazing about here. That's what's amazing about psychedelics though, because you if you psychedelics though, because you if you psychedelics though, because you if you administer them under this model and you administer them under this model and you administer them under this model and you develop a relationship and give a high develop a relationship and give a high develop a relationship and give a high dose of psychedelic, you could be dose of psychedelic, you could be dose of psychedelic, you could be healthy normal without a diagnosable healthy normal without a diagnosable healthy normal without a diagnosable issue, but man, issue, but man, issue, but man, we're all human and the issues seem to we're all human and the issues seem to we're all human and the issues seem to come to the surface. So, but we've done come to the surface. So, but we've done come to the surface. So, but we've done work with smoking cessation, so people work with smoking cessation, so people work with smoking cessation, so people trying to quit tobacco and haven't been trying to quit tobacco and haven't been trying to quit tobacco and haven't been successful. &gt;&gt; of reasons. So, maybe I'll just ask some &gt;&gt; of reasons. So, maybe I'll just ask some &gt;&gt; of reasons. So, maybe I'll just ask some very simple questions that will very simple questions that will very simple questions that will kind of step us through the process. So, kind of step us through the process. So, kind of step us through the process. So, let's say I were to sign up for one of let's say I were to sign up for one of let's say I were to sign up for one of these trials and I qualified for one these trials and I qualified for one these trials and I qualified for one of these trials, I'd show up. You said I of these trials, I'd show up. You said I of these trials, I'd show up. You said I would do several hours in advance of would do several hours in advance of would do several hours in advance of getting to know the team that would getting to know the team that would getting to know the team that would that would be present during this that would be present during this that would be present during this psychedelic journey. First there's psychedelic journey. First there's psychedelic journey. First there's screening, so it's kind of like a couple screening, so it's kind of like a couple screening, so it's kind of like a couple of days of both psychiatric like of days of both psychiatric like of days of both psychiatric like structured psychiatric interviews about structured psychiatric interviews about structured psychiatric interviews about your whole your past and symptoms across your whole your past and symptoms across your whole your past and symptoms across the DSM, the psychiatric Bible, to see if DSM, the psychiatric Bible, to see if DSM, the psychiatric Bible, to see if you might have various disorders that you might have various disorders that you might have various disorders that could disqualify you. Like the that could disqualify you. Like the that could disqualify you. Like the main ones being the psychotic disorders, main ones being the psychotic disorders, main ones being the psychotic disorders, schizophrenia and also including schizophrenia and also including schizophrenia and also including bipolar. So, the manic side of bipolar. So, the manic side of bipolar. So, the manic side of bipolar. So, so after that's in also bipolar. So, so after that's in also bipolar. So, so after that's in also cardiovascular screening, heart disease. cardiovascular screening, heart disease. cardiovascular screening, heart disease. After that screening, then the After that screening, then the After that screening, then the preparation where you get you're both preparation where you get you're both preparation where you get you're both you get you develop a therapeutic you get you develop a therapeutic you get you develop a therapeutic rapport with the people who are going to rapport with the people who are going to rapport with the people who are going to be in the room with you, your guides. be in the room with you, your guides. be in the room with you, your guides. But, you're also then didactically sort But, you're also then didactically sort But, you're also then didactically sort of explained about what the psychedelic of explained about what the psychedelic of explained about what the psychedelic could be like. And that's kind of a could be like. And that's kind of a could be like. And that's kind of a laundry list because they're more known laundry list because they're more known laundry list because they're more known by their variability. by their variability. by their variability. You could have the most beautiful You could have the most beautiful You could have the most beautiful experience of your life or the most experience of your life or the most experience of your life or the most terrifying experience of your life. So, terrifying experience of your life. So, terrifying experience of your life. So, it's just kind of laundry list of like it's just kind of laundry list of like it's just kind of laundry list of like the things that could happen so there's the things that could happen so there's the things that could happen so there's no surprises. no surprises. no surprises. I think that's so important for people I think that's so important for people I think that's so important for people to hear because you really can't predict to hear because you really can't predict to hear because you really can't predict how somebody is going to react how somebody is going to react how somebody is going to react internally. Let's say that somebody internally. Let's say that somebody internally. Let's say that somebody passes all the prerequisites passes all the prerequisites passes all the prerequisites and that and it's the day comes the day and that and it's the day comes the day and that and it's the day comes the day that they're going to have this that they're going to have this that they're going to have this experience. Are they eating mushrooms experience. Are they eating mushrooms experience. Are they eating mushrooms like you hear about or are they taking it in you hear about or are they taking it in you hear about or are they taking it in capsule form and how do they get it into capsule form and how do they get it into capsule form and how do they get it into their body? their body? their body? &gt;&gt; So, they receive pure psilocybin. Most &gt;&gt; So, they receive pure psilocybin. Most &gt;&gt; So, they receive pure psilocybin. Most of our studies are looking at where we of our studies are looking at where we of our studies are looking at where we want a psychedelic effect or in the we want a psychedelic effect or in the we want a psychedelic effect or in the 20 to 30 mg 20 to 30 mg 20 to 30 mg range. The session day itself is not range. The session day itself is not range. The session day itself is not full of full of full of for most of our studies is not full of for most of our studies is not full of for most of our studies is not full of task. We really want to look at the task. We really want to look at the task. We really want to look at the therapeutic response. Obviously, if it's therapeutic response. Obviously, if it's therapeutic response. Obviously, if it's a therapeutic study, we want it to be a therapeutic study, we want it to be a therapeutic study, we want it to be a meaningful experience and uh research meaningful experience and uh research meaningful experience and uh research has found, not surprisingly, that you has found, not surprisingly, that you has found, not surprisingly, that you get a less meaningful experience when get a less meaningful experience when get a less meaningful experience when you're in an fMRI Right. or when you're in an fMRI Right. or when you're in an fMRI Right. or when you're doing a lot of cognitive tasks. So, our doing a lot of cognitive tasks. So, our doing a lot of cognitive tasks. So, our typical therapeutic model, which again typical therapeutic model, which again typical therapeutic model, which again isn't just limited necessarily to the isn't just limited necessarily to the isn't just limited necessarily to the therapeutic studies where we're trying therapeutic studies where we're trying therapeutic studies where we're trying to treat a specific disorder, um it to treat a specific disorder, um it to treat a specific disorder, um it is to you know, have that is to you know, have that is to you know, have that preparation, so you know, the person preparation, so you know, the person preparation, so you know, the person feels very comfortable with their feels very comfortable with their feels very comfortable with their guides. Um uh I mean, ultimately, what I guides. Um uh I mean, ultimately, what I guides. Um uh I mean, ultimately, what I tell people is like tell people is like tell people is like any emotional response, it's all any emotional response, it's all any emotional response, it's all welcome. I mean, welcome. I mean, welcome. I mean, you could you could be crying like a you could you could be crying like a you could you could be crying like a baby hysterically. Like, that's what you baby hysterically. Like, that's what you baby hysterically. Like, that's what you should be doing if that's what you feel should be doing if that's what you feel should be doing if that's what you feel like. &gt;&gt; I mean, you're doing therapy for people. &gt;&gt; I mean, you're doing therapy for people. &gt;&gt; I mean, you're doing therapy for people. This is it's not just about the This is it's not just about the This is it's not just about the experience. Right. And the experience experience. Right. And the experience experience. Right. And the experience itself is very much shaped by that itself is very much shaped by that itself is very much shaped by that container, by the environment, and that container, by the environment, and that container, by the environment, and the degree to which one allows it to the degree to which one allows it to the degree to which one allows it to happen. Like, one should let go of happen. Like, one should let go of happen. Like, one should let go of control. The letting go of control is an control. The letting go of control is an control. The letting go of control is an interesting feature, actually, because interesting feature, actually, because interesting feature, actually, because one of the common themes of good one of the common themes of good one of the common themes of good psychoanalysis is or psychotherapy of psychoanalysis is or psychotherapy of psychoanalysis is or psychotherapy of any kind is that there's a trust built any kind is that there's a trust built any kind is that there's a trust built between the patient and the analyst, and between the patient and the analyst, and between the patient and the analyst, and that relationship becomes a template for that relationship becomes a template for that relationship becomes a template for trust more generally and trust in trust more generally and trust in trust more generally and trust in oneself. How do you convince people to oneself. How do you convince people to oneself. How do you convince people to go further and further down that path? go further and further down that path? go further and further down that path? What do you think allows them to do What do you think allows them to do What do you think allows them to do that? Because I think that to me is that? Because I think that to me is that? Because I think that to me is one of the more unusual uh aspects to one of the more unusual uh aspects to one of the more unusual uh aspects to psychedelics is that normally the psychedelics is that normally the psychedelics is that normally the social pressure, but also just our social pressure, but also just our social pressure, but also just our internal pressure from our own brain is internal pressure from our own brain is internal pressure from our own brain is pay attention to many things at once, pay attention to many things at once, pay attention to many things at once, not just one. not just one. not just one. Is that Is that Is that &gt;&gt; Especially these days. Yeah, multitask. &gt;&gt; Especially these days. Yeah, multitask. &gt;&gt; Especially these days. Yeah, multitask. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Multitask, and the more that we focus on &gt;&gt; Multitask, and the more that we focus on &gt;&gt; Multitask, and the more that we focus on one thing, the more bizarre that thing one thing, the more bizarre that thing one thing, the more bizarre that thing actually can appear to us, right? actually can appear to us, right? actually can appear to us, right? &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; even if it's the tip of your finger and &gt;&gt; even if it's the tip of your finger and &gt;&gt; even if it's the tip of your finger and you're not taking any psychedelics, you you're not taking any psychedelics, you you're not taking any psychedelics, you spend a long enough looking at the tip spend a long enough looking at the tip spend a long enough looking at the tip of your finger, you will notice some of your finger, you will notice some of your finger, you will notice some very weird things, right? very weird things, right? very weird things, right? That I think of that as the classic That I think of that as the classic That I think of that as the classic psychedelic effect that or psychedelic effect that or psychedelic effect that or one classic effect and one I've used one classic effect and one I've used one classic effect and one I've used many times of many times of many times of this example of why people shouldn't this example of why people shouldn't this example of why people shouldn't necessarily, you know, necessarily, you know, necessarily, you know, these aren't these one should be these aren't these one should be these aren't these one should be judicious in putting themselves in these judicious in putting themselves in these judicious in putting themselves in these circumstances. Someone could be, you circumstances. Someone could be, you circumstances. Someone could be, you know, having a very strong psilocybin having a very strong psilocybin having a very strong psilocybin experience and they're trying to experience and they're trying to experience and they're trying to navigate their way in Manhattan, navigate their way in Manhattan, navigate their way in Manhattan, crossing the street and they might be crossing the street and they might be crossing the street and they might be staring into the hand and real like staring into the hand and real like staring into the hand and real like that's their hand is the most amazing miracle. their hand is the most amazing miracle. their hand is the most amazing miracle. Like the entire universe has essentially Like the entire universe has essentially Like the entire universe has essentially conspired to come to this one point to conspired to come to this one point to conspired to come to this one point to make this absolutely breathtaking. It's make this absolutely breathtaking. It's make this absolutely breathtaking. It's almost like I think of the simplest form almost like I think of the simplest form almost like I think of the simplest form of well, we know the simplest form of well, we know the simplest form of well, we know the simplest form of learning is habituation. Simply keep of learning is habituation. Simply keep of learning is habituation. Simply keep applying stimuli and there's less applying stimuli and there's less applying stimuli and there's less response. Like response. Like response. Like this is what organisms do. This is what this is what organisms do. This is what this is what organisms do. This is what we have to do and it's like there's this we have to do and it's like there's this we have to do and it's like there's this dishabituation component that like dishabituation component that like dishabituation component that like &gt;&gt; dishabituation &gt;&gt; dishabituation &gt;&gt; dishabituation &gt;&gt; Yes, like we wouldn't be able to get &gt;&gt; Yes, like we wouldn't be able to get &gt;&gt; Yes, like we wouldn't be able to get through life if we wouldn't be able to through life if we wouldn't be able to through life if we wouldn't be able to cross that street if we were like whole cross that street if we were like whole cross that street if we were like whole like this is a miracle. It sounds like this is a miracle. It sounds like this is a miracle. It sounds like on psychedelics the one of the primary on psychedelics the one of the primary on psychedelics the one of the primary goals therapeutically is to really drill goals therapeutically is to really drill goals therapeutically is to really drill into one of these perceptual bubbles and into one of these perceptual bubbles and into one of these perceptual bubbles and expand that bubble and the safety seems expand that bubble and the safety seems expand that bubble and the safety seems is the safety it's sort of like a is the safety it's sort of like a is the safety it's sort of like a permission to do that without permission to do that without permission to do that without worrying that something's going to worrying that something's going to worrying that something's going to happen. Right, because, you know, I've happen. Right, because, you know, I've happen. Right, because, you know, I've had people there on the couch. had people there on the couch. had people there on the couch. Um Yeah, I remember one lady said this is Yeah, I remember one lady said this is Yeah, I remember one lady said this is probably uh 13, 14 years ago, said, probably uh 13, 14 years ago, said, probably uh 13, 14 years ago, said, "Matt, tell me again I can't die. Like I "Matt, tell me again I can't die. Like I "Matt, tell me again I can't die. Like I feel like my heart is going to rip feel like my heart is going to rip feel like my heart is going to rip through my chest." I mean, she was through my chest." I mean, she was through my chest." I mean, she was feeling her And I should say feeling her And I should say feeling her And I should say typically cardiovascular response is typically cardiovascular response is typically cardiovascular response is modest. The the pulse and blood pressure modest. The the pulse and blood pressure modest. The the pulse and blood pressure go up. And if it goes over certain go up. And if it goes over certain go up. And if it goes over certain level, we have a protocol. We've had to level, we have a protocol. We've had to level, we have a protocol. We've had to do this only a few times, but the do this only a few times, but the do this only a few times, but the physician comes in, gives them a little physician comes in, gives them a little physician comes in, gives them a little nitroglycerin under the tongue and you nitroglycerin under the tongue and you nitroglycerin under the tongue and you know, knocks the blood pressure down a know, knocks the blood pressure down a know, knocks the blood pressure down a little bit, doesn't affect the little bit, doesn't affect the little bit, doesn't affect the experience. So, we have it all in place experience. So, we have it all in place experience. So, we have it all in place even though they'd probably be fine out even though they'd probably be fine out even though they'd probably be fine out of an abundance of caution. of an abundance of caution. of an abundance of caution. &gt;&gt; Sure. Um but yeah, but someone can &gt;&gt; Sure. Um but yeah, but someone can &gt;&gt; Sure. Um but yeah, but someone can feel that my god, I'm going to die. Like I that my god, I'm going to die. Like I that my god, I'm going to die. Like I have never felt my heart have never felt my heart have never felt my heart beat like this before. So, there's a an beat like this before. So, there's a an beat like this before. So, there's a an expansion of a particular fairly narrow expansion of a particular fairly narrow expansion of a particular fairly narrow percept. It could be sound, could be an percept. It could be sound, could be an percept. It could be sound, could be an emotion, could be sadness, could be a emotion, could be sadness, could be a emotion, could be sadness, could be a historical event or a fear of the historical event or a fear of the historical event or a fear of the future. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. And you've mentioned before that And you've mentioned before that And you've mentioned before that there's something to be learned in that there's something to be learned in that there's something to be learned in that experience. Yeah. There's something experience. Yeah. There's something experience. Yeah. There's something about going into that experience in a in about going into that experience in a in about going into that experience in a in an un an un an un um in an in an in an in an undeterred way that allows in an undeterred way that allows in an undeterred way that allows somebody to bring something back into somebody to bring something back into somebody to bring something back into more standard reality. Yeah. Given the more standard reality. Yeah. Given the more standard reality. Yeah. Given the huge variety of experiences that people huge variety of experiences that people huge variety of experiences that people have on psychedelics, given the huge have on psychedelics, given the huge have on psychedelics, given the huge variety of humans that are out there, variety of humans that are out there, variety of humans that are out there, but what are now very clear therapeutic but what are now very clear therapeutic but what are now very clear therapeutic effects in the realm of depression, effects in the realm of depression, effects in the realm of depression, what do you think is the value of going what do you think is the value of going what do you think is the value of going into this into this into this fairly restricted perceptual bubble, fairly restricted perceptual bubble, fairly restricted perceptual bubble, what we are calling letting go or giving what we are calling letting go or giving what we are calling letting go or giving up control? Because if the experiences up control? Because if the experiences up control? Because if the experiences are many, but the value of what one are many, but the value of what one are many, but the value of what one exports from that experience is kind of exports from that experience is kind of exports from that experience is kind of similar across individuals, similar across individuals, similar across individuals, &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. that raises all sorts of interesting that raises all sorts of interesting that raises all sorts of interesting questions, and this is not a questions, and this is not a questions, and this is not a philosophy discussion. We're talking philosophy discussion. We're talking philosophy discussion. We're talking about biology and psychology here. about biology and psychology here. about biology and psychology here. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, what are your thoughts on &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, what are your thoughts on &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, what are your thoughts on that? This is in the terrain we're figuring This is in the terrain we're figuring This is in the terrain we're figuring out, you know, so there's no educated out, you know, so there's no educated out, you know, so there's no educated speculation is the best I can provide, speculation is the best I can provide, speculation is the best I can provide, but I think the best the I think the best the I think the best the most the most the most I think the common denominator I think the common denominator I think the common denominator are persisting changes in are persisting changes in are persisting changes in self-representation. Okay. Tell me more about Okay. Tell me more about Okay. Tell me more about self-representation. &gt;&gt; That's uh &gt;&gt; That's uh &gt;&gt; That's uh the way one holds the sense of self, the way one holds the sense of self, the way one holds the sense of self, the relate the fundamental relationship the relate the fundamental relationship the relate the fundamental relationship of a person in the world. I mentioned of a person in the world. I mentioned of a person in the world. I mentioned earlier that these experience seems to earlier that these experience seems to earlier that these experience seems to alter the models we hold of reality. And alter the models we hold of reality. And alter the models we hold of reality. And I think if the self is the biggest I think if the self is the biggest I think if the self is the biggest model, that I am a thing that's separate model, that I am a thing that's separate model, that I am a thing that's separate from other things. And from other things. And from other things. And that's I am defined by certain I have a certain I am defined by certain I have a certain I am defined by certain I have a certain personality and I I'm a smoker that's personality and I I'm a smoker that's personality and I I'm a smoker that's having a hard time quitting or I'm a having a hard time quitting or I'm a having a hard time quitting or I'm a depressed person that depressed person that depressed person that you know, views myself as a failure and you know, views myself as a failure and you know, views myself as a failure and all of these things. Those are models, all of these things. Those are models, all of these things. Those are models, too. So this is this innovation of the too. So this is this innovation of the too. So this is this innovation of the perceptual bubble. A narrow a narrow uh perceptual bubble. A narrow a narrow uh perceptual bubble. A narrow a narrow uh percept that then grows within the percept that then grows within the percept that then grows within the confines of that narrow percept. Yeah. confines of that narrow percept. Yeah. confines of that narrow percept. Yeah. &gt;&gt; The So sense of self is a very &gt;&gt; The So sense of self is a very &gt;&gt; The So sense of self is a very interesting uh phenomenon. And if we interesting uh phenomenon. And if we interesting uh phenomenon. And if we could dissect it a little bit, um could dissect it a little bit, um could dissect it a little bit, um there's the somatic sense of self. So there's the somatic sense of self. So there's the somatic sense of self. So the ability to literally feel the self. the ability to literally feel the self. the ability to literally feel the self. Uh in this process we call Uh in this process we call Uh in this process we call interoception. And then there's the interoception. And then there's the interoception. And then there's the title of the self, the I am blank. the title of the self, the I am blank. the title of the self, the I am blank. Yeah. And I noticed you said that Yeah. And I noticed you said that Yeah. And I noticed you said that several times and it's intriguing to me several times and it's intriguing to me several times and it's intriguing to me how one how one how one defines themselves defines themselves defines themselves internally. Not just to other people, but how a one Not just to other people, but how a one Not just to other people, but how a one psychologically and by default in uh psychologically and by default in uh psychologically and by default in uh defines themselves, I think is a very defines themselves, I think is a very defines themselves, I think is a very powerful. Like um in depressed people powerful. Like um in depressed people powerful. Like um in depressed people as well as happy people seem to define as well as happy people seem to define as well as happy people seem to define themselves in terms of these categories themselves in terms of these categories themselves in terms of these categories of emotional states. So I think it of emotional states. So I think it of emotional states. So I think it it's so interesting that it's so interesting that it's so interesting that letting go and going into this letting go and going into this letting go and going into this perceptual bubble, which is facilitated perceptual bubble, which is facilitated perceptual bubble, which is facilitated by obviously a really wonderful team of by obviously a really wonderful team of by obviously a really wonderful team of therapists, but also the serotonergic of therapists, but also the serotonergic of therapists, but also the serotonergic agent Yeah. allows us to um potentially agent Yeah. allows us to um potentially agent Yeah. allows us to um potentially reshape the perception of self. That's reshape the perception of self. That's reshape the perception of self. That's that's a tremendous feat of that's a tremendous feat of that's a tremendous feat of neuroplasticity. Right. I think there's neuroplasticity. Right. I think there's neuroplasticity. Right. I think there's something about this change in sense something about this change in sense something about this change in sense of self. There is it seems to be of self. There is it seems to be of self. There is it seems to be something on the identity level, both something on the identity level, both something on the identity level, both with I think of the work we did with I think of the work we did with I think of the work we did with cancer patients who had substantial cancer patients who had substantial cancer patients who had substantial depression anxiety because of their depression anxiety because of their depression anxiety because of their cancer. And also our work with people cancer. And also our work with people cancer. And also our work with people trying to quit cigarette smoking. I trying to quit cigarette smoking. I trying to quit cigarette smoking. I mean, there's this mean, there's this mean, there's this real There seems to be when it really real There seems to be when it really real There seems to be when it really works this change in how people works this change in how people works this change in how people view themselves. Like with smoking, like view themselves. Like with smoking, like view themselves. Like with smoking, like really stepping out of this model like really stepping out of this model like really stepping out of this model like I'm a smoker. It's tough to quit smoking I'm a smoker. It's tough to quit smoking I'm a smoker. It's tough to quit smoking cigarettes. I can't do it. I failed a cigarettes. I can't do it. I failed a cigarettes. I can't do it. I failed a bunch of times. I remember one bunch of times. I remember one bunch of times. I remember one participant during the session, but he participant during the session, but he participant during the session, but he held onto this afterwards said, "My god, held onto this afterwards said, "My god, held onto this afterwards said, "My god, it's like it's like it's like I can really just decide." I can really just decide." I can really just decide." Like flicking off a butt, I can decide Like flicking off a butt, I can decide Like flicking off a butt, I can decide not to smoke. And it's I call these duh not to smoke. And it's I call these duh not to smoke. And it's I call these duh experiences with psychedelics cuz people experiences with psychedelics cuz people experiences with psychedelics cuz people often like in the Kansas City you say, often like in the Kansas City you say, often like in the Kansas City you say, "I'm causing most of my own suffering. "I'm causing most of my own suffering. "I'm causing most of my own suffering. Like I can I can follow my appointments. Like I can I can follow my appointments. Like I can I can follow my appointments. I can do everything, but I can still I can do everything, but I can still I can do everything, but I can still plan for the vaca- I'm not getting plan for the vaca- I'm not getting plan for the vaca- I'm not getting outside in the sunshine. I'm not playing outside in the sunshine. I'm not playing outside in the sunshine. I'm not playing with my grandkids. I'm choosing to do with my grandkids. I'm choosing to do with my grandkids. I'm choosing to do that." And it's like they told that." And it's like they told that." And it's like they told themselves that before. And the smoker themselves that before. And the smoker themselves that before. And the smoker has told themselves a million times, has told themselves a million times, has told themselves a million times, "I can ch- And it So it sounds when it "I can ch- And it So it sounds when it "I can ch- And it So it sounds when it comes out of their mouths, and you folks comes out of their mouths, and you folks comes out of their mouths, and you folks will say this is part of the will say this is part of the will say this is part of the ineffability of a psychedelic ineffability of a psychedelic ineffability of a psychedelic experience. Folks say, "I know this experience. Folks say, "I know this experience. Folks say, "I know this sounds like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and this sounds like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and this sounds like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and this sounds like but my god, I could just decide." like but my god, I could just decide." like but my god, I could just decide." Like they're feeling this gravity of Like they're feeling this gravity of Like they're feeling this gravity of agency that seems to be at times agency that seems to be at times agency that seems to be at times fundamentally like supercharged from a fundamentally like supercharged from a fundamentally like supercharged from a psychedelic experience. This idea like psychedelic experience. This idea like psychedelic experience. This idea like I'm just going to make a decision. I'm just going to make a decision. I'm just going to make a decision. Like normally like you tell a depressed Like normally like you tell a depressed Like normally like you tell a depressed person like don't think of person like don't think of person like don't think of yourself that way. You're not a failure. yourself that way. You're not a failure. yourself that way. You're not a failure. It's Yeah, it's like and but you can It's Yeah, it's like and but you can It's Yeah, it's like and but you can actually in one of these states have an actually in one of these states have an actually in one of these states have an experience where you realize like, "My experience where you realize like, "My experience where you realize like, "My god." Just like using MDMA to treat PTSD god." Just like using MDMA to treat PTSD god." Just like using MDMA to treat PTSD and we're going to be starting work with and we're going to be starting work with and we're going to be starting work with psilocybin to treat PTSD, someone could psilocybin to treat PTSD, someone could psilocybin to treat PTSD, someone could really reprocess their trauma really reprocess their trauma really reprocess their trauma in a way that like has lasting effects in a way that like has lasting effects in a way that like has lasting effects and clearly there's probably something and clearly there's probably something and clearly there's probably something you know, reconsolidation of those you know, reconsolidation of those you know, reconsolidation of those memories. They are they are memories. They are they are memories. They are they are they are altered, you know, very they are altered, you know, very they are altered, you know, very consistent with what the our consistent with what the our consistent with what the our understanding of the way memory works. understanding of the way memory works. understanding of the way memory works. So, the whole idea people can actually So, the whole idea people can actually So, the whole idea people can actually in a few hours have a such a profound in a few hours have a such a profound in a few hours have a such a profound experience that they decide to make experience that they decide to make experience that they decide to make these changes in who they are and it these changes in who they are and it these changes in who they are and it sticks. I'm fascinated by this idea that sticks. I'm fascinated by this idea that sticks. I'm fascinated by this idea that a somatic and a perceptual experience, a somatic and a perceptual experience, a somatic and a perceptual experience, but a real experience of the sort that but a real experience of the sort that but a real experience of the sort that you're describing Yeah. is what allows you're describing Yeah. is what allows you're describing Yeah. is what allows us to reshape our neural circuitry and us to reshape our neural circuitry and us to reshape our neural circuitry and to feel differently about ourselves. And to feel differently about ourselves. And to feel differently about ourselves. And uh I know there's been um really uh I know there's been um really uh I know there's been um really tremendous success in many individuals tremendous success in many individuals tremendous success in many individuals of alleviating depression, Mhm. treating of alleviating depression, Mhm. treating of alleviating depression, Mhm. treating trauma with these different compounds. trauma with these different compounds. trauma with these different compounds. If we could, I'd like to just ask about If we could, I'd like to just ask about If we could, I'd like to just ask about some of the more dopaminergic compounds. some of the more dopaminergic compounds. some of the more dopaminergic compounds. In particular, MDMA. Yeah. And my In particular, MDMA. Yeah. And my In particular, MDMA. Yeah. And my understanding is that MDMA understanding is that MDMA understanding is that MDMA leads to very robust increases in both leads to very robust increases in both leads to very robust increases in both dopamine and serotonin simultaneously. dopamine and serotonin simultaneously. dopamine and serotonin simultaneously. So, why would it be So, why would it be So, why would it be that having this that having this that having this uh increased dopamine and increased uh increased dopamine and increased uh increased dopamine and increased serotonin would provide an experience serotonin would provide an experience serotonin would provide an experience that is beneficial? And how do you to that is beneficial? And how do you to that is beneficial? And how do you to the extent that you can describe it, how the extent that you can describe it, how the extent that you can describe it, how do you think that experience differs do you think that experience differs do you think that experience differs from the sorts of experiences that from the sorts of experiences that from the sorts of experiences that people have on psilocybin or more people have on psilocybin or more people have on psilocybin or more serotonergic agents? Speculating, but it serotonergic agents? Speculating, but it serotonergic agents? Speculating, but it may be that MDMA for a broader number of may be that MDMA for a broader number of may be that MDMA for a broader number of people is better for trauma because the is better for trauma because the is better for trauma because the chances of having an extremely chances of having an extremely chances of having an extremely challenging experience, what I call the challenging experience, what I call the challenging experience, what I call the bad trip, bad trip, bad trip, like really freaking out, is much lower like really freaking out, is much lower like really freaking out, is much lower with MDMA. People can have bad trips, with MDMA. People can have bad trips, with MDMA. People can have bad trips, but they're of a different nature. Well, but they're of a different nature. Well, but they're of a different nature. Well, what is the It's not sort of like what is the It's not sort of like what is the It's not sort of like freaking out because all of reality is freaking out because all of reality is freaking out because all of reality is sort of shattering. And it's less of sort of shattering. And it's less of sort of shattering. And it's less of this It can take so many forms with the this It can take so many forms with the this It can take so many forms with the classic psychedelics, but like classic psychedelics, but like classic psychedelics, but like typically you'll hear something typically you'll hear something typically you'll hear something like I didn't know it was going to be like I didn't know it was going to be like I didn't know it was going to be like this. No matter how hard you tried like this. No matter how hard you tried like this. No matter how hard you tried to prepare them that like this is like to prepare them that like this is like to prepare them that like this is like get me off this ride. get me off this ride. get me off this ride. &gt;&gt; about LSD or psilocybin? &gt;&gt; about LSD or psilocybin? &gt;&gt; about LSD or psilocybin? &gt;&gt; LSD, psilocybin. I watched uh Yeah. &gt;&gt; LSD, psilocybin. I watched uh Yeah. &gt;&gt; LSD, psilocybin. I watched uh Yeah. Yeah, and just this sense of like I'm Yeah, and just this sense of like I'm Yeah, and just this sense of like I'm going insane. This is so far beyond going insane. This is so far beyond going insane. This is so far beyond anything I've ever experienced and it's anything I've ever experienced and it's anything I've ever experienced and it's scaring the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of me. scaring the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of me. scaring the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of me. How often do How often do How often do &gt;&gt; have a toehold on anything, even that I &gt;&gt; have a toehold on anything, even that I &gt;&gt; have a toehold on anything, even that I exist as a as an entity and that exist as a as an entity and that exist as a as an entity and that can be really I think frankly can be really I think frankly can be really I think frankly experientially that's kind of the experientially that's kind of the experientially that's kind of the gateway to both gateway to both gateway to both the transcendental mystical experiences the transcendental mystical experiences the transcendental mystical experiences the sense the sense the sense uh of unity with all things which we uh of unity with all things which we uh of unity with all things which we know our data suggests is related know our data suggests is related know our data suggests is related um to long-term positive outcomes. um to long-term positive outcomes. um to long-term positive outcomes. &gt;&gt; Wait, I want to make sure I understand. &gt;&gt; Wait, I want to make sure I understand. &gt;&gt; Wait, I want to make sure I understand. So, you're saying the bad trip can be So, you're saying the bad trip can be So, you're saying the bad trip can be related to the transcendental related to the transcendental related to the transcendental experience? &gt;&gt; Right, I think those are both &gt;&gt; Right, I think those are both &gt;&gt; Right, I think those are both speculating, but you have to pass speculating, but you have to pass speculating, but you have to pass through this sort of like through this sort of like through this sort of like you know, reality shattering including you know, reality shattering including you know, reality shattering including your sense of self and one can handle your sense of self and one can handle your sense of self and one can handle that in one of two ways. You can either that in one of two ways. You can either that in one of two ways. You can either completely surrender to it or you can completely surrender to it or you can completely surrender to it or you can try to hang on and if you try to hang on try to hang on and if you try to hang on try to hang on and if you try to hang on it's going to be more like a bad trip. it's going to be more like a bad trip. it's going to be more like a bad trip. So, again, I wish there was more and So, again, I wish there was more and So, again, I wish there was more and hopefully there will be more hopefully there will be more hopefully there will be more experimentation. There's a lot going on experimentation. There's a lot going on experimentation. There's a lot going on here in the black box in terms of the here in the black box in terms of the here in the black box in terms of the operant behavior of how you are operant behavior of how you are operant behavior of how you are you know, within yourself choosing to you know, within yourself choosing to you know, within yourself choosing to handle like letting go, you know, and handle like letting go, you know, and handle like letting go, you know, and eventually we'll be able to see this in eventually we'll be able to see this in eventually we'll be able to see this in real time with brain imaging. Ah, there real time with brain imaging. Ah, there real time with brain imaging. Ah, there they are surrendering to the psychedelic they are surrendering to the psychedelic they are surrendering to the psychedelic experience. Here they are trying to hold experience. Here they are trying to hold experience. Here they are trying to hold on, but we we're not there yet, but I on, but we we're not there yet, but I on, but we we're not there yet, but I think it's a good through clinical think it's a good through clinical think it's a good through clinical observation seems pretty clear that observation seems pretty clear that observation seems pretty clear that something like that is going on. There something like that is going on. There something like that is going on. There has been an attempt at creating this has been an attempt at creating this has been an attempt at creating this movement toward um openness about movement toward um openness about movement toward um openness about psychedelics and their positive effects. psychedelics and their positive effects. psychedelics and their positive effects. The this has happened before. The this has happened before. The this has happened before. The difference is that now there are people difference is that now there are people difference is that now there are people like you inside the walls of the like you inside the walls of the like you inside the walls of the university or publishing peer-reviewed university or publishing peer-reviewed university or publishing peer-reviewed studies and things of that sort. The studies and things of that sort. The studies and things of that sort. The question is to me, you know, what are question is to me, you know, what are question is to me, you know, what are the what are the valuable exports, the what are the valuable exports, the what are the valuable exports, right? And where does the extreme lie? I right? And where does the extreme lie? I right? And where does the extreme lie? I mean, clearly there's a there's a mean, clearly there's a there's a mean, clearly there's a there's a problem with um problem with um problem with um tinkering with reality through tinkering with reality through tinkering with reality through pharmacology. And there's a benefit, it pharmacology. And there's a benefit, it pharmacology. And there's a benefit, it sounds like, to tinkering with sounds like, to tinkering with sounds like, to tinkering with reality through pharmacology. reality through pharmacology. reality through pharmacology. And for the average person, right? Or And for the average person, right? Or And for the average person, right? Or for kids that are hearing this, kids for kids that are hearing this, kids for kids that are hearing this, kids that are in their teens, right? Yeah. that are in their teens, right? Yeah. that are in their teens, right? Yeah. What are the I want to talk about what What are the I want to talk about what What are the I want to talk about what are the dangers of psychedelics? are the dangers of psychedelics? are the dangers of psychedelics? This is something you don't hear a lot This is something you don't hear a lot This is something you don't hear a lot about these days, and it's not because about these days, and it's not because about these days, and it's not because I'm anti-psychedelic at all, but what I'm anti-psychedelic at all, but what I'm anti-psychedelic at all, but what are the dangers? Yeah, so these can be are the dangers? Yeah, so these can be are the dangers? Yeah, so these can be profoundly destabilizing experiences. destabilizing experiences. destabilizing experiences. And ones that, you know, ideally, And ones that, you know, ideally, And ones that, you know, ideally, um are had in a safe container, you are had in a safe container, you are had in a safe container, you know, sort of where someone, you know, sort of where someone, you know, sort of where someone, you know, what are the relevant dangers and know, what are the relevant dangers and know, what are the relevant dangers and what can we do to mitigate those? So, what can we do to mitigate those? So, what can we do to mitigate those? So, there's two biggies. there's two biggies. there's two biggies. One, and I've already mentioned, is One, and I've already mentioned, is One, and I've already mentioned, is people with people with people with very severe psychiatric illness. Not not very severe psychiatric illness. Not not very severe psychiatric illness. Not not depression, not anxiety. I'm talking depression, not anxiety. I'm talking depression, not anxiety. I'm talking about psychotic disorders like schizophrenia psychotic disorders like schizophrenia psychotic disorders like schizophrenia or, you know, mania as part of bipolar or, you know, mania as part of bipolar or, you know, mania as part of bipolar disorder. The far more likely danger is disorder. The far more likely danger is disorder. The far more likely danger is the bad trip. Anyone can have this. The the bad trip. Anyone can have this. The the bad trip. Anyone can have this. The most psychologically healthy person in most psychologically healthy person in most psychologically healthy person in the world probably. You jack the dose the world probably. You jack the dose the world probably. You jack the dose high enough, and especially in high enough, and especially in high enough, and especially in a less-than-ideal environment, you can a less-than-ideal environment, you can a less-than-ideal environment, you can have a bad trip. You can you even get it have a bad trip. You can you even get it have a bad trip. You can you even get it in an ideal environment like ours at in an ideal environment like ours at in an ideal environment like ours at a high dose of around 30 mg of a high dose of around 30 mg of a high dose of around 30 mg of psilocybin, after, you know, the best preparation we after, you know, the best preparation we after, you know, the best preparation we can provide, about a third of people can provide, about a third of people can provide, about a third of people will say essentially, at some point they will say essentially, at some point they will say essentially, at some point they have a bad trip, you know, we have a bad trip, you know, we have a bad trip, you know, we &gt;&gt; point within the entire journey. &gt;&gt; point within the entire journey. &gt;&gt; point within the entire journey. Right. Now, they could have one of the Right. Now, they could have one of the Right. Now, they could have one of the most beautiful experiences of their life most beautiful experiences of their life most beautiful experiences of their life sometimes like a couple minutes later, sometimes like a couple minutes later, sometimes like a couple minutes later, but at some point they had a sense of but at some point they had a sense of but at some point they had a sense of strong anxiety, fear, losing their mind, strong anxiety, fear, losing their mind, strong anxiety, fear, losing their mind, feeling trapped, something like that. feeling trapped, something like that. feeling trapped, something like that. &gt;&gt; I definitely want to ask you about &gt;&gt; I definitely want to ask you about &gt;&gt; I definitely want to ask you about microdose versus standard or macrodosing microdose versus standard or macrodosing microdose versus standard or macrodosing psilocybin. I'm micro cynical, if you psilocybin. I'm micro cynical, if you psilocybin. I'm micro cynical, if you will, about this term microdose. Is will, about this term microdose. Is will, about this term microdose. Is there any clinical evidence or there any clinical evidence or there any clinical evidence or peer-reviewed published evidence that it peer-reviewed published evidence that it peer-reviewed published evidence that it works, quote-unquote, to make people works, quote-unquote, to make people works, quote-unquote, to make people feel better about anything? So, yeah, feel better about anything? So, yeah, feel better about anything? So, yeah, the claims are, and there a number of the claims are, and there a number of the claims are, and there a number of them, there's two general ones. One is sort there's two general ones. One is sort there's two general ones. One is sort of acting of acting of acting in place of the ADHD treating drug, in place of the ADHD treating drug, in place of the ADHD treating drug, so the psychomotor stimulant. So, like a so the psychomotor stimulant. So, like a so the psychomotor stimulant. So, like a better version of Adderall. better version of Adderall. better version of Adderall. The other claims are essentially a The other claims are essentially a The other claims are essentially a better version of the traditional better version of the traditional better version of the traditional antidepressants, a better version of antidepressants, a better version of antidepressants, a better version of Prozac. None of the peer-reviewed Prozac. None of the peer-reviewed Prozac. None of the peer-reviewed studies that are have much credibility, studies that are have much credibility, studies that are have much credibility, um none of them have shown a benefit. The none of them have shown a benefit. The none of them have shown a benefit. The handful of studies that have done that handful of studies that have done that handful of studies that have done that have shown have shown have shown they've ranged from finding no effect they've ranged from finding no effect they've ranged from finding no effect whatsoever to just a little bit of whatsoever to just a little bit of whatsoever to just a little bit of impairment, like impairing someone's impairment, like impairing someone's impairment, like impairing someone's ability to do time estimation and ability to do time estimation and ability to do time estimation and production tasks. So, you want an production tasks. So, you want an production tasks. So, you want an accurate sense of time, at least if accurate sense of time, at least if accurate sense of time, at least if you're navigating in the real world. you're navigating in the real world. you're navigating in the real world. It's different if you're on the couch on It's different if you're on the couch on It's different if you're on the couch on a heroic dose for therapeutic reasons a heroic dose for therapeutic reasons a heroic dose for therapeutic reasons where you're safe, but if you're where you're safe, but if you're where you're safe, but if you're crossing the street, if you're get, you crossing the street, if you're get, you crossing the street, if you're get, you know, You have to function. in your work know, You have to function. in your work know, You have to function. in your work life. Yeah, which is what the way people life. Yeah, which is what the way people life. Yeah, which is what the way people are claiming to use that helps them be a are claiming to use that helps them be a are claiming to use that helps them be a better CEO. Like, you want an accurate better CEO. Like, you want an accurate better CEO. Like, you want an accurate sense of time. So, if anything the data sense of time. So, if anything the data sense of time. So, if anything the data suggests that it makes it a little bit suggests that it makes it a little bit suggests that it makes it a little bit less accurate. And and there's evidence less accurate. And and there's evidence less accurate. And and there's evidence that someone feels that someone feels that someone feels a little bit impaired, um a little bit impaired, um a little bit impaired, um and they feel a little bit high. So, in and they feel a little bit high. So, in and they feel a little bit high. So, in terms of, you know, you call that abuse terms of, you know, you call that abuse terms of, you know, you call that abuse liability in research. So far, no liability in research. So far, no liability in research. So far, no studies have shown, you know, studies have shown, you know, studies have shown, you know, an increase in creativity, enhancement an increase in creativity, enhancement an increase in creativity, enhancement of any form of cognition, or a of any form of cognition, or a of any form of cognition, or a sustained improvement in mood. Now, sustained improvement in mood. Now, sustained improvement in mood. Now, no studies have actually looked at the no studies have actually looked at the no studies have actually looked at the system of microdosing that the system of microdosing that the system of microdosing that the aficionados are claiming. Folks like aficionados are claiming. Folks like aficionados are claiming. Folks like Paul Stamets and others, they'll have Paul Stamets and others, they'll have Paul Stamets and others, they'll have particular formulas. They're like, you particular formulas. They're like, you particular formulas. They're like, you need to take it 1 day, then take so many need to take it 1 day, then take so many need to take it 1 day, then take so many days off, and take it every 4 days. And days off, and take it every 4 days. And days off, and take it every 4 days. And they really say you need to be on it for they really say you need to be on it for they really say you need to be on it for a while. Like a few weeks in, you may a while. Like a few weeks in, you may a while. Like a few weeks in, you may start to notice through this pattern of start to notice through this pattern of start to notice through this pattern of using it, and you you're of using it, and you you're of using it, and you you're feeling the benefits on those off days, feeling the benefits on those off days, feeling the benefits on those off days, like the three or two days in between like the three or two days in between like the three or two days in between your active doses. So, those are the your active doses. So, those are the your active doses. So, those are the claims. Again, we don't know that claims. Again, we don't know that claims. Again, we don't know that there's any truth to that working, but there's any truth to that working, but there's any truth to that working, but studies have not been done studies have not been done studies have not been done to model that. So, that's a big caveat. to model that. So, that's a big caveat. to model that. So, that's a big caveat. My bet is, and this is totally based on My bet is, and this is totally based on My bet is, and this is totally based on anecdotes, that I think there is anecdotes, that I think there is anecdotes, that I think there is probably a reality to the antidepressant probably a reality to the antidepressant probably a reality to the antidepressant effects. I find that more intriguing effects. I find that more intriguing effects. I find that more intriguing Well, so are all of us suffering with Well, so are all of us suffering with Well, so are all of us suffering with depression. Right. Even if it's an it depression. Right. Even if it's an it depression. Right. Even if it's an it wouldn't be as interesting as I think wouldn't be as interesting as I think wouldn't be as interesting as I think what we're doing with high-dose what we're doing with high-dose what we're doing with high-dose psilocybin or psychedelics to treat psilocybin or psychedelics to treat psilocybin or psychedelics to treat depression. It would be, if this is depression. It would be, if this is depression. It would be, if this is developed and there's a reality, it developed and there's a reality, it developed and there's a reality, it would be more like would be more like would be more like a better, you know, perhaps a better a better, you know, perhaps a better a better, you know, perhaps a better SSRI, a better Prozac, which are SSRI, a better Prozac, which are SSRI, a better Prozac, which are similar. And it shouldn't be that similar. And it shouldn't be that similar. And it shouldn't be that surprise. Like even before the as going surprise. Like even before the as going surprise. Like even before the as going back to the tricyclics and the MAO back to the tricyclics and the MAO back to the tricyclics and the MAO inhibitors, going back to the '50s, like inhibitors, going back to the '50s, like inhibitors, going back to the '50s, like augmenting extracellular serotonin in augmenting extracellular serotonin in augmenting extracellular serotonin in one way or another, for many people, one way or another, for many people, one way or another, for many people, leads to a reduction in depressive leads to a reduction in depressive leads to a reduction in depressive symptoms. It wouldn't be that crazy for symptoms. It wouldn't be that crazy for symptoms. It wouldn't be that crazy for chronically stimulating a subtype of chronically stimulating a subtype of chronically stimulating a subtype of serotonin receptor that you have an serotonin receptor that you have an serotonin receptor that you have an antidepressant effect. So, I think if I antidepressant effect. So, I think if I antidepressant effect. So, I think if I had put my bets on it that there's if had put my bets on it that there's if had put my bets on it that there's if there's anything real, it is in that there's anything real, it is in that there's anything real, it is in that category. Although, I'm very open to category. Although, I'm very open to category. Although, I'm very open to like maybe there is something to the like maybe there is something to the like maybe there is something to the creativity to the antidepressant creativity to the antidepressant creativity to the antidepressant effects. I find that more intriguing effects. I find that more intriguing effects. I find that more intriguing because of the suffering with because of the suffering with because of the suffering with depression. Even if it's an it depression. Even if it's an it depression. Even if it's an it wouldn't &gt;&gt; is in that category. Although, I'm very &gt;&gt; is in that category. Although, I'm very &gt;&gt; is in that category. Although, I'm very open to like maybe there is something to open to like maybe there is something to open to like maybe there is something to the creativity the creativity the creativity to the, you know, improved cognition, to the, you know, improved cognition, to the, you know, improved cognition, which covers many domains in and of which covers many domains in and of which covers many domains in and of itself, but um my itself, but um my itself, but um my greatest hopes are on the my greatest hopes are on the my greatest hopes are on the on the antidepressant effects. That on the antidepressant effects. That on the antidepressant effects. That said, in the big picture, I think all of said, in the big picture, I think all of said, in the big picture, I think all of the most interesting thing about the most interesting thing about the most interesting thing about psychedelics are the heroic doses. I psychedelics are the heroic doses. I psychedelics are the heroic doses. I mean, the idea you can give something mean, the idea you can give something mean, the idea you can give something one, two, three times and you see one, two, three times and you see one, two, three times and you see improvements in depression months later improvements in depression months later improvements in depression months later Right. and in addiction Right. and in addiction Right. and in addiction you know, over a year later and with you know, over a year later and with you know, over a year later and with these, you know, people dealing with these, you know, people dealing with these, you know, people dealing with potentially terminal illness. I mean, potentially terminal illness. I mean, potentially terminal illness. I mean, it's I mean, I'm interested in big it's I mean, I'm interested in big it's I mean, I'm interested in big effects. &gt;&gt; Right. I want to make sure that I ask &gt;&gt; Right. I want to make sure that I ask &gt;&gt; Right. I want to make sure that I ask you about the other really important you about the other really important you about the other really important mission that you're involved in with mission that you're involved in with mission that you're involved in with respect to psychedelics, which is not respect to psychedelics, which is not respect to psychedelics, which is not about depression per se, but is about depression per se, but is about depression per se, but is about neurological a neurologic injury or head neurological a neurologic injury or head neurological a neurologic injury or head injury. You know, we always think injury. You know, we always think injury. You know, we always think sports, but there are many people who sports, but there are many people who sports, but there are many people who make a living make a living make a living in a way that is um in a way that is um in a way that is um over time is detrimental to their brain. over time is detrimental to their brain. over time is detrimental to their brain. What do you think is the potential for What do you think is the potential for What do you think is the potential for these compounds, particularly these compounds, particularly these compounds, particularly psilocybin, but other compounds as well, psilocybin, but other compounds as well, psilocybin, but other compounds as well, for the um treatment and possible even for the um treatment and possible even for the um treatment and possible even reversal of neurological injuries? There reversal of neurological injuries? There reversal of neurological injuries? There are anecdotes of people saying uh are anecdotes of people saying uh are anecdotes of people saying uh that psychedelics have helped heal their that psychedelics have helped heal their that psychedelics have helped heal their brain. You know, they've been in one of brain. You know, they've been in one of brain. You know, they've been in one of these situations, like in sports, these situations, like in sports, these situations, like in sports, a sport where there's repetitive head a sport where there's repetitive head a sport where there's repetitive head impact and they're claiming that you impact and they're claiming that you impact and they're claiming that you know, using psychedelics has actually know, using psychedelics has actually know, using psychedelics has actually improved their cognitive function. For improved their cognitive function. For improved their cognitive function. For example, improved their memory. If you example, improved their memory. If you example, improved their memory. If you take these anecdotes and you combine it take these anecdotes and you combine it take these anecdotes and you combine it way across orders of analysis to the way across orders of analysis to the way across orders of analysis to the rodent research from rodent research from rodent research from um several labs, like David Olson, Brian um several labs, like David Olson, Brian um several labs, like David Olson, Brian uh Roth, these folks that have shown uh Roth, these folks that have shown uh Roth, these folks that have shown different forms of neuroplasticity different forms of neuroplasticity different forms of neuroplasticity unfolding, those effects unfolding, those effects unfolding, those effects may be at play in the improve in the may be at play in the improve in the may be at play in the improve in the psychiatric treatments that we're psychiatric treatments that we're psychiatric treatments that we're dealing with that have we don't know dealing with that have we don't know dealing with that have we don't know that. It seems like a decent guess and that. It seems like a decent guess and that. It seems like a decent guess and we're going to be figuring out whether we're going to be figuring out whether we're going to be figuring out whether that's the case. that's the case. that's the case. But another potential that sets up But another potential that sets up But another potential that sets up is that maybe that's what's going on is that maybe that's what's going on is that maybe that's what's going on with these claims of improvements from with these claims of improvements from with these claims of improvements from neurological issues that there's neurological issues that there's neurological issues that there's actually you know, you know, you know, repair of the brain repair of the brain repair of the brain from injuries underlying you know, from injuries underlying you know, from injuries underlying you know, things that you know, situations where things that you know, situations where things that you know, situations where there's repetitive head impact. Perhaps there's repetitive head impact. Perhaps there's repetitive head impact. Perhaps there's a potential for helping there's a potential for helping there's a potential for helping folks recover from stroke folks recover from stroke folks recover from stroke and disorders like that. and disorders like that. and disorders like that. It is more exploratory. But what I'm It is more exploratory. But what I'm It is more exploratory. But what I'm hoping to do is some work with retired hoping to do is some work with retired hoping to do is some work with retired athletes who have been exposed but by athletes who have been exposed but by athletes who have been exposed but by the nature of their sport for example the nature of their sport for example the nature of their sport for example MMA athletes in the UFC who have been MMA athletes in the UFC who have been MMA athletes in the UFC who have been exposed to exposed to exposed to repetitive head impacts like a lot of repetitive head impacts like a lot of repetitive head impacts like a lot of sports a lot of you know, sports exposed people a lot of you know, sports exposed people a lot of you know, sports exposed people to and who are retired from the sport and who are retired from the sport and who are retired from the sport and are suffering from say depression and are suffering from say depression and are suffering from say depression which can which can which can in part result from those types of in part result from those types of in part result from those types of that history of head impact. See if we that history of head impact. See if we that history of head impact. See if we can fix the depression but then also as can fix the depression but then also as can fix the depression but then also as a cherry on top in a more exploratory a cherry on top in a more exploratory a cherry on top in a more exploratory aim see if we can have evidence of aim see if we can have evidence of aim see if we can have evidence of improvement in cognitive function and improvement in cognitive function and improvement in cognitive function and associate like using MRI see if it associate like using MRI see if it associate like using MRI see if it affects gray matter over time these affects gray matter over time these affects gray matter over time these types of things to see if there actually types of things to see if there actually types of things to see if there actually some evidence of this improved some evidence of this improved some evidence of this improved like this more direct repair of the like this more direct repair of the like this more direct repair of the brain. But again, it is very sort of brain. But again, it is very sort of brain. But again, it is very sort of like we've got some rodent data, we've like we've got some rodent data, we've like we've got some rodent data, we've got some human anecdotes. We we will got some human anecdotes. We we will got some human anecdotes. We we will acknowledge it's early days and we look acknowledge it's early days and we look acknowledge it's early days and we look forward to seeing the data. forward to seeing the data. forward to seeing the data. I appreciate how cautious you are and I appreciate how cautious you are and I appreciate how cautious you are and tentative you are. You're not drawing tentative you are. You're not drawing tentative you are. You're not drawing any conclusions. Thank you so much for any conclusions. Thank you so much for any conclusions. Thank you so much for your time, for your knowledge, and I your time, for your knowledge, and I your time, for your knowledge, and I think you put it best earlier for think you put it best earlier for think you put it best earlier for holding the candle in a very dark time, holding the candle in a very dark time, holding the candle in a very dark time, and then now and then now and then now there's light.