For years when I was struggling and For years when I was struggling and For years when I was struggling and could never get it together, I realized could never get it together, I realized could never get it together, I realized that at one point that I was just that at one point that I was just that at one point that I was just thinking like an amateur and that if I thinking like an amateur and that if I thinking like an amateur and that if I could flip a switch in my mind and think could flip a switch in my mind and think could flip a switch in my mind and think like a professional that I could like a professional that I could like a professional that I could overcome some of the things. A overcome some of the things. A overcome some of the things. A professional shows up every day. A professional shows up every day. A professional shows up every day. A professional stays on the job all day or professional stays on the job all day or professional stays on the job all day or the equivalent of all day. A the equivalent of all day. A the equivalent of all day. A professional, as I said this before, professional, as I said this before, professional, as I said this before, does not take success or failure does not take success or failure does not take success or failure personally. An amateur will, right? An personally. An amateur will, right? An personally. An amateur will, right? An amateur gets a bad review, bad response amateur gets a bad review, bad response amateur gets a bad review, bad response of this and they just crap out. I don't of this and they just crap out. I don't of this and they just crap out. I don't want to do this anymore. A professional want to do this anymore. A professional want to do this anymore. A professional plays hurt. Like if uh Kobe Bryant, plays hurt. Like if uh Kobe Bryant, plays hurt. Like if uh Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan, you know, if they've Michael Jordan, you know, if they've Michael Jordan, you know, if they've tweaked the hamstring, they're out tweaked the hamstring, they're out tweaked the hamstring, they're out there. You know, they'll die before there. You know, they'll die before there. You know, they'll die before they'll get be taken off the court. they'll get be taken off the court. they'll get be taken off the court. Whereas an amateur when he or she Whereas an amateur when he or she Whereas an amateur when he or she confronts adversity will fold. confronts adversity will fold. confronts adversity will fold. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's too cold out. You know, I've &gt;&gt; Oh, it's too cold out. You know, I've &gt;&gt; Oh, it's too cold out. You know, I've got a I got a you know, I've got the got a I got a you know, I've got the got a I got a you know, I've got the flu. that kind of thing. An amateur flu. that kind of thing. An amateur flu. that kind of thing. An amateur worries about how they feel, like, "Oh, worries about how they feel, like, "Oh, worries about how they feel, like, "Oh, I don't feel like getting out of bed I don't feel like getting out of bed I don't feel like getting out of bed this morning. I don't feel like really this morning. I don't feel like really this morning. I don't feel like really doing my work today." A professional doing my work today." A professional doing my work today." A professional doesn't care how they feel. They they doesn't care how they feel. They they doesn't care how they feel. They they do it. So, an amateur has amateur they do it. So, an amateur has amateur they do it. So, an amateur has amateur habits, and a professional has habits, and a professional has habits, and a professional has professional habits. Welcome to the professional habits. Welcome to the professional habits. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for science and science-based tools for science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Steven Presfield. Steven today is Steven Presfield. Steven today is Steven Presfield. Steven Presfield is an author of numerous Presfield is an author of numerous Presfield is an author of numerous historical fiction and non-fiction historical fiction and non-fiction historical fiction and non-fiction books, including the now iconic War of books, including the now iconic War of books, including the now iconic War of Art and also the book Do the Work, which Art and also the book Do the Work, which Art and also the book Do the Work, which both focus on understanding the forces both focus on understanding the forces both focus on understanding the forces in our minds that barrier us from being in our minds that barrier us from being in our minds that barrier us from being our most focused, creative, and our most focused, creative, and our most focused, creative, and productive selves, and more importantly, productive selves, and more importantly, productive selves, and more importantly, how to overcome those barriers. Perhaps how to overcome those barriers. Perhaps how to overcome those barriers. Perhaps it's because Steven worked hard physical it's because Steven worked hard physical it's because Steven worked hard physical labor jobs and was in the military prior labor jobs and was in the military prior labor jobs and was in the military prior to becoming a book author and to becoming a book author and to becoming a book author and screenwriter. Or perhaps it's because he screenwriter. Or perhaps it's because he screenwriter. Or perhaps it's because he published his first book at age 52 that published his first book at age 52 that published his first book at age 52 that Steven really understands how to Steven really understands how to Steven really understands how to persevere and overcome inner doubt and persevere and overcome inner doubt and persevere and overcome inner doubt and procrastination and turn creative blocks procrastination and turn creative blocks procrastination and turn creative blocks into important creative works. As you'll into important creative works. As you'll into important creative works. As you'll hear during today's episode, Steven hear during today's episode, Steven hear during today's episode, Steven doesn't talk in inspirational slogans or doesn't talk in inspirational slogans or doesn't talk in inspirational slogans or metaphors. So none of this get after it metaphors. So none of this get after it metaphors. So none of this get after it or you know, you just have to do the or you know, you just have to do the or you know, you just have to do the work. Instead, he gets very concrete work. Instead, he gets very concrete work. Instead, he gets very concrete about how to structure your day, how to about how to structure your day, how to about how to structure your day, how to frame your goals and your setbacks, and frame your goals and your setbacks, and frame your goals and your setbacks, and even how to make your creative even how to make your creative even how to make your creative environment more conducive to focus and environment more conducive to focus and environment more conducive to focus and effort. We also talk about how to effort. We also talk about how to effort. We also talk about how to capture your best ideas, which by the capture your best ideas, which by the capture your best ideas, which by the way often occur away from the work that way often occur away from the work that way often occur away from the work that you're actually trying to do, and how to you're actually trying to do, and how to you're actually trying to do, and how to implement them. So, if you have an idea implement them. So, if you have an idea implement them. So, if you have an idea or you're searching for an idea for a or you're searching for an idea for a or you're searching for an idea for a creative project to share with the creative project to share with the creative project to share with the world, this conversation will be world, this conversation will be world, this conversation will be immensely useful to you. It will also be immensely useful to you. It will also be immensely useful to you. It will also be extremely useful to anyone who suffers extremely useful to anyone who suffers extremely useful to anyone who suffers from procrastination and self-doubt, from procrastination and self-doubt, from procrastination and self-doubt, which frankly I think is all of us at which frankly I think is all of us at which frankly I think is all of us at some point or another. I read Steven's some point or another. I read Steven's some point or another. I read Steven's book, The War of Art, some years ago, book, The War of Art, some years ago, book, The War of Art, some years ago, and I loved it. It transformed the way and I loved it. It transformed the way and I loved it. It transformed the way that I did my science, how I approached that I did my science, how I approached that I did my science, how I approached the podcast, and many, many other the podcast, and many, many other the podcast, and many, many other aspects of life. You'll also notice that aspects of life. You'll also notice that aspects of life. You'll also notice that at 82 years old, Steven is incredibly at 82 years old, Steven is incredibly at 82 years old, Steven is incredibly sharp and fit. So, we talk about his sharp and fit. So, we talk about his sharp and fit. So, we talk about his physical regimen and the important role physical regimen and the important role physical regimen and the important role that it plays in keeping his mind that it plays in keeping his mind that it plays in keeping his mind active, productive, and overcoming active, productive, and overcoming active, productive, and overcoming resistance. Steven is not only very resistance. Steven is not only very resistance. Steven is not only very accomplished, he is also truly wise and accomplished, he is also truly wise and accomplished, he is also truly wise and generous. And today he shares a wealth generous. And today he shares a wealth generous. And today he shares a wealth of practical wisdom with us. Before we of practical wisdom with us. Before we of practical wisdom with us. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Steven Presfield. Steven Presfield, Steven Presfield. Steven Presfield, Steven Presfield. Steven Presfield, welcome. Andrew, it's a pleasure to be welcome. Andrew, it's a pleasure to be welcome. Andrew, it's a pleasure to be here. We're former neighbors, you know, here. We're former neighbors, you know, here. We're former neighbors, you know, so we've been talking about this for a so we've been talking about this for a so we've been talking about this for a while. It's great to be here. while. It's great to be here. while. It's great to be here. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've been wanting to do this for a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've been wanting to do this for a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've been wanting to do this for a while. I've been reading your books for while. I've been reading your books for while. I've been reading your books for goodness couple of decades now or more. goodness couple of decades now or more. goodness couple of decades now or more. Um, first War of Art, then I started uh Um, first War of Art, then I started uh Um, first War of Art, then I started uh through the library. You've written a through the library. You've written a through the library. You've written a lot of books, non-fiction and fiction. lot of books, non-fiction and fiction. lot of books, non-fiction and fiction. It's been super impactful to me and many It's been super impactful to me and many It's been super impactful to me and many other people. I think everybody deals other people. I think everybody deals other people. I think everybody deals with procrastination. you'll tell us with procrastination. you'll tell us with procrastination. you'll tell us about resistance. Um, but there's a about resistance. Um, but there's a about resistance. Um, but there's a quote out there they claim is you. I'm quote out there they claim is you. I'm quote out there they claim is you. I'm going to assume it's you. And um, going to assume it's you. And um, going to assume it's you. And um, &gt;&gt; I'm laughing already. &gt;&gt; I'm laughing already. &gt;&gt; I'm laughing already. &gt;&gt; And I recommend um, accepting that it's &gt;&gt; And I recommend um, accepting that it's &gt;&gt; And I recommend um, accepting that it's you even if it's not, cuz it's a it's a you even if it's not, cuz it's a it's a you even if it's not, cuz it's a it's a beautiful quote. beautiful quote. beautiful quote. &gt;&gt; It's a good quote. I'll take credit. &gt;&gt; It's a good quote. I'll take credit. &gt;&gt; It's a good quote. I'll take credit. &gt;&gt; It's great. Um, and I'd like your &gt;&gt; It's great. Um, and I'd like your &gt;&gt; It's great. Um, and I'd like your reflections on it and what you intended reflections on it and what you intended reflections on it and what you intended when you said it, which is quote, "The when you said it, which is quote, "The when you said it, which is quote, "The more important to your soul's growth, more important to your soul's growth, more important to your soul's growth, the stronger the resistance will be," the stronger the resistance will be," the stronger the resistance will be," which for me was very counterintuitive. which for me was very counterintuitive. which for me was very counterintuitive. &gt;&gt; We all imagine the creative process as &gt;&gt; We all imagine the creative process as &gt;&gt; We all imagine the creative process as one of, you know, being inspired. ah one of, you know, being inspired. ah one of, you know, being inspired. ah this is my soul's work and having a this is my soul's work and having a this is my soul's work and having a ton of motivation to get the work done a ton of motivation to get the work done a ton of motivation to get the work done a ton of desire and drive but the more ton of desire and drive but the more ton of desire and drive but the more important to your soul's growth the important to your soul's growth the important to your soul's growth the stronger your resistance will be stronger your resistance will be stronger your resistance will be interesting &gt;&gt; well that's absolutely true and what I &gt;&gt; well that's absolutely true and what I &gt;&gt; well that's absolutely true and what I what I meant by that was that um what I meant by that was that um what I meant by that was that um when we conceive an idea for something when we conceive an idea for something when we conceive an idea for something we want to do a movie we want to make or we want to do a movie we want to make or we want to do a movie we want to make or book we want to make it's not like at book we want to make it's not like at book we want to make it's not like at all like what the fantasy was, "Oh, I'm all like what the fantasy was, "Oh, I'm all like what the fantasy was, "Oh, I'm really charged up. It's going to be really charged up. It's going to be really charged up. It's going to be great." What happens is waves of what I great." What happens is waves of what I great." What happens is waves of what I call resistance with a capital R start call resistance with a capital R start call resistance with a capital R start coming off that keyboard or whatever it coming off that keyboard or whatever it coming off that keyboard or whatever it is to try to stop us from doing it. Make is to try to stop us from doing it. Make is to try to stop us from doing it. Make us procrastinate, make us, you know, go us procrastinate, make us, you know, go us procrastinate, make us, you know, go to the beach, make us, you know, be to the beach, make us, you know, be to the beach, make us, you know, be dist, you know, give into distractions, dist, you know, give into distractions, dist, you know, give into distractions, so on and so forth. And but the weird so on and so forth. And but the weird so on and so forth. And but the weird principle is, and this is why I always principle is, and this is why I always principle is, and this is why I always say if you want to know which one of say if you want to know which one of say if you want to know which one of three or four projects that you should three or four projects that you should three or four projects that you should do, you should do the one you're most do, you should do the one you're most do, you should do the one you're most afraid of, because afraid of, because afraid of, because that fear is a form of resistance with a that fear is a form of resistance with a that fear is a form of resistance with a capital R. And the more important a capital R. And the more important a capital R. And the more important a project is to your soul's evolution, not project is to your soul's evolution, not project is to your soul's evolution, not to your commercial success, but to your to your commercial success, but to your to your commercial success, but to your own evolution as an artist, the more own evolution as an artist, the more own evolution as an artist, the more resistance you will feel to it. So, in resistance you will feel to it. So, in resistance you will feel to it. So, in other words, the thing that you really other words, the thing that you really other words, the thing that you really should be doing is going to be the should be doing is going to be the should be doing is going to be the hardest and is going to punch you in the hardest and is going to punch you in the hardest and is going to punch you in the face the hardest, which is why so many face the hardest, which is why so many face the hardest, which is why so many artists have such a hardcore artists have such a hardcore artists have such a hardcore professional attitude because they have professional attitude because they have professional attitude because they have to have it to be able to kind of stand to have it to be able to kind of stand to have it to be able to kind of stand up to that resistance to trying to push up to that resistance to trying to push up to that resistance to trying to push them away from doing their them away from doing their them away from doing their project, whatever it is. project, whatever it is. project, whatever it is. &gt;&gt; The more important to your soul's &gt;&gt; The more important to your soul's &gt;&gt; The more important to your soul's evolution, the more resistance you're evolution, the more resistance you're evolution, the more resistance you're going to experience. But that's the going to experience. But that's the going to experience. But that's the project you should be doing. project you should be doing. project you should be doing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um here's an analogy that I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um here's an analogy that I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um here's an analogy that I use sometimes, Andrew, and you may have use sometimes, Andrew, and you may have use sometimes, Andrew, and you may have heard me say this before. I think about heard me say this before. I think about heard me say this before. I think about um if you can imagine a tree in the um if you can imagine a tree in the um if you can imagine a tree in the middle of a sunny meadow. As soon as the middle of a sunny meadow. As soon as the middle of a sunny meadow. As soon as the tree appears, a shadow is going to tree appears, a shadow is going to tree appears, a shadow is going to appear. And the shadow is going to be appear. And the shadow is going to be appear. And the shadow is going to be the tree is your dream, whatever it is, the tree is your dream, whatever it is, the tree is your dream, whatever it is, right? A book, a movie, whatever. And right? A book, a movie, whatever. And right? A book, a movie, whatever. And the shadow is the resistance you're the shadow is the resistance you're the shadow is the resistance you're going to feel. And they're directly going to feel. And they're directly going to feel. And they're directly proportionate to each other. The bigger proportionate to each other. The bigger proportionate to each other. The bigger the tree, the bigger the shadow. So when the tree, the bigger the shadow. So when the tree, the bigger the shadow. So when you feel that shadow, you feel that you feel that shadow, you feel that you feel that shadow, you feel that massive resistance. Oh, I want to quit. massive resistance. Oh, I want to quit. massive resistance. Oh, I want to quit. I don't want to I'm not good enough to I don't want to I'm not good enough to I don't want to I'm not good enough to do this, etc., etc. That's a good sign. do this, etc., etc. That's a good sign. do this, etc., etc. That's a good sign. And then it says that the tree, your And then it says that the tree, your And then it says that the tree, your dream is really big. And so you got to dream is really big. And so you got to dream is really big. And so you got to do it. That's not the you don't want to do it. That's not the you don't want to do it. That's not the you don't want to take a little tree, you want to take the take a little tree, you want to take the take a little tree, you want to take the big tree. big tree. big tree. &gt;&gt; You have military training and &gt;&gt; You have military training and &gt;&gt; You have military training and background. And you were a Marine, background. And you were a Marine, background. And you were a Marine, correct? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I was a reservist Marine &gt;&gt; Yeah, I was a reservist Marine &gt;&gt; Yeah, I was a reservist Marine infantryman. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Uh, how much does your training as a &gt;&gt; Uh, how much does your training as a &gt;&gt; Uh, how much does your training as a Marine impact this concept of resistance Marine impact this concept of resistance Marine impact this concept of resistance and your suggestions for people and your and your suggestions for people and your and your suggestions for people and your ability to push through resistance ability to push through resistance ability to push through resistance &gt;&gt; a tremendous amount. You know, I think, &gt;&gt; a tremendous amount. You know, I think, &gt;&gt; a tremendous amount. You know, I think, you know, when I was going through uh you know, when I was going through uh you know, when I was going through uh boot camp and, you know, infantry boot camp and, you know, infantry boot camp and, you know, infantry training and stuff like that, I hated it training and stuff like that, I hated it training and stuff like that, I hated it and I thought I just can't wait till I and I thought I just can't wait till I and I thought I just can't wait till I get out of this and just be a get out of this and just be a get out of this and just be a regular civilian again. But as I've regular civilian again. But as I've regular civilian again. But as I've grown and lived through the artist grown and lived through the artist grown and lived through the artist life of, you know, writing, you know, life of, you know, writing, you know, life of, you know, writing, you know, being in a room with your own demons for being in a room with your own demons for being in a room with your own demons for two or three years at a time. I've two or three years at a time. I've two or three years at a time. I've learned that kind of the virtues that learned that kind of the virtues that learned that kind of the virtues that you learn in the military um are the you learn in the military um are the you learn in the military um are the same virtues that you have to call upon same virtues that you have to call upon same virtues that you have to call upon to live that war of art, the war inside to live that war of art, the war inside to live that war of art, the war inside your head. You know, the virtues of uh your head. You know, the virtues of uh your head. You know, the virtues of uh of stubbornness, of uh the willing of stubbornness, of uh the willing of stubbornness, of uh the willing embracing of adversity, of patience, of embracing of adversity, of patience, of embracing of adversity, of patience, of selflessness, of courage because it's selflessness, of courage because it's selflessness, of courage because it's about fear. And so, yeah, then it's about fear. And so, yeah, then it's about fear. And so, yeah, then it's influenced me tremendously. And I found influenced me tremendously. And I found influenced me tremendously. And I found sort of to my amazement as I started sort of to my amazement as I started sort of to my amazement as I started writing fiction that I was drawn to writing fiction that I was drawn to writing fiction that I was drawn to themes of war, even though I've never themes of war, even though I've never themes of war, even though I've never actually been in a war, but the it's the actually been in a war, but the it's the actually been in a war, but the it's the it's the inner war that interests me, it's the inner war that interests me, it's the inner war that interests me, the metaphor of war. So, yeah, a lot. It the metaphor of war. So, yeah, a lot. It the metaphor of war. So, yeah, a lot. It meant a lot. Do you think the physical meant a lot. Do you think the physical meant a lot. Do you think the physical training that you took part in when you training that you took part in when you training that you took part in when you were in the Marines has impacted a your were in the Marines has impacted a your were in the Marines has impacted a your current physical regimen? By the way, current physical regimen? By the way, current physical regimen? By the way, everybody, Stephen is 82 years old. Uh, everybody, Stephen is 82 years old. Uh, everybody, Stephen is 82 years old. Uh, I see him at the gym. Um, he's there I see him at the gym. Um, he's there I see him at the gym. Um, he's there every morning very early. What time do every morning very early. What time do every morning very early. What time do you get there? you get there? you get there? &gt;&gt; I get there at quarter to 5. &gt;&gt; I get there at quarter to 5. &gt;&gt; I get there at quarter to 5. &gt;&gt; Quarter to 5:00 a.m. Um, which is why I &gt;&gt; Quarter to 5:00 a.m. Um, which is why I &gt;&gt; Quarter to 5:00 a.m. Um, which is why I see him from time to time cuz I'm not see him from time to time cuz I'm not see him from time to time cuz I'm not there at home. there at home. there at home. &gt;&gt; You're coming in, I'm going home. Yeah. &gt;&gt; You're coming in, I'm going home. Yeah. &gt;&gt; You're coming in, I'm going home. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and I sometimes train there &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and I sometimes train there &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and I sometimes train there and elsewhere. But you are very and elsewhere. But you are very and elsewhere. But you are very consistent. You train very early. So consistent. You train very early. So consistent. You train very early. So clearly um you're in great physical and clearly um you're in great physical and clearly um you're in great physical and mental shape. It's awesome to see. you mental shape. It's awesome to see. you mental shape. It's awesome to see. you are, you know, with all the discussion are, you know, with all the discussion are, you know, with all the discussion about longevity, you are living proof. about longevity, you are living proof. about longevity, you are living proof. Uh, so I am curious about your physical Uh, so I am curious about your physical Uh, so I am curious about your physical regimen and the extent to which your regimen and the extent to which your regimen and the extent to which your physical regimen impacts your ability to physical regimen impacts your ability to physical regimen impacts your ability to lean into and against resistance to do lean into and against resistance to do lean into and against resistance to do your creative work at the keyboard or your creative work at the keyboard or your creative work at the keyboard or with pen and paper. with pen and paper. with pen and paper. &gt;&gt; That's a great question. um going to the &gt;&gt; That's a great question. um going to the &gt;&gt; That's a great question. um going to the gym early first thing for me is um a gym early first thing for me is um a gym early first thing for me is um a rehearsal for when I get home and I go rehearsal for when I get home and I go rehearsal for when I get home and I go sit at the keyboard and I actually have sit at the keyboard and I actually have sit at the keyboard and I actually have to face the resistance of working that to face the resistance of working that to face the resistance of working that day. Right? So to me the gym is about day. Right? So to me the gym is about day. Right? So to me the gym is about something that I don't want to do. I something that I don't want to do. I something that I don't want to do. I hate to get up that early in the morning hate to get up that early in the morning hate to get up that early in the morning and get there. It's something that is and get there. It's something that is and get there. It's something that is going to hurt, right? We all know about going to hurt, right? We all know about going to hurt, right? We all know about that. And it's something that I'm afraid that. And it's something that I'm afraid that. And it's something that I'm afraid of because as you know there are all of because as you know there are all of because as you know there are all kinds of ways you can hurt yourself and kinds of ways you can hurt yourself and kinds of ways you can hurt yourself and you embarrass yourself and so on and you embarrass yourself and so on and you embarrass yourself and so on and so forth. But having done that in the so forth. But having done that in the so forth. But having done that in the morning. So it's for I've got like um I morning. So it's for I've got like um I morning. So it's for I've got like um I think we have a mutual friend in Randy think we have a mutual friend in Randy think we have a mutual friend in Randy Wallace, right? Do we have Yeah. Randy Wallace, right? Do we have Yeah. Randy Wallace, right? Do we have Yeah. Randy has this thing Randall Wallace who wrote has this thing Randall Wallace who wrote has this thing Randall Wallace who wrote Braveheart and his secretary directed Braveheart and his secretary directed Braveheart and his secretary directed that and many others. He has a thing in that and many others. He has a thing in that and many others. He has a thing in the morning that he calls little the morning that he calls little the morning that he calls little successes. And what he's trying to do to successes. And what he's trying to do to successes. And what he's trying to do to build momentum for when he's actually build momentum for when he's actually build momentum for when he's actually going to sit down and write is, you going to sit down and write is, you going to sit down and write is, you know, achieve something that he can say, know, achieve something that he can say, know, achieve something that he can say, "Okay, I did something good here and "Okay, I did something good here and "Okay, I did something good here and then I did, you know, so going to the then I did, you know, so going to the then I did, you know, so going to the gym for me is that it's not so much gym for me is that it's not so much gym for me is that it's not so much about the physical aspect of it. It's about the physical aspect of it. It's about the physical aspect of it. It's the uh the rehearsal for kind of facing the uh the rehearsal for kind of facing the uh the rehearsal for kind of facing like so I feel like when I finish at the like so I feel like when I finish at the like so I feel like when I finish at the gym, nothing I'm going to do for the gym, nothing I'm going to do for the gym, nothing I'm going to do for the rest of the day is going to be as hard rest of the day is going to be as hard rest of the day is going to be as hard as what I already did. So, you know, as what I already did. So, you know, as what I already did. So, you know, there we go. The the ways are greased there we go. The the ways are greased there we go. The the ways are greased and I can go forward. That's the theory and I can go forward. That's the theory and I can go forward. That's the theory anyway. &gt;&gt; So, when you wake up in the morning, &gt;&gt; So, when you wake up in the morning, &gt;&gt; So, when you wake up in the morning, you're not looking forward to working you're not looking forward to working you're not looking forward to working out. &gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] no. I mean, we can we say that &gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] no. I mean, we can we say that &gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] no. I mean, we can we say that here? &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely not. It's a drag. I hate to &gt;&gt; Absolutely not. It's a drag. I hate to &gt;&gt; Absolutely not. It's a drag. I hate to go. You know, go. You know, go. You know, &gt;&gt; you prefer to stay in bed. &gt;&gt; you prefer to stay in bed. &gt;&gt; you prefer to stay in bed. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I wish I could stay in bed, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I wish I could stay in bed, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I wish I could stay in bed, you know, on and but uh on the days I do you know, on and but uh on the days I do you know, on and but uh on the days I do stay in bed, Sunday, I don't feel so stay in bed, Sunday, I don't feel so stay in bed, Sunday, I don't feel so good about myself, you know. I wish I good about myself, you know. I wish I good about myself, you know. I wish I had gone to the gym. I mean, you must had gone to the gym. I mean, you must had gone to the gym. I mean, you must feel the same way, Andrew, about feel the same way, Andrew, about feel the same way, Andrew, about whatever you do, being an old whatever you do, being an old whatever you do, being an old skateboarder and, you know, a fitness skateboarder and, you know, a fitness skateboarder and, you know, a fitness guy your whole life. What is it? How guy your whole life. What is it? How guy your whole life. What is it? How does it fit in with your regimen? does it fit in with your regimen? does it fit in with your regimen? &gt;&gt; Well, the problem for me is that I love &gt;&gt; Well, the problem for me is that I love &gt;&gt; Well, the problem for me is that I love working out. working out. working out. &gt;&gt; Oh, you do? &gt;&gt; Oh, you do? &gt;&gt; Oh, you do? &gt;&gt; So, wow. &gt;&gt; So, wow. &gt;&gt; So, wow. &gt;&gt; I do and I always have. Um, I have &gt;&gt; I do and I always have. Um, I have &gt;&gt; I do and I always have. Um, I have noticed in the last maybe 2 3 years that noticed in the last maybe 2 3 years that noticed in the last maybe 2 3 years that occasionally I have to push myself a occasionally I have to push myself a occasionally I have to push myself a little bit more, but I little bit more, but I little bit more, but I loathe rest days, but they are loathe rest days, but they are loathe rest days, but they are important. You know, I do believe in important. You know, I do believe in important. You know, I do believe in taking one full day off per week, taking one full day off per week, taking one full day off per week, letting my body recover. letting my body recover. letting my body recover. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; but that's the problem is I really enjoy &gt;&gt; but that's the problem is I really enjoy &gt;&gt; but that's the problem is I really enjoy working out. And so by the time I'm done working out. And so by the time I'm done working out. And so by the time I'm done working out and then I shower up and I working out and then I shower up and I working out and then I shower up and I eat and I'm sitting down to do some eat and I'm sitting down to do some eat and I'm sitting down to do some work, I'm like, "Oh, now comes the work, I'm like, "Oh, now comes the work, I'm like, "Oh, now comes the really hard workout." Um, but I notice really hard workout." Um, but I notice really hard workout." Um, but I notice that I learn things during those that I learn things during those that I learn things during those workouts, provided workouts, provided workouts, provided &gt;&gt; that I don't have my phone with me. Ah, &gt;&gt; that I don't have my phone with me. Ah, &gt;&gt; that I don't have my phone with me. Ah, &gt;&gt; I might listen to music on my phone, &gt;&gt; I might listen to music on my phone, &gt;&gt; I might listen to music on my phone, sometimes a podcast or an audio book, sometimes a podcast or an audio book, sometimes a podcast or an audio book, but I do my very best not to be on but I do my very best not to be on but I do my very best not to be on social media or text during those social media or text during those social media or text during those workouts because during those workouts, workouts because during those workouts, workouts because during those workouts, something always comes to mind that I something always comes to mind that I something always comes to mind that I find useful find useful find useful &gt;&gt; for elsewhere in life &gt;&gt; for elsewhere in life &gt;&gt; for elsewhere in life &gt;&gt; and it usually pops up during a rest &gt;&gt; and it usually pops up during a rest &gt;&gt; and it usually pops up during a rest period between sets. You know, I think period between sets. You know, I think period between sets. You know, I think exercise takes our brain and body into exercise takes our brain and body into exercise takes our brain and body into these unfamiliar states. these unfamiliar states. these unfamiliar states. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think that our unconscious &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think that our unconscious &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think that our unconscious mind geysers stuff up. And mind geysers stuff up. And mind geysers stuff up. And &gt;&gt; uh I think it was the great Joe Strummer &gt;&gt; uh I think it was the great Joe Strummer &gt;&gt; uh I think it was the great Joe Strummer of the Clash that said, you know, when of the Clash that said, you know, when of the Clash that said, you know, when you have a thought that feels important, you have a thought that feels important, you have a thought that feels important, write it down because write it down because write it down because &gt;&gt; you think it will be there later, but &gt;&gt; you think it will be there later, but &gt;&gt; you think it will be there later, but certain thoughts and ideas are offered certain thoughts and ideas are offered certain thoughts and ideas are offered up and they don't last, at least not in up and they don't last, at least not in up and they don't last, at least not in that form. You need to catch them. And that form. You need to catch them. And that form. You need to catch them. And so I have a mode of catch usually in so I have a mode of catch usually in so I have a mode of catch usually in notes. Do you have a do you have a notes. Do you have a do you have a notes. Do you have a do you have a capture method for ideas whether or not capture method for ideas whether or not capture method for ideas whether or not you get them during workouts or you get them during workouts or you get them during workouts or &gt;&gt; I don't have during workouts. I &gt;&gt; I don't have during workouts. I &gt;&gt; I don't have during workouts. I don't seem to get ideas during workouts, don't seem to get ideas during workouts, don't seem to get ideas during workouts, but I completely agree with that but I completely agree with that but I completely agree with that you know there the those ideas when they you know there the those ideas when they you know there the those ideas when they come like in the shower or when you're come like in the shower or when you're come like in the shower or when you're on the subway or when you're driving on the subway or when you're driving on the subway or when you're driving along the freeway, your mind is occupied along the freeway, your mind is occupied along the freeway, your mind is occupied in something else, right? Your ego is in something else, right? Your ego is in something else, right? Your ego is involved and somehow it opens the involved and somehow it opens the involved and somehow it opens the pipeline and things burble up and you pipeline and things burble up and you pipeline and things burble up and you always think, "Oh, I'll remember that always think, "Oh, I'll remember that always think, "Oh, I'll remember that that." But you forget it's like a dream, that." But you forget it's like a dream, that." But you forget it's like a dream, you know? They just go away. So yeah, I you know? They just go away. So yeah, I you know? They just go away. So yeah, I mean I'll just dictate it into my I mean I'll just dictate it into my I mean I'll just dictate it into my phone. I mean, my phone now is, you phone. I mean, my phone now is, you phone. I mean, my phone now is, you know, full of stuff that I've got to know, full of stuff that I've got to know, full of stuff that I've got to transcribe. But I couldn't agree more transcribe. But I couldn't agree more transcribe. But I couldn't agree more with that. with that. with that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something about the way &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something about the way &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something about the way that our unconscious mind I feel like it that our unconscious mind I feel like it that our unconscious mind I feel like it kind of tosses things up for the kind of tosses things up for the kind of tosses things up for the conscious mind to catch. And in those conscious mind to catch. And in those conscious mind to catch. And in those moments, just like in a dream, we think, moments, just like in a dream, we think, moments, just like in a dream, we think, "Oh, I'll remember this later." "Oh, I'll remember this later." "Oh, I'll remember this later." &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh and we don't. &gt;&gt; Uh and we don't. &gt;&gt; Uh and we don't. &gt;&gt; It's amazing how they go away. They just &gt;&gt; It's amazing how they go away. They just &gt;&gt; It's amazing how they go away. They just eancence, you know, eancence, you know, eancence, you know, &gt;&gt; eancence. It's a beautiful word and it &gt;&gt; eancence. It's a beautiful word and it &gt;&gt; eancence. It's a beautiful word and it captures it perfectly. captures it perfectly. captures it perfectly. &gt;&gt; See, I'm a different belie. I don't &gt;&gt; See, I'm a different belie. I don't &gt;&gt; See, I'm a different belie. I don't believe it's really coming from the believe it's really coming from the believe it's really coming from the subconscious. I'm a believer in the subconscious. I'm a believer in the subconscious. I'm a believer in the goddess. I'm a believer in the muse. I goddess. I'm a believer in the muse. I goddess. I'm a believer in the muse. I think it's coming from someplace else, think it's coming from someplace else, think it's coming from someplace else, you know, and that they're you know, and that they're you know, and that they're playing with us a little bit, you know, playing with us a little bit, you know, playing with us a little bit, you know, like I know Stephen Spielberg says when like I know Stephen Spielberg says when like I know Stephen Spielberg says when an idea comes, he says it whispers an idea comes, he says it whispers an idea comes, he says it whispers rather than shouting, which is his way, rather than shouting, which is his way, rather than shouting, which is his way, I think, of saying, you know, it just I think, of saying, you know, it just I think, of saying, you know, it just it's a very subtle thing that goes away it's a very subtle thing that goes away it's a very subtle thing that goes away very fast, you know, and you got to grab very fast, you know, and you got to grab very fast, you know, and you got to grab it while it's there. it while it's there. it while it's there. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on the Huberman Lab podcast and before on the Huberman Lab podcast and before on the Huberman Lab podcast and elsewhere about the fact that getting a elsewhere about the fact that getting a elsewhere about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of great night's sleep is the foundation of great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep performance. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in terms of on makes a huge difference in terms of on makes a huge difference in terms of the quality of sleep that you get each the quality of sleep that you get each the quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is, how firm it is, night. How soft it is, how firm it is, night. How soft it is, how firm it is, how breathable it is, the temperature how breathable it is, the temperature how breathable it is, the temperature all play into your comfort and needs to all play into your comfort and needs to all play into your comfort and needs to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you'll If you go to the Helix website, you'll If you go to the Helix website, you'll take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will take a brief two-minute quiz and it will ask you questions such as, "Do you tend ask you questions such as, "Do you tend ask you questions such as, "Do you tend to sleep on your back, your side, or to sleep on your back, your side, or to sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach, maybe you don't know, but your stomach, maybe you don't know, but your stomach, maybe you don't know, but it will also ask you, do you tend to run it will also ask you, do you tend to run it will also ask you, do you tend to run hot or cold during the night or the hot or cold during the night or the hot or cold during the night or the early part of the night, etc. Things of early part of the night, etc. Things of early part of the night, etc. Things of that sort." Maybe you know the answers that sort." Maybe you know the answers that sort." Maybe you know the answers to those questions, maybe you don't, but to those questions, maybe you don't, but to those questions, maybe you don't, but either way, Helix will match you to the either way, Helix will match you to the either way, Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that ideal mattress for you. For me, that ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress, turned out to be the Dusk mattress, turned out to be the Dusk mattress, Dusk. I started sleeping on the Dusk Dusk. I started sleeping on the Dusk Dusk. I started sleeping on the Dusk mattress about three and a half years mattress about three and a half years mattress about three and a half years ago and it's been far and away the best ago and it's been far and away the best ago and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. It's sleep that I've ever had. It's sleep that I've ever had. It's absolutely clear to me that having a absolutely clear to me that having a absolutely clear to me that having a mattress that's right for you does mattress that's right for you does mattress that's right for you does improve one's sleep. If you'd like to improve one's sleep. If you'd like to improve one's sleep. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to try Helix, you can go to try Helix, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman, take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that is will match you to a mattress that is will match you to a mattress that is customized for your unique sleep needs. customized for your unique sleep needs. customized for your unique sleep needs. Right now, Helix is giving up to 20% off Right now, Helix is giving up to 20% off Right now, Helix is giving up to 20% off all mattress orders. Again, that's all mattress orders. Again, that's all mattress orders. Again, that's helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. also brought to us by BetterHelp. also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing weekly entirely online. I've been doing weekly entirely online. I've been doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years, and I've therapy for well over 30 years, and I've therapy for well over 30 years, and I've found it to be an extremely important found it to be an extremely important found it to be an extremely important component to my overall health. There component to my overall health. There component to my overall health. There are essentially three things that great are essentially three things that great are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it provides a good rapport with somebody provides a good rapport with somebody provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and discuss issues that you can trust and discuss issues that you can trust and discuss issues with. Second of all, great therapy with. Second of all, great therapy with. Second of all, great therapy provides support in the form of provides support in the form of provides support in the form of emotional support or directed guidance emotional support or directed guidance emotional support or directed guidance with practical issues in your life. And with practical issues in your life. And with practical issues in your life. And third, expert therapy can provide useful third, expert therapy can provide useful third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. Insights that can allow you to insights. Insights that can allow you to insights. Insights that can allow you to make changes to improve your life. Not make changes to improve your life. Not make changes to improve your life. Not just your emotional life and your just your emotional life and your just your emotional life and your relationship life, but also your relationship life, but also your relationship life, but also your professional life. With Better Help, professional life. With Better Help, professional life. With Better Help, they make it very easy to find an expert they make it very easy to find an expert they make it very easy to find an expert therapist who can help provide the therapist who can help provide the therapist who can help provide the benefits that come through effective benefits that come through effective benefits that come through effective therapy. And it's carried out entirely therapy. And it's carried out entirely therapy. And it's carried out entirely online, so it's extremely convenient. No online, so it's extremely convenient. No online, so it's extremely convenient. No driving to the therapist's office, no driving to the therapist's office, no driving to the therapist's office, no looking for parking, etc. If you would looking for parking, etc. If you would looking for parking, etc. If you would like to try BetterHelp, go to like to try BetterHelp, go to like to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. &gt;&gt; Tell me more about this the from the &gt;&gt; Tell me more about this the from the &gt;&gt; Tell me more about this the from the goddess or the gods or the muse, you goddess or the gods or the muse, you goddess or the gods or the muse, you know, that from outside us or from God. know, that from outside us or from God. know, that from outside us or from God. &gt;&gt; Ah, well, you know, if you um go back to &gt;&gt; Ah, well, you know, if you um go back to &gt;&gt; Ah, well, you know, if you um go back to the ancient Greeks, right? every um the ancient Greeks, right? every um the ancient Greeks, right? every um the Iliad or the Odyssey or any of those Iliad or the Odyssey or any of those Iliad or the Odyssey or any of those other great works always start with an other great works always start with an other great works always start with an invocation of the muse, right? Homer invocation of the muse, right? Homer invocation of the muse, right? Homer writes, you know, goddess, you know, writes, you know, goddess, you know, writes, you know, goddess, you know, tell this story, you know, and basically tell this story, you know, and basically tell this story, you know, and basically the artist is stepping or taking his ego the artist is stepping or taking his ego the artist is stepping or taking his ego out of the picture and saying, I'm not out of the picture and saying, I'm not out of the picture and saying, I'm not the one that's going to tell you this the one that's going to tell you this the one that's going to tell you this story about ancient Troy. The goddess story about ancient Troy. The goddess story about ancient Troy. The goddess will tell through me. So they're sort of will tell through me. So they're sort of will tell through me. So they're sort of asking, you know, help me, show me, you asking, you know, help me, show me, you asking, you know, help me, show me, you know, that kind of thing. And um I had a know, that kind of thing. And um I had a know, that kind of thing. And um I had a mentor, you know, Rob, we were talking mentor, you know, Rob, we were talking mentor, you know, Rob, we were talking about that earlier, a guy named Paul about that earlier, a guy named Paul about that earlier, a guy named Paul Rink. He's like, can I get into the Rink. He's like, can I get into the Rink. He's like, can I get into the weeds on this thing, Andrew? weeds on this thing, Andrew? weeds on this thing, Andrew? &gt;&gt; Please. &gt;&gt; Please. &gt;&gt; Please. &gt;&gt; And um he sort of introduced me to this &gt;&gt; And um he sort of introduced me to this &gt;&gt; And um he sort of introduced me to this concept. This was like the first time I concept. This was like the first time I concept. This was like the first time I tried to write a book. I was like 27 or tried to write a book. I was like 27 or tried to write a book. I was like 27 or something like that. And I Well, I had something like that. And I Well, I had something like that. And I Well, I had actually tried and failed before, but it actually tried and failed before, but it actually tried and failed before, but it was the first time I ever finished one. was the first time I ever finished one. was the first time I ever finished one. And I used to have breakfast every And I used to have breakfast every And I used to have breakfast every morning. This was in Carmel Valley, not morning. This was in Carmel Valley, not morning. This was in Carmel Valley, not so far from where you grew up. And uh in so far from where you grew up. And uh in so far from where you grew up. And uh in with my friend Paul Rank, who's a who with my friend Paul Rank, who's a who with my friend Paul Rank, who's a who was a maybe 30 years older than me. He was a maybe 30 years older than me. He was a maybe 30 years older than me. He was an established writer. He knew John was an established writer. He knew John was an established writer. He knew John Steinbeck, knew Henry Miller from Big Steinbeck, knew Henry Miller from Big Steinbeck, knew Henry Miller from Big Surf. And he told me about the muses, Surf. And he told me about the muses, Surf. And he told me about the muses, the Greek goddesses, the nine sisters the Greek goddesses, the nine sisters the Greek goddesses, the nine sisters whose job it was to inspire artists. whose job it was to inspire artists. whose job it was to inspire artists. Right? The classic image of the muse is Right? The classic image of the muse is Right? The classic image of the muse is Beethoven at the piano and a kind of a Beethoven at the piano and a kind of a Beethoven at the piano and a kind of a shadowy female figure is kind of shadowy female figure is kind of shadowy female figure is kind of whispering in his ear, you know, whispering in his ear, you know, whispering in his ear, you know, bringing him da d right. And so he bringing him da d right. And so he bringing him da d right. And so he wrote out for me, my friend Paul, the wrote out for me, my friend Paul, the wrote out for me, my friend Paul, the invocation of the muse from he typed it invocation of the muse from he typed it invocation of the muse from he typed it out on his Remington manual typewriter, out on his Remington manual typewriter, out on his Remington manual typewriter, the invocation of the muse from the invocation of the muse from the invocation of the muse from the Odyssey, from Homer's Odyssey Odyssey, from Homer's Odyssey Odyssey, from Homer's Odyssey translation by TE Lawrence. And I've translation by TE Lawrence. And I've translation by TE Lawrence. And I've kept that. It burned up in the fire. kept that. It burned up in the fire. kept that. It burned up in the fire. Lost it in the fire. But I've kept that Lost it in the fire. But I've kept that Lost it in the fire. But I've kept that for like 50 years. And every morning for like 50 years. And every morning for like 50 years. And every morning before I sit down to work, I say that before I sit down to work, I say that before I sit down to work, I say that prayer, you know, out loud and in full prayer, you know, out loud and in full prayer, you know, out loud and in full earnest, you know, God has helped me. earnest, you know, God has helped me. earnest, you know, God has helped me. And um I'm absolutely a believer in And um I'm absolutely a believer in And um I'm absolutely a believer in that, you know, that ideas come that, you know, that ideas come that, you know, that ideas come from another place. And it's our job. from another place. And it's our job. from another place. And it's our job. And I don't think it's the subconscious. And I don't think it's the subconscious. And I don't think it's the subconscious. It's our job to open the pipeline and It's our job to open the pipeline and It's our job to open the pipeline and get out of the way. and get out of the way. and get out of the way. &gt;&gt; I love it. I And I'm totally open to the &gt;&gt; I love it. I And I'm totally open to the &gt;&gt; I love it. I And I'm totally open to the idea that it's not the unconscious mind idea that it's not the unconscious mind idea that it's not the unconscious mind or the subconscious, whatever people or the subconscious, whatever people or the subconscious, whatever people want to call it. Um I'm sad to hear that want to call it. Um I'm sad to hear that want to call it. Um I'm sad to hear that this uh um this write up of Invocation this uh um this write up of Invocation this uh um this write up of Invocation of the Muse burned. We should probably of the Muse burned. We should probably of the Muse burned. We should probably just mention that we used to be just mention that we used to be just mention that we used to be neighbors. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um your home burned in the fires, sadly. &gt;&gt; Um your home burned in the fires, sadly. &gt;&gt; Um your home burned in the fires, sadly. Uh the home that I lived in um it was Uh the home that I lived in um it was Uh the home that I lived in um it was not my home. I was renting it. Also not my home. I was renting it. Also not my home. I was renting it. Also burned in the fires. Um so my guess is burned in the fires. Um so my guess is burned in the fires. Um so my guess is at some point during today's at some point during today's at some point during today's conversation we'll talk about conversation we'll talk about conversation we'll talk about &gt;&gt; loss of objects and items. But sounds &gt;&gt; loss of objects and items. But sounds &gt;&gt; loss of objects and items. But sounds like this one was pretty precious. like this one was pretty precious. like this one was pretty precious. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was a sad thing to lose that, &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was a sad thing to lose that, &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was a sad thing to lose that, you know, but you know it's in my you know, but you know it's in my you know, but you know it's in my head, you know. head, you know. head, you know. &gt;&gt; How long is it? &gt;&gt; How long is it? &gt;&gt; How long is it? &gt;&gt; Um it was on one page double spaced. &gt;&gt; Um it was on one page double spaced. &gt;&gt; Um it was on one page double spaced. &gt;&gt; I would say it takes to recite it takes &gt;&gt; I would say it takes to recite it takes &gt;&gt; I would say it takes to recite it takes maybe 90 seconds. Do you have any uh maybe 90 seconds. Do you have any uh maybe 90 seconds. Do you have any uh interest or desire in calling it up now interest or desire in calling it up now interest or desire in calling it up now or a portion of it? or a portion of it? or a portion of it? &gt;&gt; Uh I'll call up just the opening of &gt;&gt; Uh I'll call up just the opening of &gt;&gt; Uh I'll call up just the opening of it because the middle part is Homer sort it because the middle part is Homer sort it because the middle part is Homer sort of describing the whole story of the of describing the whole story of the of describing the whole story of the Odyssey. But it starts like this. It Odyssey. But it starts like this. It Odyssey. But it starts like this. It goes, "Oh divine poisey, goes, "Oh divine poisey, goes, "Oh divine poisey, goddess, daughter of Zeus, sustain for goddess, daughter of Zeus, sustain for goddess, daughter of Zeus, sustain for me this song of the various-minded man," me this song of the various-minded man," me this song of the various-minded man," meaning Odysius. And then he kind of meaning Odysius. And then he kind of meaning Odysius. And then he kind of goes on to talk about da and at goes on to talk about da and at goes on to talk about da and at the end it says um make this tale live the end it says um make this tale live the end it says um make this tale live for us in all its many bearings oh muse for us in all its many bearings oh muse for us in all its many bearings oh muse which I think is a great you know make which I think is a great you know make which I think is a great you know make it live make it come alive in all its it live make it come alive in all its it live make it come alive in all its many bearings. And so you know that's uh many bearings. And so you know that's uh many bearings. And so you know that's uh thanks to my friend Paul that's been thanks to my friend Paul that's been thanks to my friend Paul that's been a thing that's been with me for you know a thing that's been with me for you know a thing that's been with me for you know 40 years. 40 years. 40 years. &gt;&gt; I love it. Well we'll provide a link to &gt;&gt; I love it. Well we'll provide a link to &gt;&gt; I love it. Well we'll provide a link to the full uh the full uh the full uh &gt;&gt; it's in the war of art actually. I &gt;&gt; it's in the war of art actually. I &gt;&gt; it's in the war of art actually. I wrote this out in the in the War of Art. wrote this out in the in the War of Art. wrote this out in the in the War of Art. I think it's on page 114 or 115. I think it's on page 114 or 115. I think it's on page 114 or 115. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And if anyone hasn't read War of &gt;&gt; Yeah. And if anyone hasn't read War of &gt;&gt; Yeah. And if anyone hasn't read War of Art, it's an absolute must-read. I've Art, it's an absolute must-read. I've Art, it's an absolute must-read. I've read it many times. It's have an read it many times. It's have an read it many times. It's have an audiobook form, uh, hard copy form. It audiobook form, uh, hard copy form. It audiobook form, uh, hard copy form. It is awesome. It is just awesome. is awesome. It is just awesome. is awesome. It is just awesome. So, when you sit down to write after So, when you sit down to write after So, when you sit down to write after you've recited this, um, how many you've recited this, um, how many you've recited this, um, how many times in the first 10 minutes do you times in the first 10 minutes do you times in the first 10 minutes do you think your mind flits to something else? think your mind flits to something else? think your mind flits to something else? I mean, you're now a pro. like you've I mean, you're now a pro. like you've I mean, you're now a pro. like you've written many books and you know what to written many books and you know what to written many books and you know what to uh what is noise and you know what is uh what is noise and you know what is uh what is noise and you know what is signal and you know if you really need signal and you know if you really need signal and you know if you really need to go to the bathroom or if you don't to go to the bathroom or if you don't to go to the bathroom or if you don't you know well these are these are the you know well these are these are the you know well these are these are the things that pop up right as you point things that pop up right as you point things that pop up right as you point out resistance comes in oh you know I out resistance comes in oh you know I out resistance comes in oh you know I need another glass of water or I'm not need another glass of water or I'm not need another glass of water or I'm not caffeinating enough or there's not caffeinating enough or there's not caffeinating enough or there's not enough sunlight coming through my window enough sunlight coming through my window enough sunlight coming through my window whatever right um whatever right um whatever right um &gt;&gt; how many times in the first 10 minutes &gt;&gt; how many times in the first 10 minutes &gt;&gt; how many times in the first 10 minutes on a typical day just give us an average on a typical day just give us an average on a typical day just give us an average uh do you think your mind flits to yeah uh do you think your mind flits to yeah uh do you think your mind flits to yeah like I wonder what's going on in the like I wonder what's going on in the like I wonder what's going on in the news &gt;&gt; that's a great you know, like what's &gt;&gt; that's a great you know, like what's &gt;&gt; that's a great you know, like what's going on in the world. I mean, going on in the world. I mean, going on in the world. I mean, &gt;&gt; how many times? One, &gt;&gt; how many times? One, &gt;&gt; how many times? One, &gt;&gt; two, never. &gt;&gt; two, never. &gt;&gt; two, never. &gt;&gt; Never. Now, that's not to say when I &gt;&gt; Never. Now, that's not to say when I &gt;&gt; Never. Now, that's not to say when I first started many, many moons ago that first started many, many moons ago that first started many, many moons ago that I didn't have a lot of that sort of I didn't have a lot of that sort of I didn't have a lot of that sort of stuff, but I have I don't know whether stuff, but I have I don't know whether stuff, but I have I don't know whether just over the years, um, I'm just over the years, um, I'm just over the years, um, I'm absolutely a believer in, you know, like absolutely a believer in, you know, like absolutely a believer in, you know, like diving straight into the pool, you know, diving straight into the pool, you know, diving straight into the pool, you know, I don't sit there for one second, you I don't sit there for one second, you I don't sit there for one second, you know, wondering what I'm going to do. I know, wondering what I'm going to do. I know, wondering what I'm going to do. I just plunge right in. And uh you know, just plunge right in. And uh you know, just plunge right in. And uh you know, thank goodness I'm somehow I've learned thank goodness I'm somehow I've learned thank goodness I'm somehow I've learned how to do it and I just focus full tilt how to do it and I just focus full tilt how to do it and I just focus full tilt on it. Uh so yeah, I don't I don't have on it. Uh so yeah, I don't I don't have on it. Uh so yeah, I don't I don't have those thoughts at all. H those thoughts at all. H those thoughts at all. H &gt;&gt; how long do you write in that first &gt;&gt; how long do you write in that first &gt;&gt; how long do you write in that first bout? &gt;&gt; Um maybe an hour. &gt;&gt; Um maybe an hour. &gt;&gt; Um maybe an hour. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Uh and then I'll take a little bit of &gt;&gt; Uh and then I'll take a little bit of &gt;&gt; Uh and then I'll take a little bit of a break. a break. a break. &gt;&gt; Um I love to do laundry. That's my big &gt;&gt; Um I love to do laundry. That's my big &gt;&gt; Um I love to do laundry. That's my big thing. You know, I'll go I'll change the thing. You know, I'll go I'll change the thing. You know, I'll go I'll change the I'll put in the laundry at the start, I'll put in the laundry at the start, I'll put in the laundry at the start, you know, and it'll be the lo the load you know, and it'll be the lo the load you know, and it'll be the lo the load will be done. Then I can put it into the will be done. Then I can put it into the will be done. Then I can put it into the dryer. I take a little break and then I dryer. I take a little break and then I dryer. I take a little break and then I come back and start again for come back and start again for come back and start again for another hour. another hour. another hour. &gt;&gt; You enjoy it or you enjoy clean laundry &gt;&gt; You enjoy it or you enjoy clean laundry &gt;&gt; You enjoy it or you enjoy clean laundry or both? or both? or both? &gt;&gt; I just I enjoy the sort of the ritual of &gt;&gt; I just I enjoy the sort of the ritual of &gt;&gt; I just I enjoy the sort of the ritual of it and the craziness of it, you know. it and the craziness of it, you know. it and the craziness of it, you know. &gt;&gt; Not me. Not one bit. The only thing I &gt;&gt; Not me. Not one bit. The only thing I &gt;&gt; Not me. Not one bit. The only thing I enjoy about doing laundry is clearing enjoy about doing laundry is clearing enjoy about doing laundry is clearing the lint trap. There's something very the lint trap. There's something very the lint trap. There's something very satisfying about what I hate. I don't satisfying about what I hate. I don't satisfying about what I hate. I don't want to do that. want to do that. want to do that. &gt;&gt; Interesting. All right. Well, we're not &gt;&gt; Interesting. All right. Well, we're not &gt;&gt; Interesting. All right. Well, we're not considering, but we'd make good considering, but we'd make good considering, but we'd make good roommates. &gt;&gt; Um interesting. So, for an hour, you're &gt;&gt; Um interesting. So, for an hour, you're &gt;&gt; Um interesting. So, for an hour, you're locked in and you're just typing. Wait, locked in and you're just typing. Wait, locked in and you're just typing. Wait, how often does your inner critic pop up how often does your inner critic pop up how often does your inner critic pop up nowadays versus at the beginning? nowadays versus at the beginning? nowadays versus at the beginning? Meaning the I don't know if this is Meaning the I don't know if this is Meaning the I don't know if this is going the right direction. Um, I've going the right direction. Um, I've going the right direction. Um, I've heard before that you're just supposed heard before that you're just supposed heard before that you're just supposed to create and then edit later. What's to create and then edit later. What's to create and then edit later. What's your process there? your process there? your process there? &gt;&gt; Uh, it almost never comes up. The inner &gt;&gt; Uh, it almost never comes up. The inner &gt;&gt; Uh, it almost never comes up. The inner critic again. It used to, you know, used critic again. It used to, you know, used critic again. It used to, you know, used to all the time was a terrible struggle to all the time was a terrible struggle to all the time was a terrible struggle I had for years. I had for years. I had for years. &gt;&gt; You know, you sit down and you think, &gt;&gt; You know, you sit down and you think, &gt;&gt; You know, you sit down and you think, well, is Hemingway would Hemingway write well, is Hemingway would Hemingway write well, is Hemingway would Hemingway write this sentence, you know, right? or this sentence, you know, right? or this sentence, you know, right? or you know what will the New York Times you know what will the New York Times you know what will the New York Times think when I write you know but think when I write you know but think when I write you know but eventually over time you learn you just eventually over time you learn you just eventually over time you learn you just can't deal with that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know can't deal with that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know can't deal with that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know it drives you insane it drives you insane it drives you insane &gt;&gt; you know so no I don't I don't let &gt;&gt; you know so no I don't I don't let &gt;&gt; you know so no I don't I don't let that inner critic come in you know and that inner critic come in you know and that inner critic come in you know and I'm definitely a believer um at the end I'm definitely a believer um at the end I'm definitely a believer um at the end of the day I never read what I wrote of the day I never read what I wrote of the day I never read what I wrote &gt;&gt; and I never look back on it the next day &gt;&gt; and I never look back on it the next day &gt;&gt; and I never look back on it the next day um I believe in multiple d somebody um I believe in multiple d somebody um I believe in multiple d somebody taught me this one time that uh think in taught me this one time that uh think in taught me this one time that uh think in multiple drafts. Um this was Jack Eps, multiple drafts. Um this was Jack Eps, multiple drafts. Um this was Jack Eps, the writer of the original writer of Top the writer of the original writer of Top the writer of the original writer of Top Gun. Um I was working for him on a on a Gun. Um I was working for him on a on a Gun. Um I was working for him on a on a movie project and he said he said always movie project and he said he said always movie project and he said he said always think in multiple drafts and uh and you think in multiple drafts and uh and you think in multiple drafts and uh and you can only fix so much in one draft. You can only fix so much in one draft. You can only fix so much in one draft. You can only fix one thing in one draft. So can only fix one thing in one draft. So can only fix one thing in one draft. So I usually will think of and I start a I usually will think of and I start a I usually will think of and I start a book maybe 13, 14, 15 drafts. the last book maybe 13, 14, 15 drafts. the last book maybe 13, 14, 15 drafts. the last seven or eight will be really small, you seven or eight will be really small, you seven or eight will be really small, you know, really slight changes, but I won't know, really slight changes, but I won't know, really slight changes, but I won't look back on the day's work because I look back on the day's work because I look back on the day's work because I figure on my next draft then I'll then figure on my next draft then I'll then figure on my next draft then I'll then I'll read it fresh and it'll look a I'll read it fresh and it'll look a I'll read it fresh and it'll look a million times a much more clear sense. million times a much more clear sense. million times a much more clear sense. Is this any good? Because if you do it Is this any good? Because if you do it Is this any good? Because if you do it when it's too fresh, you start to drive when it's too fresh, you start to drive when it's too fresh, you start to drive yourself crazy. You start to, you know, yourself crazy. You start to, you know, yourself crazy. You start to, you know, perfectionism, another form of perfectionism, another form of perfectionism, another form of resistance comes in. So, yeah, that's resistance comes in. So, yeah, that's resistance comes in. So, yeah, that's my process. I know a lot of other that's my process. I know a lot of other that's my process. I know a lot of other people don't do it that way, but that's people don't do it that way, but that's people don't do it that way, but that's the way I do it. I never when the when the way I do it. I never when the when the way I do it. I never when the when the day is done, the bell rings, the day is done, the bell rings, the day is done, the bell rings, the office is closed, that's it. I turn off office is closed, that's it. I turn off office is closed, that's it. I turn off my mind and just let you let the muse my mind and just let you let the muse my mind and just let you let the muse take care of it overnight and I don't I take care of it overnight and I don't I take care of it overnight and I don't I try not to worry about it at all. All I try not to worry about it at all. All I try not to worry about it at all. All I ask myself, I know I'm getting into the ask myself, I know I'm getting into the ask myself, I know I'm getting into the weeds here really. No, it's very weeds here really. No, it's very weeds here really. No, it's very important that you get into the weeds important that you get into the weeds important that you get into the weeds because I think um you've offered many because I think um you've offered many because I think um you've offered many times through books and uh their times through books and uh their times through books and uh their podcasts the contour and a lot podcasts the contour and a lot podcasts the contour and a lot of depth, but I think the more detail of depth, but I think the more detail of depth, but I think the more detail the better because everyone will do it the better because everyone will do it the better because everyone will do it slightly differently, slightly differently, slightly differently, &gt;&gt; but I think it's very important. We &gt;&gt; but I think it's very important. We &gt;&gt; but I think it's very important. We rarely hear what people's real process rarely hear what people's real process rarely hear what people's real process is. So, please don't edit yourself is. So, please don't edit yourself is. So, please don't edit yourself here. At the end of the a day's session, here. At the end of the a day's session, here. At the end of the a day's session, all I ask myself is did I put in the all I ask myself is did I put in the all I ask myself is did I put in the time and did I work as hard as I can. time and did I work as hard as I can. time and did I work as hard as I can. Quality will take care of itself later Quality will take care of itself later Quality will take care of itself later in the next draft and the next draft in the next draft and the next draft in the next draft and the next draft after that. But I'd never judge it, you after that. But I'd never judge it, you after that. But I'd never judge it, you know. And it took a long, long time to know. And it took a long, long time to know. And it took a long, long time to get to that place to learn that, you get to that place to learn that, you get to that place to learn that, you know, because I would drive myself know, because I would drive myself know, because I would drive myself insane for years and years judging along insane for years and years judging along insane for years and years judging along the way. the way. the way. How long is the total writing session at How long is the total writing session at How long is the total writing session at depending on how much laundry you have depending on how much laundry you have depending on how much laundry you have to? &gt;&gt; Great questions. I used to be able to &gt;&gt; Great questions. I used to be able to &gt;&gt; Great questions. I used to be able to write for four hours. Now I can only write for four hours. Now I can only write for four hours. Now I can only write for about two. What I tell myself, write for about two. What I tell myself, write for about two. What I tell myself, and I think it's true, is that I can do and I think it's true, is that I can do and I think it's true, is that I can do in two hours now what I used to do in two hours now what I used to do in two hours now what I used to do in four. &gt;&gt; Um, but I stop when I start making &gt;&gt; Um, but I stop when I start making &gt;&gt; Um, but I stop when I start making mistakes. When I start having typos and mistakes. When I start having typos and mistakes. When I start having typos and things like that, then it's kind of like things like that, then it's kind of like things like that, then it's kind of like a workout at the gym. you know, when a workout at the gym. you know, when a workout at the gym. you know, when you've reached the end, you know, I'm you've reached the end, you know, I'm you've reached the end, you know, I'm just going to hurt myself if I do just going to hurt myself if I do just going to hurt myself if I do another set, you know, um the point of another set, you know, um the point of another set, you know, um the point of diminishing returns. So, when I get diminishing returns. So, when I get diminishing returns. So, when I get tired, I stop and I don't question it at tired, I stop and I don't question it at tired, I stop and I don't question it at all. I don't say I don't make myself all. I don't say I don't make myself all. I don't say I don't make myself feel bad about, oh, you can get another feel bad about, oh, you can get another feel bad about, oh, you can get another 10 minutes. Um like Steinbeck used to 10 minutes. Um like Steinbeck used to 10 minutes. Um like Steinbeck used to say that um pressing forward at the end say that um pressing forward at the end say that um pressing forward at the end of a long day to get just a little bit of a long day to get just a little bit of a long day to get just a little bit more is the falsest kind of economy more is the falsest kind of economy more is the falsest kind of economy because you pay for it the next day. And because you pay for it the next day. And because you pay for it the next day. And Hemingway used to say he always stopped Hemingway used to say he always stopped Hemingway used to say he always stopped when he knew what was coming next in the when he knew what was coming next in the when he knew what was coming next in the story which I also believe in that too story which I also believe in that too story which I also believe in that too because that'll help you in that hairy because that'll help you in that hairy because that'll help you in that hairy first moment when you're sitting down first moment when you're sitting down first moment when you're sitting down because at least you know oh okay this because at least you know oh okay this because at least you know oh okay this is what's going to happen. Ah, so you is what's going to happen. Ah, so you is what's going to happen. Ah, so you leave sort of an ellipse in your mind. leave sort of an ellipse in your mind. leave sort of an ellipse in your mind. So the next morning you know exactly So the next morning you know exactly So the next morning you know exactly where to pick up and that the entry where to pick up and that the entry where to pick up and that the entry point is a little easier. point is a little easier. point is a little easier. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; The analogy to uh working out is a great &gt;&gt; The analogy to uh working out is a great &gt;&gt; The analogy to uh working out is a great one. Um one. Um one. Um years ago when I started resistance years ago when I started resistance years ago when I started resistance training I learned from Mike Menser. I training I learned from Mike Menser. I training I learned from Mike Menser. I don't know if you ever overlapped with don't know if you ever overlapped with don't know if you ever overlapped with Mike at Golds. No. Mike at Golds. No. Mike at Golds. No. &gt;&gt; He died some years ago. &gt;&gt; He died some years ago. &gt;&gt; He died some years ago. &gt;&gt; Just interrupt for a second. They call &gt;&gt; Just interrupt for a second. They call &gt;&gt; Just interrupt for a second. They call it resistance training which is exactly it resistance training which is exactly it resistance training which is exactly what we're talking about for art. Yeah. what we're talking about for art. Yeah. what we're talking about for art. Yeah. So but please continue. So but please continue. So but please continue. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Excellent point, Noah. please. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Excellent point, Noah. please. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Excellent point, Noah. please. Um, you know, there are a lot of theories you know, there are a lot of theories you know, there are a lot of theories out there about resistance training and out there about resistance training and out there about resistance training and how best to get muscles to grow and to how best to get muscles to grow and to how best to get muscles to grow and to get stronger, etc. At one extreme is, get stronger, etc. At one extreme is, get stronger, etc. At one extreme is, you know, you warm up and then you do you know, you warm up and then you do you know, you warm up and then you do one set to absolute failure, maybe a one set to absolute failure, maybe a one set to absolute failure, maybe a second set you push through. That's kind second set you push through. That's kind second set you push through. That's kind of the mener high intensity thing. At of the mener high intensity thing. At of the mener high intensity thing. At the other extreme is it's volume, just the other extreme is it's volume, just the other extreme is it's volume, just lots and lots and lots of sets. There's lots and lots and lots of sets. There's lots and lots and lots of sets. There's been debate about this endlessly and has been debate about this endlessly and has been debate about this endlessly and has to do with all sorts of factors, but the to do with all sorts of factors, but the to do with all sorts of factors, but the literature is now coming to a place literature is now coming to a place literature is now coming to a place where it's pretty clear that after where it's pretty clear that after where it's pretty clear that after warming up the first one or two sets warming up the first one or two sets warming up the first one or two sets that you do are really the most valuable that you do are really the most valuable that you do are really the most valuable of a given exercise. And I didn't know of a given exercise. And I didn't know of a given exercise. And I didn't know that &gt;&gt; almost certainly you need more than one &gt;&gt; almost certainly you need more than one &gt;&gt; almost certainly you need more than one set um overall you certainly do, but set um overall you certainly do, but set um overall you certainly do, but that it's really the intensity that you that it's really the intensity that you that it's really the intensity that you bring. But here's the point that is bring. But here's the point that is bring. But here's the point that is strongly analogous to what you're strongly analogous to what you're strongly analogous to what you're talking about when you say you used to talking about when you say you used to talking about when you say you used to be able to write for four hours a day. be able to write for four hours a day. be able to write for four hours a day. Now you do two and you tell yourself Now you do two and you tell yourself Now you do two and you tell yourself that you accomplish the same amount in that you accomplish the same amount in that you accomplish the same amount in those two. That's almost certainly true those two. That's almost certainly true those two. That's almost certainly true based on what we understand about based on what we understand about based on what we understand about neuroscience and believe it or not neuroscience and believe it or not neuroscience and believe it or not resistance training in the gym. And the resistance training in the gym. And the resistance training in the gym. And the argument is that as you resistance the argument is that as you resistance the argument is that as you resistance train or write train or write train or write &gt;&gt; or play volleyball or do any activity, &gt;&gt; or play volleyball or do any activity, &gt;&gt; or play volleyball or do any activity, &gt;&gt; you develop a better ability to recruit &gt;&gt; you develop a better ability to recruit &gt;&gt; you develop a better ability to recruit your nervous system to do the necessary your nervous system to do the necessary your nervous system to do the necessary work. You said you didn't used to be work. You said you didn't used to be work. You said you didn't used to be able to just sit down and focus for an able to just sit down and focus for an able to just sit down and focus for an hour with minimal interruption in your hour with minimal interruption in your hour with minimal interruption in your mind. Now you can. You learned that mind. Now you can. You learned that mind. Now you can. You learned that &gt;&gt; the more intensity that we can bring to &gt;&gt; the more intensity that we can bring to &gt;&gt; the more intensity that we can bring to something, the more focus we can bring something, the more focus we can bring something, the more focus we can bring to something, the more taxing it is. to something, the more taxing it is. to something, the more taxing it is. &gt;&gt; Like if I do one set in the gym with &gt;&gt; Like if I do one set in the gym with &gt;&gt; Like if I do one set in the gym with total concentration to absolute failure, total concentration to absolute failure, total concentration to absolute failure, which is very difficult to do when you which is very difficult to do when you which is very difficult to do when you first start training. You barely know first start training. You barely know first start training. You barely know how to do the movement, right? You're how to do the movement, right? You're how to do the movement, right? You're still learning. Your nervous system is still learning. Your nervous system is still learning. Your nervous system is still learning. You can't inflict the still learning. You can't inflict the still learning. You can't inflict the same stimulus same stimulus same stimulus &gt;&gt; with one set that you uh that you can &gt;&gt; with one set that you uh that you can &gt;&gt; with one set that you uh that you can later after you're practiced. later after you're practiced. later after you're practiced. &gt;&gt; Makes a lot of sense. &gt;&gt; Makes a lot of sense. &gt;&gt; Makes a lot of sense. &gt;&gt; So, and so there's this counterintuitive &gt;&gt; So, and so there's this counterintuitive &gt;&gt; So, and so there's this counterintuitive thing that people in the high thing that people in the high thing that people in the high performance field are really starting to performance field are really starting to performance field are really starting to adopt. And I talked to people in a bunch adopt. And I talked to people in a bunch adopt. And I talked to people in a bunch of different high performance fields, of different high performance fields, of different high performance fields, not just exercise and creative works, not just exercise and creative works, not just exercise and creative works, that the better you get at something, that the better you get at something, that the better you get at something, the shorter your real workouts should be the shorter your real workouts should be the shorter your real workouts should be &gt;&gt; and the more intense they should be. &gt;&gt; and the more intense they should be. &gt;&gt; and the more intense they should be. It's almost like a knife that's getting It's almost like a knife that's getting It's almost like a knife that's getting sharper and sharper. you can cut deeper sharper and sharper. you can cut deeper sharper and sharper. you can cut deeper and deeper whereas at the beginning we and deeper whereas at the beginning we and deeper whereas at the beginning we have sort of a dull blade and we have to have sort of a dull blade and we have to have sort of a dull blade and we have to you know route over the same path. So you know route over the same path. So you know route over the same path. So &gt;&gt; I think this is a nervous system feature &gt;&gt; I think this is a nervous system feature &gt;&gt; I think this is a nervous system feature &gt;&gt; and that's why it transcends physical &gt;&gt; and that's why it transcends physical &gt;&gt; and that's why it transcends physical and mental creative and other types of and mental creative and other types of and mental creative and other types of works. &gt;&gt; Um because if you talk to great &gt;&gt; Um because if you talk to great &gt;&gt; Um because if you talk to great musicians, they're not practicing 11 musicians, they're not practicing 11 musicians, they're not practicing 11 hours a day anymore. They're practicing hours a day anymore. They're practicing hours a day anymore. They're practicing for three or four extremely focused for three or four extremely focused for three or four extremely focused hours, sometimes divided up by naps and hours, sometimes divided up by naps and hours, sometimes divided up by naps and meals, you know, the So, in any case, meals, you know, the So, in any case, meals, you know, the So, in any case, &gt;&gt; so you so you put in your two very &gt;&gt; so you so you put in your two very &gt;&gt; so you so you put in your two very focused hours with some laundry in focused hours with some laundry in focused hours with some laundry in between. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And then you rack it, you hang it &gt;&gt; And then you rack it, you hang it &gt;&gt; And then you rack it, you hang it up, and you don't look at it. Are you up, and you don't look at it. Are you up, and you don't look at it. Are you thinking about it throughout the day? thinking about it throughout the day? thinking about it throughout the day? &gt;&gt; Um, no. But like we were talking about, &gt;&gt; Um, no. But like we were talking about, &gt;&gt; Um, no. But like we were talking about, if an idea comes to me, then I grab my if an idea comes to me, then I grab my if an idea comes to me, then I grab my phone and I dictate that. And let me say phone and I dictate that. And let me say phone and I dictate that. And let me say one thing here for anybody that's one thing here for anybody that's one thing here for anybody that's listening to this and would be want to listening to this and would be want to listening to this and would be want to be writers, aspiring writers. Um, so I'm be writers, aspiring writers. Um, so I'm be writers, aspiring writers. Um, so I'm a full-time writer. I don't have another a full-time writer. I don't have another a full-time writer. I don't have another job. I don't have to do anything. But job. I don't have to do anything. But job. I don't have to do anything. But yet I can only get two hours of time yet I can only get two hours of time yet I can only get two hours of time basically in the day. So, if you guys basically in the day. So, if you guys basically in the day. So, if you guys have a full-time job and kids and a have a full-time job and kids and a have a full-time job and kids and a family and a wife and a spouse, family and a wife and a spouse, family and a wife and a spouse, whatever, if you can squeeze out a whatever, if you can squeeze out a whatever, if you can squeeze out a couple hours a day, you're doing you're couple hours a day, you're doing you're couple hours a day, you're doing you're on the same level with me, same level on the same level with me, same level on the same level with me, same level with a with a full-time writer, so that with a with a full-time writer, so that with a with a full-time writer, so that it is possible to uh have a full-time it is possible to uh have a full-time it is possible to uh have a full-time job and still do a your artistic job and still do a your artistic job and still do a your artistic thing to a full tilt version. thing to a full tilt version. thing to a full tilt version. &gt;&gt; Excellent point. How important do you &gt;&gt; Excellent point. How important do you &gt;&gt; Excellent point. How important do you think it is for you to start that think it is for you to start that think it is for you to start that writing session at more or less the same writing session at more or less the same writing session at more or less the same time each day? You're not saying two time each day? You're not saying two time each day? You're not saying two hours in the morning or two hours in the hours in the morning or two hours in the hours in the morning or two hours in the evening. Two hours in the morning or evening. Two hours in the morning or evening. Two hours in the morning or hour in the morning, hour in the hour in the morning, hour in the hour in the morning, hour in the afternoon. It sounds like it's very afternoon. It sounds like it's very afternoon. It sounds like it's very regimented. &gt;&gt; It it is. I think it's really important. &gt;&gt; It it is. I think it's really important. &gt;&gt; It it is. I think it's really important. And when life was more predictable for And when life was more predictable for And when life was more predictable for me, I would always do it. But like since me, I would always do it. But like since me, I would always do it. But like since the fires and other things like that, the fires and other things like that, the fires and other things like that, um, sometimes I have to shift time um, sometimes I have to shift time um, sometimes I have to shift time frames around and be ready to do that, frames around and be ready to do that, frames around and be ready to do that, you know. Um, I have a good friend Jack you know. Um, I have a good friend Jack you know. Um, I have a good friend Jack Carr, the thriller writer who did the Carr, the thriller writer who did the Carr, the thriller writer who did the terminal list and uh, you know, he's terminal list and uh, you know, he's terminal list and uh, you know, he's uh, he's a master of writing in uh, he's a master of writing in uh, he's a master of writing in airplanes and writing at Starbucks airplanes and writing at Starbucks airplanes and writing at Starbucks because he's always traveling and doing because he's always traveling and doing because he's always traveling and doing all kinds of stuff and just finding the all kinds of stuff and just finding the all kinds of stuff and just finding the time. God bless him. I don't know how he time. God bless him. I don't know how he time. God bless him. I don't know how he does it, you know, to and he is does it, you know, to and he is does it, you know, to and he is incredibly productive. Um, I don't I incredibly productive. Um, I don't I incredibly productive. Um, I don't I don't know if I could do that. I maybe don't know if I could do that. I maybe don't know if I could do that. I maybe my I will shift from writing from 11 to my I will shift from writing from 11 to my I will shift from writing from 11 to 1 to writing from one to three but 1 to writing from one to three but 1 to writing from one to three but that's about the most you know uh that's about the most you know uh that's about the most you know uh variance I can put into it. variance I can put into it. variance I can put into it. &gt;&gt; Do you have your phone in the room when &gt;&gt; Do you have your phone in the room when &gt;&gt; Do you have your phone in the room when you write and is the internet engaged on you write and is the internet engaged on you write and is the internet engaged on your computer? Not at all, you know. No. your computer? Not at all, you know. No. your computer? Not at all, you know. No. I mean, my phone is there maybe to I mean, my phone is there maybe to I mean, my phone is there maybe to dictate a note or something like that, dictate a note or something like that, dictate a note or something like that, but otherwise, no. I don't, you know, but otherwise, no. I don't, you know, but otherwise, no. I don't, you know, absolutely not. And and uh Yeah. I can't absolutely not. And and uh Yeah. I can't absolutely not. And and uh Yeah. I can't even imagine that. even imagine that. even imagine that. &gt;&gt; Music. &gt;&gt; Music. &gt;&gt; Music. &gt;&gt; No. No music. No. &gt;&gt; No. No music. No. &gt;&gt; No. No music. No. &gt;&gt; Just the sound of your own breathing. &gt;&gt; Just the sound of your own breathing. &gt;&gt; Just the sound of your own breathing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. What's that? &gt;&gt; Yeah. What's that? &gt;&gt; Yeah. What's that? &gt;&gt; Because you're in your own head, right? &gt;&gt; Because you're in your own head, right? &gt;&gt; Because you're in your own head, right? You're in that universe, you know? You're in that universe, you know? You're in that universe, you know? &gt;&gt; This is what I find so odd about writing &gt;&gt; This is what I find so odd about writing &gt;&gt; This is what I find so odd about writing is you're in your head. you're in your head. you're in your head. It's your voice in your head, but you're It's your voice in your head, but you're It's your voice in your head, but you're in a conversation with the potential in a conversation with the potential in a conversation with the potential audience. What is the actual dialogue? Are you is the actual dialogue? Are you is the actual dialogue? Are you thinking, this gets a little thinking, this gets a little thinking, this gets a little philosophical, but at the end of the philosophical, but at the end of the philosophical, but at the end of the day, it's very concrete. Are you day, it's very concrete. Are you day, it's very concrete. Are you thinking about a conversation with the thinking about a conversation with the thinking about a conversation with the audience or are you just translating audience or are you just translating audience or are you just translating thoughts into words and the audience thoughts into words and the audience thoughts into words and the audience doesn't exist yet? Uh, I'm very aware of doesn't exist yet? Uh, I'm very aware of doesn't exist yet? Uh, I'm very aware of the reader in the sense of the reader in the sense of the reader in the sense of um, let's say it's a scene that I that I'm let's say it's a scene that I that I'm let's say it's a scene that I that I'm writing and I know certain things have writing and I know certain things have writing and I know certain things have to happen in this scene. Character A has to happen in this scene. Character A has to happen in this scene. Character A has to do something, character B, da to do something, character B, da to do something, character B, da da. And so I'm trying to put that da. And so I'm trying to put that da. And so I'm trying to put that down, but I'm thinking, down, but I'm thinking, down, but I'm thinking, is the reader understanding what have I is the reader understanding what have I is the reader understanding what have I got this in the right order for got this in the right order for got this in the right order for them? you know, am I am I boring them? you know, am I am I boring them? you know, am I am I boring them? Is it did I did I say that, you know, Is it did I did I say that, you know, Is it did I did I say that, you know, two pages ago and now I'm repeating two pages ago and now I'm repeating two pages ago and now I'm repeating myself? So, I'm but I'm not having a myself? So, I'm but I'm not having a myself? So, I'm but I'm not having a conversation. I'm just trying to make conversation. I'm just trying to make conversation. I'm just trying to make it as easy and as interesting and as it as easy and as interesting and as it as easy and as interesting and as fun as I can for the for the reader and fun as I can for the for the reader and fun as I can for the for the reader and always make trying to make sure that and always make trying to make sure that and always make trying to make sure that I'm leading I'm leading them. I'm leading I'm leading them. I'm leading I'm leading them. I'm seducing them. I'm trying to reel them seducing them. I'm trying to reel them seducing them. I'm trying to reel them in, you know, all you know, and not bore in, you know, all you know, and not bore in, you know, all you know, and not bore them. You know, by the end of this them. You know, by the end of this them. You know, by the end of this chapter or scene, I want the reader to chapter or scene, I want the reader to chapter or scene, I want the reader to be thinking, "Oh, I can't wait to turn be thinking, "Oh, I can't wait to turn be thinking, "Oh, I can't wait to turn the page and see what happens next." the page and see what happens next." the page and see what happens next." &gt;&gt; Growing up, were you a storyteller among &gt;&gt; Growing up, were you a storyteller among &gt;&gt; Growing up, were you a storyteller among your friends? your friends? your friends? &gt;&gt; I never even thought about it as a kid. &gt;&gt; I never even thought about it as a kid. &gt;&gt; I never even thought about it as a kid. &gt;&gt; Like, you didn't hanging out with &gt;&gt; Like, you didn't hanging out with &gt;&gt; Like, you didn't hanging out with friends, you wouldn't tell a story about friends, you wouldn't tell a story about friends, you wouldn't tell a story about what had happened three days ago. what had happened three days ago. what had happened three days ago. &gt;&gt; I mean, just like anybody else would, &gt;&gt; I mean, just like anybody else would, &gt;&gt; I mean, just like anybody else would, but no, I was never like a, you know, a but no, I was never like a, you know, a but no, I was never like a, you know, a storyteller or anything. I was not a kid storyteller or anything. I was not a kid storyteller or anything. I was not a kid that wanted to be a writer. I never that wanted to be a writer. I never that wanted to be a writer. I never thought about it at all. thought about it at all. thought about it at all. So, you just kind of tripped and fell So, you just kind of tripped and fell So, you just kind of tripped and fell into all that. into all that. into all that. &gt;&gt; I mean, my first job &gt;&gt; I mean, my first job &gt;&gt; I mean, my first job &gt;&gt; was in advertising in New York City out &gt;&gt; was in advertising in New York City out &gt;&gt; was in advertising in New York City out of right out of college. of right out of college. of right out of college. &gt;&gt; This is like the Mad Men thing. &gt;&gt; This is like the Mad Men thing. &gt;&gt; This is like the Mad Men thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But I guess at the time I &gt;&gt; Yeah. But I guess at the time I &gt;&gt; Yeah. But I guess at the time I thought, oh, I'd love to write a thought, oh, I'd love to write a thought, oh, I'd love to write a commercial that people said, uh, oh, commercial that people said, uh, oh, commercial that people said, uh, oh, that was great. It was so funny. I love that was great. It was so funny. I love that was great. It was so funny. I love that thing. So, that sort of um got me that thing. So, that sort of um got me that thing. So, that sort of um got me kind of a little bit started into the kind of a little bit started into the kind of a little bit started into the idea of storytelling. And then I had a idea of storytelling. And then I had a idea of storytelling. And then I had a boss. His name was Ed Hannibal. and he boss. His name was Ed Hannibal. and he boss. His name was Ed Hannibal. and he wrote a book kind of at home and it wrote a book kind of at home and it wrote a book kind of at home and it became a hit, you know, and uh it was became a hit, you know, and uh it was became a hit, you know, and uh it was called Chocolate Days, Popsicle Weeks, called Chocolate Days, Popsicle Weeks, called Chocolate Days, Popsicle Weeks, and he quit to become like a novelist. and he quit to become like a novelist. and he quit to become like a novelist. And so I thought, well, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] why don't And so I thought, well, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] why don't And so I thought, well, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] why don't I do that, you know? So that was what I do that, you know? So that was what I do that, you know? So that was what sort of started me into it, you know, sort of started me into it, you know, sort of started me into it, you know, being completely naive and totally being completely naive and totally being completely naive and totally stupid, you know, and having no idea of stupid, you know, and having no idea of stupid, you know, and having no idea of what I was doing. That's wild. So I what I was doing. That's wild. So I what I was doing. That's wild. So I imagined you as like the kid who was imagined you as like the kid who was imagined you as like the kid who was always coming in telling stories and you always coming in telling stories and you always coming in telling stories and you were writing in the background. were writing in the background. were writing in the background. Advertising is pretty interesting though Advertising is pretty interesting though Advertising is pretty interesting though because it it's the same process. You because it it's the same process. You because it it's the same process. You have to get into the mind of the have to get into the mind of the have to get into the mind of the audience. You have a story to tell and I audience. You have a story to tell and I audience. You have a story to tell and I guess with advertising the goal is a guess with advertising the goal is a guess with advertising the goal is a purchase and with writing the idea is purchase and with writing the idea is purchase and with writing the idea is they uh buy into the next page. they uh buy into the next page. they uh buy into the next page. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Something like that. &gt;&gt; Something like that. &gt;&gt; Something like that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very similar in that sense. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very similar in that sense. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very similar in that sense. You know You know You know &gt;&gt; what? Any ads that you recall &gt;&gt; what? Any ads that you recall &gt;&gt; what? Any ads that you recall particularly enjoying? particularly enjoying? particularly enjoying? &gt;&gt; No, I was terrible. I was never any good &gt;&gt; No, I was terrible. I was never any good &gt;&gt; No, I was terrible. I was never any good at it. You know, I never made any money at it. You know, I never made any money at it. You know, I never made any money at I was never successful at all. Um, at I was never successful at all. Um, at I was never successful at all. Um, but I met a lot of nice people and I but I met a lot of nice people and I but I met a lot of nice people and I learned a lot of stuff in that. You learned a lot of stuff in that. You learned a lot of stuff in that. You know, &gt;&gt; you said that was in New York City. &gt;&gt; you said that was in New York City. &gt;&gt; you said that was in New York City. &gt;&gt; It was in New York City. Um, in fact, if &gt;&gt; It was in New York City. Um, in fact, if &gt;&gt; It was in New York City. Um, in fact, if I can if I can hype one of my books, I can if I can hype one of my books, I can if I can hype one of my books, it's a small follow-up to The War of Art it's a small follow-up to The War of Art it's a small follow-up to The War of Art called Nobody Wants to Read Your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] called Nobody Wants to Read Your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] called Nobody Wants to Read Your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And it kind of a lot of it is about what And it kind of a lot of it is about what And it kind of a lot of it is about what you learn in advertising because nobody you learn in advertising because nobody you learn in advertising because nobody wants to read your ads or listen to your wants to read your ads or listen to your wants to read your ads or listen to your uh commercials or anything like that. uh commercials or anything like that. uh commercials or anything like that. And so one thing you learn in that And so one thing you learn in that And so one thing you learn in that business is to make it so good or so business is to make it so good or so business is to make it so good or so interesting, so intriguing that people interesting, so intriguing that people interesting, so intriguing that people will overcome their hatred of having to will overcome their hatred of having to will overcome their hatred of having to listen to your stupid Preparation H listen to your stupid Preparation H listen to your stupid Preparation H commercial. Um, so that was uh anyway commercial. Um, so that was uh anyway commercial. Um, so that was uh anyway that was that was what that was what got that was that was what that was what got that was that was what that was what got me started. But I was never a me started. But I was never a me started. But I was never a storyteller as a kid. No, I'd like to go storyteller as a kid. No, I'd like to go storyteller as a kid. No, I'd like to go back to the quote that we started with. back to the quote that we started with. back to the quote that we started with. The more important to your soul's The more important to your soul's The more important to your soul's growth, the stronger the resistance will growth, the stronger the resistance will growth, the stronger the resistance will be. I think many people will hear that, I think many people will hear that, I think many people will hear that, including myself, and we'll think, okay, including myself, and we'll think, okay, including myself, and we'll think, okay, what is what is my soul's growth? Where what is what is my soul's growth? Where what is what is my soul's growth? Where does it want to go? You know, I think does it want to go? You know, I think does it want to go? You know, I think when we hear the word soul and growth, when we hear the word soul and growth, when we hear the word soul and growth, particularly when it's about us, we particularly when it's about us, we particularly when it's about us, we think like there's going to be this big think like there's going to be this big think like there's going to be this big sign written on the heavens about what sign written on the heavens about what sign written on the heavens about what we're supposed to do and we're going to we're supposed to do and we're going to we're supposed to do and we're going to feel compelled to do it. You're saying feel compelled to do it. You're saying feel compelled to do it. You're saying the opposite. That the thing that we the opposite. That the thing that we the opposite. That the thing that we need to do most sometimes is hidden from need to do most sometimes is hidden from need to do most sometimes is hidden from us. The muse perhaps can reveal that. us. The muse perhaps can reveal that. us. The muse perhaps can reveal that. And it's through the act of writing And it's through the act of writing And it's through the act of writing without knowing what the work even is without knowing what the work even is without knowing what the work even is that sometimes we arrive there. So for that sometimes we arrive there. So for that sometimes we arrive there. So for people that don't have a crystallized people that don't have a crystallized people that don't have a crystallized idea yet and they want to explore their idea yet and they want to explore their idea yet and they want to explore their creative sense. creative sense. creative sense. They might want to do it through They might want to do it through They might want to do it through writing. They might want to do it writing. They might want to do it writing. They might want to do it through pottery. They might want to do through pottery. They might want to do through pottery. They might want to do it through music. They might want to do it through music. They might want to do it through music. They might want to do it through making movies. Any number of it through making movies. Any number of it through making movies. Any number of things. What's the translation from the thing What's the translation from the thing What's the translation from the thing you need most is the thing you're you need most is the thing you're you need most is the thing you're resisting most to actually getting into resisting most to actually getting into resisting most to actually getting into the process of evolving that thing out the process of evolving that thing out the process of evolving that thing out of us? It's like it sounds like an of us? It's like it sounds like an of us? It's like it sounds like an extrusion process like you're trying to extrusion process like you're trying to extrusion process like you're trying to like push semiolid concrete through like push semiolid concrete through like push semiolid concrete through a filter. But I want to know what the a filter. But I want to know what the a filter. But I want to know what the filter is. filter is. filter is. &gt;&gt; Um I mean I know that young people today &gt;&gt; Um I mean I know that young people today &gt;&gt; Um I mean I know that young people today there's a tremendous amount of pressure there's a tremendous amount of pressure there's a tremendous amount of pressure on people to find their passion, you on people to find their passion, you on people to find their passion, you know, and follow their passion and so on know, and follow their passion and so on know, and follow their passion and so on so forth. And I and I know for me I so forth. And I and I know for me I so forth. And I and I know for me I would as a young person I would go what would as a young person I would go what would as a young person I would go what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is that? I don't know what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is that? I don't know what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is that? I don't know what it is that I want to do you know um I'm it is that I want to do you know um I'm it is that I want to do you know um I'm lost. I'm you know struggling. But I do lost. I'm you know struggling. But I do lost. I'm you know struggling. But I do think that we are all born with some think that we are all born with some think that we are all born with some sort of a of at least one a kind of a sort of a of at least one a kind of a sort of a of at least one a kind of a calling of some kind. And it may not be calling of some kind. And it may not be calling of some kind. And it may not be the arts, you know, it may be helping the arts, you know, it may be helping the arts, you know, it may be helping other people through some kind of a other people through some kind of a other people through some kind of a nonprofit or something or like what nonprofit or something or like what nonprofit or something or like what you're doing, Andrew, you know, where you're doing, Andrew, you know, where you're doing, Andrew, you know, where you're bringing neuroscience and the you're bringing neuroscience and the you're bringing neuroscience and the scientific, you know, to personal scientific, you know, to personal scientific, you know, to personal development, so on and so forth. Um, I development, so on and so forth. Um, I development, so on and so forth. Um, I think we do all have some sort of some think we do all have some sort of some think we do all have some sort of some sort of calling and like sort of calling and like sort of calling and like we know it. we know it. we know it. Like if we could somehow put somebody Like if we could somehow put somebody Like if we could somehow put somebody in here and say, "I'll give you three in here and say, "I'll give you three in here and say, "I'll give you three seconds. Tell me what you should be seconds. Tell me what you should be seconds. Tell me what you should be supposed to be doing." It will pop into supposed to be doing." It will pop into supposed to be doing." It will pop into somebody's head. You know, they go, "Oh, somebody's head. You know, they go, "Oh, somebody's head. You know, they go, "Oh, you know, I knew I know I've always you know, I knew I know I've always you know, I knew I know I've always wanted to do to you be a motorcycle, wanted to do to you be a motorcycle, wanted to do to you be a motorcycle, whatever." You know, so but then that whatever." You know, so but then that whatever." You know, so but then that sort of whisper urge to do this thing is sort of whisper urge to do this thing is sort of whisper urge to do this thing is immediately countered by this force of immediately countered by this force of immediately countered by this force of resistance, you know, because it's resistance, you know, because it's resistance, you know, because it's trying to stop us. It's the devil. It's trying to stop us. It's the devil. It's trying to stop us. It's the devil. It's trying to stop us from being our true trying to stop us from being our true trying to stop us from being our true selves and becoming self-realized, selves and becoming self-realized, selves and becoming self-realized, self-actualized or whatever. So, self-actualized or whatever. So, self-actualized or whatever. So, resistance will immediately say to us, resistance will immediately say to us, resistance will immediately say to us, like if you were to say, "Oh, I want to like if you were to say, "Oh, I want to like if you were to say, "Oh, I want to have a podcast and I want to talk about, have a podcast and I want to talk about, have a podcast and I want to talk about, you know, science." Immediately, you know, science." Immediately, you know, science." Immediately, resistance would say, "Who are you, resistance would say, "Who are you, resistance would say, "Who are you, Andrew, to do this thing? I mean, you're Andrew, to do this thing? I mean, you're Andrew, to do this thing? I mean, you're a professor, you know, at Stanford. You a professor, you know, at Stanford. You a professor, you know, at Stanford. You know, we don't have any experience doing know, we don't have any experience doing know, we don't have any experience doing this." Not to mention, it's been done a this." Not to mention, it's been done a this." Not to mention, it's been done a million times by other people. They've million times by other people. They've million times by other people. They've done it a thousand times better than done it a thousand times better than done it a thousand times better than you. Nobody's going to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. Nobody's going to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. Nobody's going to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You're gonna put this out or you're You're gonna put this out or you're You're gonna put this out or you're gonna embarrass yourself. you had a gonna embarrass yourself. you had a gonna embarrass yourself. you had a certain level of prestige at Stanford. certain level of prestige at Stanford. certain level of prestige at Stanford. Now you're an idiot. You know, you did Now you're an idiot. You know, you did Now you're an idiot. You know, you did it's gonna be that voice, right? it's gonna be that voice, right? it's gonna be that voice, right? &gt;&gt; Some people actually said Stanford's not &gt;&gt; Some people actually said Stanford's not &gt;&gt; Some people actually said Stanford's not going to like it. Why would you do this? going to like it. Why would you do this? going to like it. Why would you do this? You're tenured at Stanford. What You're tenured at Stanford. What You're tenured at Stanford. What are you doing? You're you you're funded. are you doing? You're you you're funded. are you doing? You're you you're funded. Your lab's publishing. Well, one of Your lab's publishing. Well, one of Your lab's publishing. Well, one of those people was my father. Um who's those people was my father. Um who's those people was my father. Um who's also a scientist. Um my process of also a scientist. Um my process of also a scientist. Um my process of pushing back. pushing back. pushing back. &gt;&gt; I rest my case. &gt;&gt; I rest my case. &gt;&gt; I rest my case. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the true part here, the really &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the true part here, the really &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the true part here, the really kind of interesting part is a lot of kind of interesting part is a lot of kind of interesting part is a lot of times those voices will be the voices times those voices will be the voices times those voices will be the voices closest to us, our spouse, our father, closest to us, our spouse, our father, closest to us, our spouse, our father, you know, because well, I can get into you know, because well, I can get into you know, because well, I can get into that. I'll get into that and if we if we that. I'll get into that and if we if we that. I'll get into that and if we if we want to continue, but in any event, um, want to continue, but in any event, um, want to continue, but in any event, um, so that voice of resistance will come so that voice of resistance will come so that voice of resistance will come up. In addition, resistance will try to up. In addition, resistance will try to up. In addition, resistance will try to distract us. You know, it'll try to make distract us. You know, it'll try to make distract us. You know, it'll try to make us procrastinate. it'll try to make us procrastinate. it'll try to make us procrastinate. it'll try to make us yield to perfectionism where we yield to perfectionism where we yield to perfectionism where we noodle over one sentence you know for noodle over one sentence you know for noodle over one sentence you know for three days you know or we or fear all of three days you know or we or fear all of three days you know or we or fear all of the other things will stop us. So many the other things will stop us. So many the other things will stop us. So many people live their entire lives and never people live their entire lives and never people live their entire lives and never do and never enact their real calling do and never enact their real calling do and never enact their real calling you know um but we were talking about you know um but we were talking about you know um but we were talking about the more important to the growth of your the more important to the growth of your the more important to the growth of your soul that was what the we started with soul that was what the we started with soul that was what the we started with this right so that calling whatever it this right so that calling whatever it this right so that calling whatever it is to be a writer a filmmaker whatever is to be a writer a filmmaker whatever is to be a writer a filmmaker whatever it is it is it is if we don't do that in our life we if we don't do that in our life we if we don't do that in our life we that energy that energy that energy doesn't go away it becomes it goes into doesn't go away it becomes it goes into doesn't go away it becomes it goes into a more malignant channel, right? And it a more malignant channel, right? And it a more malignant channel, right? And it shows itself in maybe an addiction, shows itself in maybe an addiction, shows itself in maybe an addiction, alcoholism, uh cruelty to others, abuse of others, uh cruelty to others, abuse of others, uh cruelty to others, abuse of others, abuse of ourselves, porn, you name it. abuse of ourselves, porn, you name it. abuse of ourselves, porn, you name it. any of the sort of vices that people any of the sort of vices that people any of the sort of vices that people have uh because that original creative have uh because that original creative have uh because that original creative divine energy that really wants to be divine energy that really wants to be divine energy that really wants to be the odyssey or something like that. If the odyssey or something like that. If the odyssey or something like that. If we yield to our own resistance and don't yield to our own resistance and don't yield to our own resistance and don't evolve that then bad things happen. On evolve that then bad things happen. On evolve that then bad things happen. On the other hand, if we do follow that, we the other hand, if we do follow that, we the other hand, if we do follow that, we kind of open ourselves up to, you know, kind of open ourselves up to, you know, kind of open ourselves up to, you know, to becoming who we who we really are. to becoming who we who we really are. to becoming who we who we really are. And, you know, a lot of people in the you know, a lot of people in the you know, a lot of people in the podcasting and in the uh human podcasting and in the uh human podcasting and in the uh human development or whatever they call it, development or whatever they call it, development or whatever they call it, personal development world, they sort of personal development world, they sort of personal development world, they sort of promise like some sort of nirvana is promise like some sort of nirvana is promise like some sort of nirvana is going to happen if you do XYZ. But what going to happen if you do XYZ. But what going to happen if you do XYZ. But what I'm what I'm promising is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of a I'm what I'm promising is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of a I'm what I'm promising is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of a lot of hard work that's probably never lot of hard work that's probably never lot of hard work that's probably never going to be rewarded, but you'll be on going to be rewarded, but you'll be on going to be rewarded, but you'll be on the track that you know your soul was the track that you know your soul was the track that you know your soul was meant to be on. And God bless you, you meant to be on. And God bless you, you meant to be on. And God bless you, you can't ask for any more than that. can't ask for any more than that. can't ask for any more than that. &gt;&gt; And sometimes it works out at &gt;&gt; And sometimes it works out at &gt;&gt; And sometimes it works out at spectacular levels of whatever income, spectacular levels of whatever income, spectacular levels of whatever income, fame, whatever it is that people think fame, whatever it is that people think fame, whatever it is that people think they might want, but that's not really they might want, but that's not really they might want, but that's not really the thing to chase. We'll talk about the thing to chase. We'll talk about the thing to chase. We'll talk about that. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we'll talk about that. Sometimes &gt;&gt; Yeah, we'll talk about that. Sometimes &gt;&gt; Yeah, we'll talk about that. Sometimes it's the lottery of life sometimes, it's the lottery of life sometimes, it's the lottery of life sometimes, but that absolutely should not be the but that absolutely should not be the but that absolutely should not be the thing that people are chasing. thing that people are chasing. thing that people are chasing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I um I only know my own experience &gt;&gt; Yeah. I um I only know my own experience &gt;&gt; Yeah. I um I only know my own experience and I couldn't help but reflect a little and I couldn't help but reflect a little and I couldn't help but reflect a little bit on, you know, when I was bit on, you know, when I was bit on, you know, when I was deciding to do the podcast and I did get deciding to do the podcast and I did get deciding to do the podcast and I did get some voices back like, hey, like maybe some voices back like, hey, like maybe some voices back like, hey, like maybe that's, you know, what are you doing? I that's, you know, what are you doing? I that's, you know, what are you doing? I um I um I um I not clinically diagnosed with I not clinically diagnosed with I not clinically diagnosed with Tourette's or anything like that, but I Tourette's or anything like that, but I Tourette's or anything like that, but I felt um at that point that I had a felt um at that point that I had a felt um at that point that I had a certain amount of knowledge in me uh certain amount of knowledge in me uh certain amount of knowledge in me uh based on 25 years of studying and based on 25 years of studying and based on 25 years of studying and research in neuroscience and related research in neuroscience and related research in neuroscience and related fields. And I felt like if I didn't let fields. And I felt like if I didn't let fields. And I felt like if I didn't let it out, I was going to explode. Uh-huh. it out, I was going to explode. Uh-huh. it out, I was going to explode. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; And so Rob, my producer, and my &gt;&gt; And so Rob, my producer, and my &gt;&gt; And so Rob, my producer, and my bulldog Costello, and I went into a bulldog Costello, and I went into a bulldog Costello, and I went into a small &gt;&gt; closet in Topanga, set up some cameras, &gt;&gt; closet in Topanga, set up some cameras, &gt;&gt; closet in Topanga, set up some cameras, and I exploded onto the onto the camera. and I exploded onto the onto the camera. and I exploded onto the onto the camera. I just like I it just poured out. I just like I it just poured out. I just like I it just poured out. I think for the entire first year, we were think for the entire first year, we were think for the entire first year, we were doing almost all solos. Hardly any doing almost all solos. Hardly any doing almost all solos. Hardly any guests because it was pandemic and we guests because it was pandemic and we guests because it was pandemic and we weren't quite sitting down with guests. weren't quite sitting down with guests. weren't quite sitting down with guests. I didn't know. And I don't even remember I didn't know. And I don't even remember I didn't know. And I don't even remember thinking about the hundreds of hours thinking about the hundreds of hours thinking about the hundreds of hours of preparation. We did hundreds of hours of preparation. We did hundreds of hours of preparation. We did hundreds of hours of preparation for each episode, but the of preparation for each episode, but the of preparation for each episode, but the just I just feel like it just kind of just I just feel like it just kind of just I just feel like it just kind of like geysered out. So, I think there's like geysered out. So, I think there's like geysered out. So, I think there's some benefit to having um something some benefit to having um something some benefit to having um something build up so much within us that it has build up so much within us that it has build up so much within us that it has to come out. to come out. to come out. &gt;&gt; And I can certainly relate to the &gt;&gt; And I can certainly relate to the &gt;&gt; And I can certainly relate to the dangers of suppressing something. I dangers of suppressing something. I dangers of suppressing something. I think &gt;&gt; how old were you when you when you &gt;&gt; how old were you when you when you &gt;&gt; how old were you when you when you started that? started that? started that? &gt;&gt; 45 years ago. &gt;&gt; 45 years ago. &gt;&gt; 45 years ago. &gt;&gt; 45. &gt;&gt; 45. &gt;&gt; 45. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was kind of late to it. Now &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was kind of late to it. Now &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was kind of late to it. Now I had lectured in front of students and I had lectured in front of students and I had lectured in front of students and given seminars and lectured in front of given seminars and lectured in front of given seminars and lectured in front of donors which is donors which is donors which is &gt;&gt; in some ways similar to the podcast in &gt;&gt; in some ways similar to the podcast in &gt;&gt; in some ways similar to the podcast in the in the sense that you're the in the sense that you're the in the sense that you're &gt;&gt; teaching science often to non-scientists &gt;&gt; teaching science often to non-scientists &gt;&gt; teaching science often to non-scientists or diverse fields but uh for me it was or diverse fields but uh for me it was or diverse fields but uh for me it was just inside I couldn't help it. just inside I couldn't help it. just inside I couldn't help it. There was my only answer was I couldn't There was my only answer was I couldn't There was my only answer was I couldn't help it. And um to his credit by the way help it. And um to his credit by the way help it. And um to his credit by the way my dad has been immensely supportive my dad has been immensely supportive my dad has been immensely supportive of the podcast. He actually was on the of the podcast. He actually was on the of the podcast. He actually was on the podcast &gt;&gt; and gave us a chance to bond and learn &gt;&gt; and gave us a chance to bond and learn &gt;&gt; and gave us a chance to bond and learn about him and um about him and um about him and um &gt;&gt; and he's a scientist so I got to learn &gt;&gt; and he's a scientist so I got to learn &gt;&gt; and he's a scientist so I got to learn some physics. The audience got to learn some physics. The audience got to learn some physics. The audience got to learn some physics as well. But um but yeah, some physics as well. But um but yeah, some physics as well. But um but yeah, when you take on something that people when you take on something that people when you take on something that people are not familiar with you doing or they are not familiar with you doing or they are not familiar with you doing or they are projecting on to you the sense that are projecting on to you the sense that are projecting on to you the sense that they want you safe and secure because they want you safe and secure because they want you safe and secure because sometimes it's a it's a real um it's a sometimes it's a it's a real um it's a sometimes it's a it's a real um it's a genuine &gt;&gt; feeling of support for somebody, you &gt;&gt; feeling of support for somebody, you &gt;&gt; feeling of support for somebody, you know, a mother or father or siblings know, a mother or father or siblings know, a mother or father or siblings like, "Hey, so you're going to give up like, "Hey, so you're going to give up like, "Hey, so you're going to give up your job as a lawyer to go write movie your job as a lawyer to go write movie your job as a lawyer to go write movie scripts like and you got three kids and scripts like and you got three kids and scripts like and you got three kids and like uh they're scared for you because like uh they're scared for you because like uh they're scared for you because they don't want to see you take your they don't want to see you take your they don't want to see you take your life off a cliff. life off a cliff. life off a cliff. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh what's your response to that? &gt;&gt; Uh what's your response to that? &gt;&gt; Uh what's your response to that? &gt;&gt; I mean, there's validity to that &gt;&gt; I mean, there's validity to that &gt;&gt; I mean, there's validity to that obviously. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But I think what happens um is that each &gt;&gt; But I think what happens um is that each &gt;&gt; But I think what happens um is that each person is dealing with their own person is dealing with their own person is dealing with their own resistance, &gt;&gt; their own calling, their own that they &gt;&gt; their own calling, their own that they &gt;&gt; their own calling, their own that they know that they really should be doing. know that they really should be doing. know that they really should be doing. And 99.999% And 99.999% And 99.999% of them are not doing it or are of them are not doing it or are of them are not doing it or are unconscious of it. Right. It's sort of a unconscious of it. Right. It's sort of a unconscious of it. Right. It's sort of a niggling thing, but they don't know niggling thing, but they don't know niggling thing, but they don't know about it. So then when they see you, about it. So then when they see you, about it. So then when they see you, Andrew, starting your podcast, that's a Andrew, starting your podcast, that's a Andrew, starting your podcast, that's a reproach to them and they say, "Well, if reproach to them and they say, "Well, if reproach to them and they say, "Well, if Andrew can do it, why can't I do it?" Andrew can do it, why can't I do it?" Andrew can do it, why can't I do it?" You know, and so then it becomes kind of You know, and so then it becomes kind of You know, and so then it becomes kind of malicious. And it's I don't think it's malicious. And it's I don't think it's malicious. And it's I don't think it's deliberately malicious a lot of times, deliberately malicious a lot of times, deliberately malicious a lot of times, but people will then try to undermine but people will then try to undermine but people will then try to undermine you and say and under the guise of you and say and under the guise of you and say and under the guise of uh we're only looking out for you. We uh we're only looking out for you. We uh we're only looking out for you. We don't want your children to be starving don't want your children to be starving don't want your children to be starving and in the street. They will try to try and in the street. They will try to try and in the street. They will try to try to undermine you and stop you from doing to undermine you and stop you from doing to undermine you and stop you from doing it and make fun of you or ridicule you. it and make fun of you or ridicule you. it and make fun of you or ridicule you. Like um the filmmaker David O. Russell, Like um the filmmaker David O. Russell, Like um the filmmaker David O. Russell, I don't know if you know who I'm talking I don't know if you know who I'm talking I don't know if you know who I'm talking about. He did the fighter with Mark about. He did the fighter with Mark about. He did the fighter with Mark Wahlberg. I love that movie. He did Wahlberg. I love that movie. He did Wahlberg. I love that movie. He did Silver Linings Playbook um you know with Silver Linings Playbook um you know with Silver Linings Playbook um you know with Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper. Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper. Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper. And I did not see that one, but I did And I did not see that one, but I did And I did not see that one, but I did see the see the see the &gt;&gt; joy about the lady who invented the &gt;&gt; joy about the lady who invented the &gt;&gt; joy about the lady who invented the miracle mop with which was Jennifer miracle mop with which was Jennifer miracle mop with which was Jennifer Lawrence. And all of these stories are Lawrence. And all of these stories are Lawrence. And all of these stories are about sabotage by the people closest to about sabotage by the people closest to about sabotage by the people closest to you, particer, right? and he's got seven sisters and he right? and he's got seven sisters and he right? and he's got seven sisters and he also has an older brother and they're also has an older brother and they're also has an older brother and they're like and his mom is his manager and like and his mom is his manager and like and his mom is his manager and she's like booking him fights where he's she's like booking him fights where he's she's like booking him fights where he's outweighed by 20 pounds and he gets outweighed by 20 pounds and he gets outweighed by 20 pounds and he gets massacred. You know, massacred. You know, massacred. You know, &gt;&gt; true story of Mickey Ward. &gt;&gt; true story of Mickey Ward. &gt;&gt; true story of Mickey Ward. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; And the story is, you know, he finally &gt;&gt; And the story is, you know, he finally &gt;&gt; And the story is, you know, he finally meets a girl who's like really meets a girl who's like really meets a girl who's like really supportive of him. But anyway, it's a supportive of him. But anyway, it's a supportive of him. But anyway, it's a real theme that the people closest to us real theme that the people closest to us real theme that the people closest to us will try to they don't want us. will try to they don't want us. will try to they don't want us. They're happy the way, you know, we like They're happy the way, you know, we like They're happy the way, you know, we like you, Andrew, the way you are. You know, you, Andrew, the way you are. You know, you, Andrew, the way you are. You know, our son, we know he's working at our son, we know he's working at our son, we know he's working at Stanford. He's doing his thing. We don't Stanford. He's doing his thing. We don't Stanford. He's doing his thing. We don't want to see him, it may be unconscious. want to see him, it may be unconscious. want to see him, it may be unconscious. I'm not knocking your dad. We don't want I'm not knocking your dad. We don't want I'm not knocking your dad. We don't want to see him suddenly burst out of the uh to see him suddenly burst out of the uh to see him suddenly burst out of the uh the cocoon and become a butterfly and the cocoon and become a butterfly and the cocoon and become a butterfly and wing away from us, you know, so they wing away from us, you know, so they wing away from us, you know, so they like you the way they are, you know, the like you the way they are, you know, the like you the way they are, you know, the way you are. way you are. way you are. &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take, things like magnesium can take, things like magnesium can take, things like magnesium thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleepup supporting It has the best sleepup supporting It has the best sleepup supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkaagz.com/huberman to drinkaagz.com/huberman to drinkaagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Rura. Rurora makes what I believe are Rura. Rurora makes what I believe are Rura. Rurora makes what I believe are the best water filters on the market. the best water filters on the market. the best water filters on the market. It's an unfortunate reality, but tap It's an unfortunate reality, but tap It's an unfortunate reality, but tap water often contains contaminants that water often contains contaminants that water often contains contaminants that negatively impact our health. In fact, a negatively impact our health. In fact, a negatively impact our health. In fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental Working 2020 study by the Environmental Working 2020 study by the Environmental Working Group estimated that more than 200 Group estimated that more than 200 Group estimated that more than 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS million Americans are exposed to PAS million Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, through drinking of tap chemicals, through drinking of tap chemicals, through drinking of tap water. These forever chemicals are water. These forever chemicals are water. These forever chemicals are linked to serious health issues such as linked to serious health issues such as linked to serious health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome hormone disruption, gut microbiome hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many disruption, fertility issues, and many disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. The Environmental other health problems. The Environmental other health problems. The Environmental Working Group has also shown that over Working Group has also shown that over Working Group has also shown that over 122 million Americans drink tap water 122 million Americans drink tap water 122 million Americans drink tap water with high levels of chemicals known to with high levels of chemicals known to with high levels of chemicals known to cause cancer. It's for all these reasons cause cancer. It's for all these reasons cause cancer. It's for all these reasons that I'm thrilled to have Aurora as a that I'm thrilled to have Aurora as a that I'm thrilled to have Aurora as a sponsor of this podcast. I've been using sponsor of this podcast. I've been using sponsor of this podcast. I've been using the Aurora countertop system for almost the Aurora countertop system for almost the Aurora countertop system for almost a year now. Aurora's filtration a year now. Aurora's filtration a year now. Aurora's filtration technology removes harmful substances, technology removes harmful substances, technology removes harmful substances, including endocrine disruptors and including endocrine disruptors and including endocrine disruptors and disinfection byproducts while preserving disinfection byproducts while preserving disinfection byproducts while preserving beneficial minerals like magnesium and beneficial minerals like magnesium and beneficial minerals like magnesium and calcium. It requires no installation or calcium. It requires no installation or calcium. It requires no installation or plumbing. It's built from medical grade plumbing. It's built from medical grade plumbing. It's built from medical grade stainless steel. And its sleek design stainless steel. And its sleek design stainless steel. And its sleek design fits beautifully on your countertop. In fits beautifully on your countertop. In fits beautifully on your countertop. In fact, I consider it a welcome addition fact, I consider it a welcome addition fact, I consider it a welcome addition to my kitchen. It looks great and the to my kitchen. It looks great and the to my kitchen. It looks great and the water is delicious. If you'd like to try water is delicious. If you'd like to try water is delicious. If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, that's ror o r a.com/huberman. We've had several clinical psychologists We've had several clinical psychologists We've had several clinical psychologists on the podcast and a resounding theme on the podcast and a resounding theme on the podcast and a resounding theme from them has been that it is astounding from them has been that it is astounding from them has been that it is astounding and yet consistent that people will and yet consistent that people will and yet consistent that people will remain in a not so great place that they remain in a not so great place that they remain in a not so great place that they understand and is predictable in understand and is predictable in understand and is predictable in exchange for what they could do stepping exchange for what they could do stepping exchange for what they could do stepping into some new life even getting over into some new life even getting over into some new life even getting over their anger about something. In their anger about something. In their anger about something. In fact, I was thinking uh throughout fact, I was thinking uh throughout fact, I was thinking uh throughout today's conversation, I couldn't help today's conversation, I couldn't help today's conversation, I couldn't help but think that perhaps the two most but think that perhaps the two most but think that perhaps the two most dangerous things to the creative process dangerous things to the creative process dangerous things to the creative process to really doing the important work are to really doing the important work are to really doing the important work are the many things that exist in the many things that exist in the many things that exist in the world now that basically sell us the world now that basically sell us the world now that basically sell us the opportunity for free to be angry or to opportunity for free to be angry or to opportunity for free to be angry or to numb out. numb out. numb out. &gt;&gt; I mean, I again, if people want to drink &gt;&gt; I mean, I again, if people want to drink &gt;&gt; I mean, I again, if people want to drink a little bit, I'm not going to disparage a little bit, I'm not going to disparage a little bit, I'm not going to disparage that. I've done an episode on alcohol. that. I've done an episode on alcohol. that. I've done an episode on alcohol. It's not good for you. But some people It's not good for you. But some people It's not good for you. But some people can have a couple drinks a week or can have a couple drinks a week or can have a couple drinks a week or whatever. Okay, I'm not judging there. whatever. Okay, I'm not judging there. whatever. Okay, I'm not judging there. But but things But but things But but things &gt;&gt; like alcohol, like certain forms of &gt;&gt; like alcohol, like certain forms of &gt;&gt; like alcohol, like certain forms of social media, and I say certain forms social media, and I say certain forms social media, and I say certain forms because I do think social media can be because I do think social media can be because I do think social media can be informative and educational in the right informative and educational in the right informative and educational in the right context and the right amount. Um certain context and the right amount. Um certain context and the right amount. Um certain forms of media more generally, the news, forms of media more generally, the news, forms of media more generally, the news, right? um any number of highly right? um any number of highly right? um any number of highly processed, highly palatable foods uh processed, highly palatable foods uh processed, highly palatable foods uh which are not delicious. They but they which are not delicious. They but they which are not delicious. They but they allow us to kind of numb out numb out allow us to kind of numb out numb out allow us to kind of numb out numb out our senses and just kind of mindlessly our senses and just kind of mindlessly our senses and just kind of mindlessly eat. &gt;&gt; Um and on and on. I feel like anger and &gt;&gt; Um and on and on. I feel like anger and &gt;&gt; Um and on and on. I feel like anger and numbing out numbing out numbing out &gt;&gt; are how the world is trying to pull us &gt;&gt; are how the world is trying to pull us &gt;&gt; are how the world is trying to pull us away. &gt;&gt; And someone gets paid for that. We think &gt;&gt; And someone gets paid for that. We think &gt;&gt; And someone gets paid for that. We think we get it for free, but they get paid we get it for free, but they get paid we get it for free, but they get paid for that very well. We give our time, for that very well. We give our time, for that very well. We give our time, our soul according to what you're our soul according to what you're our soul according to what you're saying. Yeah. saying. Yeah. saying. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And then more close to us within our &gt;&gt; And then more close to us within our &gt;&gt; And then more close to us within our inner circle, people that genuinely care inner circle, people that genuinely care inner circle, people that genuinely care about us are, from what you're saying, about us are, from what you're saying, about us are, from what you're saying, kind of in their own psychological kind of in their own psychological kind of in their own psychological entanglements and they really care. They entanglements and they really care. They entanglements and they really care. They want us safe. They want to keep us where want us safe. They want to keep us where want us safe. They want to keep us where they know they can find us. And as a they know they can find us. And as a they know they can find us. And as a consequence, it's really tough to even consequence, it's really tough to even consequence, it's really tough to even get to the process of resistance at this get to the process of resistance at this get to the process of resistance at this point. It's all around us. point. It's all around us. point. It's all around us. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's all around us. &gt;&gt; It's all around us. &gt;&gt; It's all around us. &gt;&gt; Hit the nail on a lot of heads. So I &gt;&gt; Hit the nail on a lot of heads. So I &gt;&gt; Hit the nail on a lot of heads. So I feel like do you think the world is feel like do you think the world is feel like do you think the world is &gt;&gt; set up now in ways that it's more &gt;&gt; set up now in ways that it's more &gt;&gt; set up now in ways that it's more difficult to get to that chair and to difficult to get to that chair and to difficult to get to that chair and to meet the inner resistance? That's I meet the inner resistance? That's I meet the inner resistance? That's I phrased it poorly before. There's phrased it poorly before. There's phrased it poorly before. There's resistance all around us. There's uh in resistance all around us. There's uh in resistance all around us. There's uh in the things that are being sold to us the things that are being sold to us the things that are being sold to us quote unquote for free. quote unquote for free. quote unquote for free. &gt;&gt; The cost is immense. It's true. You're &gt;&gt; The cost is immense. It's true. You're &gt;&gt; The cost is immense. It's true. You're not putting a coin in a in a slot and not putting a coin in a in a slot and not putting a coin in a in a slot and pulling a lever, but it's your time. pulling a lever, but it's your time. pulling a lever, but it's your time. It's your soul. It's your essence. It's your soul. It's your essence. It's your soul. It's your essence. It's your life. Yeah. your life. Yeah. your life. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And then it's close to us with family &gt;&gt; And then it's close to us with family &gt;&gt; And then it's close to us with family members and friends and significant members and friends and significant members and friends and significant others. Sometimes um dogs are immune others. Sometimes um dogs are immune others. Sometimes um dogs are immune from this. Cats are immune. They want us from this. Cats are immune. They want us from this. Cats are immune. They want us to do the real work cuz we'll be they'll to do the real work cuz we'll be they'll to do the real work cuz we'll be they'll be right next to us. Um be right next to us. Um be right next to us. Um &gt;&gt; and then with all that, then we sit down &gt;&gt; and then with all that, then we sit down &gt;&gt; and then with all that, then we sit down and then the resistance comes up from and then the resistance comes up from and then the resistance comes up from right up in the middle. right up in the middle. right up in the middle. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's like this is a this is a minefield. &gt;&gt; It's like this is a this is a minefield. &gt;&gt; It's like this is a this is a minefield. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. I agree with you &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. I agree with you &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. I agree with you completely. It's I don't think it's ever completely. It's I don't think it's ever completely. It's I don't think it's ever been harder. It's like I always said been harder. It's like I always said been harder. It's like I always said that if you want to make a billion that if you want to make a billion that if you want to make a billion dollars, come up with some kind of dollars, come up with some kind of dollars, come up with some kind of product that feeds into people's natural product that feeds into people's natural product that feeds into people's natural resistance like potato chips or social resistance like potato chips or social resistance like potato chips or social media or something like and they did media or something like and they did media or something like and they did come up with a product and it's called, come up with a product and it's called, come up with a product and it's called, you know, the internet, you know, it's you know, the internet, you know, it's you know, the internet, you know, it's called social media. And you're right, called social media. And you're right, called social media. And you're right, people make a lot of money off of that people make a lot of money off of that people make a lot of money off of that because they and I don't think because they and I don't think because they and I don't think they're even aware of what they're doing they're even aware of what they're doing they're even aware of what they're doing or aware of what they're tapping into, or aware of what they're tapping into, or aware of what they're tapping into, but they're just allowing people, you or but they're just allowing people, you or but they're just allowing people, you or me, who has a calling that we know me, who has a calling that we know me, who has a calling that we know we should be doing. They're allowing us we should be doing. They're allowing us we should be doing. They're allowing us to not do it, to be drawn over here for to not do it, to be drawn over here for to not do it, to be drawn over here for whatever reason. And I think a lot of whatever reason. And I think a lot of whatever reason. And I think a lot of the anger and polarization in politics the anger and polarization in politics the anger and polarization in politics is about that today, you know, because is about that today, you know, because is about that today, you know, because people can't face, you know, to sit down people can't face, you know, to sit down people can't face, you know, to sit down and do whatever they were they were born and do whatever they were they were born and do whatever they were they were born to do. So, it's much easier to hate the to do. So, it's much easier to hate the to do. So, it's much easier to hate the other person over here or get completely other person over here or get completely other person over here or get completely caught up in all that rabbit hole of all caught up in all that rabbit hole of all caught up in all that rabbit hole of all that sort of stuff, you know. Um, yeah, that sort of stuff, you know. Um, yeah, that sort of stuff, you know. Um, yeah, it's uh to follow your calling is a it's uh to follow your calling is a it's uh to follow your calling is a really hard thing, you know. It's not uh really hard thing, you know. It's not uh really hard thing, you know. It's not uh we were born to be by evolution to be we were born to be by evolution to be we were born to be by evolution to be tribal creatures, you know, through all tribal creatures, you know, through all tribal creatures, you know, through all those evolution. And the opposite, the those evolution. And the opposite, the those evolution. And the opposite, the one thing that the tribe hates the most one thing that the tribe hates the most one thing that the tribe hates the most is somebody that goes his own way or her is somebody that goes his own way or her is somebody that goes his own way or her own way, right? Follows their own thing own way, right? Follows their own thing own way, right? Follows their own thing and doesn't, you know, hue to what the and doesn't, you know, hue to what the and doesn't, you know, hue to what the tribe wants them to do. So for us to do tribe wants them to do. So for us to do tribe wants them to do. So for us to do that as individuals is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you that as individuals is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you that as individuals is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know, and take and it's usually know, and take and it's usually know, and take and it's usually like what you said, you sort of exploded like what you said, you sort of exploded like what you said, you sort of exploded out of you when you got you have to out of you when you got you have to out of you when you got you have to almost reach a breaking point, you almost reach a breaking point, you almost reach a breaking point, you know, almost hit bottom in some kind of know, almost hit bottom in some kind of know, almost hit bottom in some kind of a sense before it just kind of explodes a sense before it just kind of explodes a sense before it just kind of explodes out of you because we'll all resist that out of you because we'll all resist that out of you because we'll all resist that so much. It's so scary. so much. It's so scary. so much. It's so scary. &gt;&gt; It's so interesting. I think it was in &gt;&gt; It's so interesting. I think it was in &gt;&gt; It's so interesting. I think it was in high school uh that I first realized how high school uh that I first realized how high school uh that I first realized how silly humans are and it was the silly humans are and it was the silly humans are and it was the following. At the time I was into following. At the time I was into following. At the time I was into skateboarding. Um skateboarding has gone skateboarding. Um skateboarding has gone skateboarding. Um skateboarding has gone through various evolutions of being through various evolutions of being through various evolutions of being popular. Now it's in the Olympics of popular. Now it's in the Olympics of popular. Now it's in the Olympics of being unpopular of being profitable. being unpopular of being profitable. being unpopular of being profitable. When I got into it, it was really When I got into it, it was really When I got into it, it was really unpopular. It had gone through one big unpopular. It had gone through one big unpopular. It had gone through one big two big waves. There was the kind of Dog two big waves. There was the kind of Dog two big waves. There was the kind of Dog Town and Z Boys wave like the back Town and Z Boys wave like the back Town and Z Boys wave like the back discovering backyard pools. this kind of discovering backyard pools. this kind of discovering backyard pools. this kind of thing that the surfers did. Then there thing that the surfers did. Then there thing that the surfers did. Then there was a second wave for those that care. was a second wave for those that care. was a second wave for those that care. This was like the classic Bones Brigade This was like the classic Bones Brigade This was like the classic Bones Brigade wave. There were only two or three big wave. There were only two or three big wave. There were only two or three big companies. Tony Hawk was early in this companies. Tony Hawk was early in this companies. Tony Hawk was early in this because he was young. Stad Frank Hawk because he was young. Stad Frank Hawk because he was young. Stad Frank Hawk ran the National Skateboard Association ran the National Skateboard Association ran the National Skateboard Association and then it disappeared just kind of, and then it disappeared just kind of, and then it disappeared just kind of, you know, that kids that were into you know, that kids that were into you know, that kids that were into soccer. They were into other sports. soccer. They were into other sports. soccer. They were into other sports. Skateboarding wasn't a big thing. It was Skateboarding wasn't a big thing. It was Skateboarding wasn't a big thing. It was small. And and there was this really small. And and there was this really small. And and there was this really kind of weird trend in the early 90s kind of weird trend in the early 90s kind of weird trend in the early 90s where skateboarders started wearing where skateboarders started wearing where skateboarders started wearing really baggy clothes. No one wore really baggy clothes. No one wore really baggy clothes. No one wore really baggy clothes. And I'll never forget baggy clothes. And I'll never forget baggy clothes. And I'll never forget because I was part of that community, we because I was part of that community, we because I was part of that community, we wore these what now wouldn't even be wore these what now wouldn't even be wore these what now wouldn't even be considered baggy shorts. So we're not considered baggy shorts. So we're not considered baggy shorts. So we're not talking about like a deep sag on the talking about like a deep sag on the talking about like a deep sag on the shorts, but it was like baggy shorts. shorts, but it was like baggy shorts. shorts, but it was like baggy shorts. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; And I'll never forget the amount of &gt;&gt; And I'll never forget the amount of &gt;&gt; And I'll never forget the amount of teasing and ridicule that we received. teasing and ridicule that we received. teasing and ridicule that we received. People like, pull up your pants, you People like, pull up your pants, you People like, pull up your pants, you know, why by the athletes, by the cool know, why by the athletes, by the cool know, why by the athletes, by the cool by the water polo athletes, the by the water polo athletes, the by the water polo athletes, the jocks, the everything. But not just jocks, the everything. But not just jocks, the everything. But not just at school, but elsewhere. leave for the at school, but elsewhere. leave for the at school, but elsewhere. leave for the summer, come back, summer, come back, summer, come back, and over that summer, the someone in the and over that summer, the someone in the and over that summer, the someone in the world of rock and roll and in hiphop had world of rock and roll and in hiphop had world of rock and roll and in hiphop had kind of um picked this up from kind of um picked this up from kind of um picked this up from skateboarding culture and baggy pants skateboarding culture and baggy pants skateboarding culture and baggy pants and shorts hit the mainstream. and shorts hit the mainstream. and shorts hit the mainstream. &gt;&gt; Oh, I never &gt;&gt; Oh, I never &gt;&gt; Oh, I never was into it. And that's when the was into it. And that's when the was into it. And that's when the bell went off. I was like, they don't bell went off. I was like, they don't bell went off. I was like, they don't actually know what they like is this is actually know what they like is this is actually know what they like is this is just the essence of peer pressure. just the essence of peer pressure. just the essence of peer pressure. They have no concept of what they They have no concept of what they They have no concept of what they actually like. actually like. actually like. &gt;&gt; And I think that was a big one for me. I &gt;&gt; And I think that was a big one for me. I &gt;&gt; And I think that was a big one for me. I was like, well, first of all, I thought was like, well, first of all, I thought was like, well, first of all, I thought they're hypocrites. I thought they're hypocrites. I thought they're hypocrites. I thought they're idiots. And then I realized they're but idiots. And then I realized they're but idiots. And then I realized they're but they're none of those things. It's that they're none of those things. It's that they're none of those things. It's that for most people, what they like is sold for most people, what they like is sold for most people, what they like is sold to them. to them. to them. &gt;&gt; It's and they're tracking someone else. &gt;&gt; It's and they're tracking someone else. &gt;&gt; It's and they're tracking someone else. And so throughout my life, I've had And so throughout my life, I've had And so throughout my life, I've had mentors um that didn't know me. I would mentors um that didn't know me. I would mentors um that didn't know me. I would I literally have a list of different I literally have a list of different I literally have a list of different names. Some some of these people live, names. Some some of these people live, names. Some some of these people live, some of them dead. Amazingly, some of some of them dead. Amazingly, some of some of them dead. Amazingly, some of them are now my close friends. Um, I them are now my close friends. Um, I them are now my close friends. Um, I embarrass them all the time by telling embarrass them all the time by telling embarrass them all the time by telling them that they're on this list. them that they're on this list. them that they're on this list. &gt;&gt; But I think that the concept of &gt;&gt; But I think that the concept of &gt;&gt; But I think that the concept of mentorship is so much different than the mentorship is so much different than the mentorship is so much different than the concept of looking to concept of looking to concept of looking to &gt;&gt; the other members of our species more &gt;&gt; the other members of our species more &gt;&gt; the other members of our species more broadly &gt;&gt; for what is cool, what's worth pursuing. &gt;&gt; for what is cool, what's worth pursuing. &gt;&gt; for what is cool, what's worth pursuing. &gt;&gt; How valuable for you have mentors been? &gt;&gt; How valuable for you have mentors been? &gt;&gt; How valuable for you have mentors been? I know you're you've been a mentor to I know you're you've been a mentor to I know you're you've been a mentor to many people, by the way. You're on the many people, by the way. You're on the many people, by the way. You're on the list. Just to embarrass you. I can show list. Just to embarrass you. I can show list. Just to embarrass you. I can show you that list from the late you that list from the late you that list from the late '9s late 90s 2000s transition. How '9s late 90s 2000s transition. How '9s late 90s 2000s transition. How important are mentors and how do we important are mentors and how do we important are mentors and how do we differentiate mentors from the voice in differentiate mentors from the voice in differentiate mentors from the voice in our own head? How important is it to be our own head? How important is it to be our own head? How important is it to be self-guided versus encouraged and guided self-guided versus encouraged and guided self-guided versus encouraged and guided by these mentor voices? Because I by these mentor voices? Because I by these mentor voices? Because I believe that the general public is the believe that the general public is the believe that the general public is the absolute wrong signal. I think that I absolute wrong signal. I think that I absolute wrong signal. I think that I think that signal think that signal think that signal &gt;&gt; I agree with you takes you off the &gt;&gt; I agree with you takes you off the &gt;&gt; I agree with you takes you off the metaphorical cliff. metaphorical cliff. metaphorical cliff. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Mentors have been really important &gt;&gt; Yeah. Mentors have been really important &gt;&gt; Yeah. Mentors have been really important to me. very important. Um, in fact, I to me. very important. Um, in fact, I to me. very important. Um, in fact, I wrote a memoir called Government Cheese. wrote a memoir called Government Cheese. wrote a memoir called Government Cheese. I don't know if you've heard about this I don't know if you've heard about this I don't know if you've heard about this one at all, but it's the chapters one at all, but it's the chapters one at all, but it's the chapters are named after the various mentors that are named after the various mentors that are named after the various mentors that I've had and um many of them and a I've had and um many of them and a I've had and um many of them and a lot of them are not in the writing world lot of them are not in the writing world lot of them are not in the writing world at all. Um, and um, like my friend at all. Um, and um, like my friend at all. Um, and um, like my friend Paul, he was in the in the writing Paul, he was in the in the writing Paul, he was in the in the writing world, but um, you know, I had a boss at world, but um, you know, I had a boss at world, but um, you know, I had a boss at a trucking company that I worked for a trucking company that I worked for a trucking company that I worked for that was like a real mentor to me. I that was like a real mentor to me. I that was like a real mentor to me. I once I picked fruit in uh, Washington once I picked fruit in uh, Washington once I picked fruit in uh, Washington State, you know, and as a migratory State, you know, and as a migratory State, you know, and as a migratory worker, you know, for a while and I had worker, you know, for a while and I had worker, you know, for a while and I had a mentor there. I never even knew his a mentor there. I never even knew his a mentor there. I never even knew his um, last name. He was a fellow fruit um, last name. He was a fellow fruit um, last name. He was a fellow fruit picker, you know, former marine from uh, picker, you know, former marine from uh, picker, you know, former marine from uh, the Cho who was at the Chosen Reservoir the Cho who was at the Chosen Reservoir the Cho who was at the Chosen Reservoir in Korea. I'm sure nobody listening to in Korea. I'm sure nobody listening to in Korea. I'm sure nobody listening to this know knows what that is, but it was this know knows what that is, but it was this know knows what that is, but it was like an amazing like an amazing like an amazing &gt;&gt; horror show of heroism. And anyway, &gt;&gt; horror show of heroism. And anyway, &gt;&gt; horror show of heroism. And anyway, &gt;&gt; what was it about those two mentors &gt;&gt; what was it about those two mentors &gt;&gt; what was it about those two mentors that you can uh maybe summarize that you that you can uh maybe summarize that you that you can uh maybe summarize that you extracted? Was it a work ethic? Was it a extracted? Was it a work ethic? Was it a extracted? Was it a work ethic? Was it a style of being? a style of being? a style of being? &gt;&gt; It was it was a work ethic in both &gt;&gt; It was it was a work ethic in both &gt;&gt; It was it was a work ethic in both cases. Um in the one in the one, cases. Um in the one in the one, cases. Um in the one in the one, again, I'll sort of get a little into again, I'll sort of get a little into again, I'll sort of get a little into the weeds here a little bit, the weeds here a little bit, the weeds here a little bit, &gt;&gt; please. Um, I was uh I had gone to a &gt;&gt; please. Um, I was uh I had gone to a &gt;&gt; please. Um, I was uh I had gone to a tractor trailer driving school and I got tractor trailer driving school and I got tractor trailer driving school and I got hired and to work for this uh company in hired and to work for this uh company in hired and to work for this uh company in North Carolina and I was, you know, a North Carolina and I was, you know, a North Carolina and I was, you know, a beginner and um I really I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up beginner and um I really I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up beginner and um I really I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up big time one time. I dropped a trailer big time one time. I dropped a trailer big time one time. I dropped a trailer with like $300,000 worth of, you know, with like $300,000 worth of, you know, with like $300,000 worth of, you know, industrial equipment in it. and um industrial equipment in it. and um industrial equipment in it. and um my boss, his name was Hugh Reeves, uh my boss, his name was Hugh Reeves, uh my boss, his name was Hugh Reeves, uh took me out to this hot dog place called took me out to this hot dog place called took me out to this hot dog place called Amos and Andy's in Durham, North Amos and Andy's in Durham, North Amos and Andy's in Durham, North Carolina. And he sat me down and he Carolina. And he sat me down and he Carolina. And he sat me down and he said, "Um, son, I don't know what Trump, said, "Um, son, I don't know what Trump, said, "Um, son, I don't know what Trump, you know, uh internal drama you're going you know, uh internal drama you're going you know, uh internal drama you're going through. I know you're going through through. I know you're going through through. I know you're going through something, but let me tell you this. something, but let me tell you this. something, but let me tell you this. While you're working for me, you're a While you're working for me, you're a While you're working for me, you're a professional and your job is deliver a professional and your job is deliver a professional and your job is deliver a load. And I don't care what happens load. And I don't care what happens load. And I don't care what happens between A and B, you got to do that, you between A and B, you got to do that, you between A and B, you got to do that, you know, and I was like, you know, and I know, and I was like, you know, and I know, and I was like, you know, and I knew he was just absolutely right. And knew he was just absolutely right. And knew he was just absolutely right. And that uh and I thought, man, I got to get that uh and I thought, man, I got to get that uh and I thought, man, I got to get my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] together here, you know? I my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] together here, you know? I my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] together here, you know? I can't. And so that obviously stuck with can't. And so that obviously stuck with can't. And so that obviously stuck with me forever. And the uh um my friend John me forever. And the uh um my friend John me forever. And the uh um my friend John from Seattle in the fruit picking world from Seattle in the fruit picking world from Seattle in the fruit picking world was again, I'm going to do a longer was again, I'm going to do a longer was again, I'm going to do a longer story than probably needs to be here. story than probably needs to be here. story than probably needs to be here. Um, in the uh in the fruit picking world, at in the uh in the fruit picking world, at in the uh in the fruit picking world, at least when I was doing this, it was most least when I was doing this, it was most least when I was doing this, it was most of the work was done by fruit tramps, by of the work was done by fruit tramps, by of the work was done by fruit tramps, by guys that like were riding the rails guys that like were riding the rails guys that like were riding the rails from the old days. And the big um one of from the old days. And the big um one of from the old days. And the big um one of the phrases that they that they used was the phrases that they that they used was the phrases that they that they used was pulling the pin. Have you ever heard pulling the pin. Have you ever heard pulling the pin. Have you ever heard this thing? And what pulling the pin this thing? And what pulling the pin this thing? And what pulling the pin meant was quitting too soon. Like meant was quitting too soon. Like meant was quitting too soon. Like pulling the pin came from railroad. If pulling the pin came from railroad. If pulling the pin came from railroad. If you want to uncouple one car from you want to uncouple one car from you want to uncouple one car from another, the trainman would pull a heavy another, the trainman would pull a heavy another, the trainman would pull a heavy steel pin and the cars would uncouple. steel pin and the cars would uncouple. steel pin and the cars would uncouple. So like you would wake up one day in a So like you would wake up one day in a So like you would wake up one day in a bunk house six weeks into a season and bunk house six weeks into a season and bunk house six weeks into a season and so and so would be gone. He'd say, "Oh, so and so would be gone. He'd say, "Oh, so and so would be gone. He'd say, "Oh, you know what happened to Andrew?" And you know what happened to Andrew?" And you know what happened to Andrew?" And oh, he pulled the pin. So at the time oh, he pulled the pin. So at the time oh, he pulled the pin. So at the time that I was there, I was trying for the that I was there, I was trying for the that I was there, I was trying for the first time to finish a book and I'd run first time to finish a book and I'd run first time to finish a book and I'd run out of money and I this is why I was out of money and I this is why I was out of money and I this is why I was working to get the money and I realized working to get the money and I realized working to get the money and I realized that in my life I had pulled the pin on that in my life I had pulled the pin on that in my life I had pulled the pin on everything that I'd ever done on my everything that I'd ever done on my everything that I'd ever done on my marriage on this that the other and this marriage on this that the other and this marriage on this that the other and this friend of mine John would I wanted to friend of mine John would I wanted to friend of mine John would I wanted to quit before the season ended you know quit before the season ended you know quit before the season ended you know and he would not let me do it you know and he would not let me do it you know and he would not let me do it you know he sort of just had a he you know he sort of just had a he you know he sort of just had a he you know he took me under his wing. And so that was took me under his wing. And so that was took me under his wing. And so that was another thing that was just drilled into another thing that was just drilled into another thing that was just drilled into my head in the sense of um am I going to my head in the sense of um am I going to my head in the sense of um am I going to finish this project? [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yeah, I'd finish this project? [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yeah, I'd finish this project? [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yeah, I'd rather die. I will die before I'll give rather die. I will die before I'll give rather die. I will die before I'll give up on this project. And it was all up on this project. And it was all up on this project. And it was all because of him. So that those are two because of him. So that those are two because of him. So that those are two mentors that weren't writing mentors, mentors that weren't writing mentors, mentors that weren't writing mentors, but that I used there those but that I used there those but that I used there those lessons stuck with me forever. And I lessons stuck with me forever. And I lessons stuck with me forever. And I will say one thing too for anybody will say one thing too for anybody will say one thing too for anybody that's struggling with finishing that's struggling with finishing that's struggling with finishing anything. Once I did finish that book, anything. Once I did finish that book, anything. Once I did finish that book, which I did, I've never had any trouble which I did, I've never had any trouble which I did, I've never had any trouble finishing anything ever again. finishing anything ever again. finishing anything ever again. &gt;&gt; Whereas it was my bet noir for years. I &gt;&gt; Whereas it was my bet noir for years. I &gt;&gt; Whereas it was my bet noir for years. I would fumble on the goal line, you know, would fumble on the goal line, you know, would fumble on the goal line, you know, &gt;&gt; resistance, former resistance. &gt;&gt; resistance, former resistance. &gt;&gt; resistance, former resistance. &gt;&gt; I love that those two guys are uh now &gt;&gt; I love that those two guys are uh now &gt;&gt; I love that those two guys are uh now alive and present in 2025. I don't know. alive and present in 2025. I don't know. alive and present in 2025. I don't know. They may still be alive uh in general, They may still be alive uh in general, They may still be alive uh in general, but um but um but um perfectionism, you talked about it as the enemy. Um I you talked about it as the enemy. Um I you talked about it as the enemy. Um I learned two very disperate schools of learned two very disperate schools of learned two very disperate schools of thought in research science. One was thought in research science. One was thought in research science. One was no one study can answer everything. So no one study can answer everything. So no one study can answer everything. So when it, you know, you get to the point when it, you know, you get to the point when it, you know, you get to the point where you have a clear answer what the where you have a clear answer what the where you have a clear answer what the data mean, you write it up, you ship it data mean, you write it up, you ship it data mean, you write it up, you ship it out, you publish. And I feel very out, you publish. And I feel very out, you publish. And I feel very fortunate that I work for people that fortunate that I work for people that fortunate that I work for people that encourage that. Um because many people encourage that. Um because many people encourage that. Um because many people get caught up in the idea that every get caught up in the idea that every get caught up in the idea that every paper has to be a landmark paper. paper has to be a landmark paper. paper has to be a landmark paper. Actually, that's one of the major causes Actually, that's one of the major causes Actually, that's one of the major causes of scientific fraud by the way of scientific fraud by the way of scientific fraud by the way &gt;&gt; when people feel that their papers have &gt;&gt; when people feel that their papers have &gt;&gt; when people feel that their papers have to be published in the top tier to be published in the top tier to be published in the top tier journals. It's it's probably the journals. It's it's probably the journals. It's it's probably the strongest driver of scientific fraud. Um strongest driver of scientific fraud. Um strongest driver of scientific fraud. Um there probably some bad apples that come there probably some bad apples that come there probably some bad apples that come in and are seeking ways that they can in and are seeking ways that they can in and are seeking ways that they can build narratives to get prizes and build narratives to get prizes and build narratives to get prizes and stuff, but that I think they're stuff, but that I think they're stuff, but that I think they're exceedingly rare that um those people exceedingly rare that um those people exceedingly rare that um those people are driven to other fields where there's are driven to other fields where there's are driven to other fields where there's more money involved, more fame involved. more money involved, more fame involved. more money involved, more fame involved. &gt;&gt; But in science, a lot of bad stuff comes &gt;&gt; But in science, a lot of bad stuff comes &gt;&gt; But in science, a lot of bad stuff comes from people feeling that they have to from people feeling that they have to from people feeling that they have to have a landmark paper. And I was taught have a landmark paper. And I was taught have a landmark paper. And I was taught early on some papers end up in solid early on some papers end up in solid early on some papers end up in solid journals and some end up in spectacular journals and some end up in spectacular journals and some end up in spectacular journals. And some projects go nowhere. journals. And some projects go nowhere. journals. And some projects go nowhere. That's just the reality. Mhm. That's just the reality. Mhm. That's just the reality. Mhm. &gt;&gt; The key is to figure out which one is &gt;&gt; The key is to figure out which one is &gt;&gt; The key is to figure out which one is which and but finish things. which and but finish things. which and but finish things. &gt;&gt; At the other end of the spectrum is this &gt;&gt; At the other end of the spectrum is this &gt;&gt; At the other end of the spectrum is this idea that if you are able to make idea that if you are able to make idea that if you are able to make something better, you should something better, you should something better, you should &gt;&gt; and uh this is the reason I delayed my &gt;&gt; and uh this is the reason I delayed my &gt;&gt; and uh this is the reason I delayed my book release for a year. I felt like I book release for a year. I felt like I book release for a year. I felt like I could make it better. There was there could make it better. There was there could make it better. There was there are new data. I want to add are new data. I want to add are new data. I want to add illustrations, but at some point it's illustrations, but at some point it's illustrations, but at some point it's got to ship. So I think we can all agree got to ship. So I think we can all agree got to ship. So I think we can all agree that perfectionism is not great because that perfectionism is not great because that perfectionism is not great because it limits our ability to complete things it limits our ability to complete things it limits our ability to complete things and ship things off sometimes even our and ship things off sometimes even our and ship things off sometimes even our ability to do the work in the first ability to do the work in the first ability to do the work in the first place. But at some level if we can make place. But at some level if we can make place. But at some level if we can make something better we probably should. something better we probably should. something better we probably should. That that's also you know part and That that's also you know part and That that's also you know part and parcel with meeting resistance and parcel with meeting resistance and parcel with meeting resistance and pushing through it. So how do you pushing through it. So how do you pushing through it. So how do you balance those th those two? They're balance those th those two? They're balance those th those two? They're they're in a strong push pull for me. they're in a strong push pull for me. they're in a strong push pull for me. &gt;&gt; I think that uh it's another great &gt;&gt; I think that uh it's another great &gt;&gt; I think that uh it's another great question. I mean, it's so easy to as a question. I mean, it's so easy to as a question. I mean, it's so easy to as a writer to noodle all day with one writer to noodle all day with one writer to noodle all day with one paragraph, you know, and of course, paragraph, you know, and of course, paragraph, you know, and of course, it's obviously, you know, uh resist it's obviously, you know, uh resist it's obviously, you know, uh resist resistance is watching and laughing at resistance is watching and laughing at resistance is watching and laughing at you, you know, oh man, look at this poor you, you know, oh man, look at this poor you, you know, oh man, look at this poor idiot. I've gotten him to completely idiot. I've gotten him to completely idiot. I've gotten him to completely blow the day on this one thing. So, that blow the day on this one thing. So, that blow the day on this one thing. So, that sort of perfectionism is a form of sort of perfectionism is a form of sort of perfectionism is a form of resistance and really has to be avoided resistance and really has to be avoided resistance and really has to be avoided at all costs. Um, on the other hand, you at all costs. Um, on the other hand, you at all costs. Um, on the other hand, you do want to produce something that's do want to produce something that's do want to produce something that's really good, you know, and not but, you really good, you know, and not but, you really good, you know, and not but, you know, like Seth Goden says, when it's, know, like Seth Goden says, when it's, know, like Seth Goden says, when it's, you know, ship it, right? When it's you know, ship it, right? When it's you know, ship it, right? When it's ready to go, you know, there comes a ready to go, you know, there comes a ready to go, you know, there comes a time when, you know, I'm just noodling time when, you know, I'm just noodling time when, you know, I'm just noodling with this because I'm afraid of the uh with this because I'm afraid of the uh with this because I'm afraid of the uh response. Is this going to fail? Is it response. Is this going to fail? Is it response. Is this going to fail? Is it going to fizzle? Is it going to crash going to fizzle? Is it going to crash going to fizzle? Is it going to crash and burn? So, I don't want to ship it and burn? So, I don't want to ship it and burn? So, I don't want to ship it out right now. I had a friend, I tell out right now. I had a friend, I tell out right now. I had a friend, I tell this story, who had uh written this in this story, who had uh written this in this story, who had uh written this in deeply personal novel deeply personal novel deeply personal novel about uh salvaging a ship. He had been about uh salvaging a ship. He had been about uh salvaging a ship. He had been in the merchant marine and you know, I in the merchant marine and you know, I in the merchant marine and you know, I mean, what a great metaphor that was. mean, what a great metaphor that was. mean, what a great metaphor that was. And I read it. It was in its mailing And I read it. It was in its mailing And I read it. It was in its mailing box back in the days when you typed it box back in the days when you typed it box back in the days when you typed it out on a typewriter ready to go and to out on a typewriter ready to go and to out on a typewriter ready to go and to his agent and he couldn't make himself his agent and he couldn't make himself his agent and he couldn't make himself send it off, you know. And the send it off, you know. And the send it off, you know. And the sad part of the story is my friend died sad part of the story is my friend died sad part of the story is my friend died and there so that was and there so that was and there so that was I don't know whether that was I don't know whether that was I don't know whether that was perfectionism or just fear of um perfectionism or just fear of um perfectionism or just fear of um being judged in the in the real world being judged in the in the real world being judged in the in the real world but so it's a real vice perfectionism but so it's a real vice perfectionism but so it's a real vice perfectionism and uh to be guarded against at all and uh to be guarded against at all and uh to be guarded against at all costs I think. But when a thing is ready costs I think. But when a thing is ready costs I think. But when a thing is ready to go let it go. to go let it go. to go let it go. &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk about death. Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk about death. Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; I'd like to talk about death. Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Um, you know, I've &gt;&gt; Um, you know, I've &gt;&gt; Um, you know, I've &gt;&gt; Me too. &gt;&gt; Me too. &gt;&gt; Me too. &gt;&gt; I've great u I've &gt;&gt; I've great u I've &gt;&gt; I've great u I've &gt;&gt; listened to and read uh Steve Jobs's &gt;&gt; listened to and read uh Steve Jobs's &gt;&gt; listened to and read uh Steve Jobs's biography. &gt;&gt; Um I think it's spectacular. Um I had a &gt;&gt; Um I think it's spectacular. Um I had a &gt;&gt; Um I think it's spectacular. Um I had a particular interest in it because particular interest in it because particular interest in it because &gt;&gt; what's the title? Cuz I've never read &gt;&gt; what's the title? Cuz I've never read &gt;&gt; what's the title? Cuz I've never read it. &gt;&gt; I think it's Steve Jobs by Walter &gt;&gt; I think it's Steve Jobs by Walter &gt;&gt; I think it's Steve Jobs by Walter Isacson. It's a phenomenal Isacson. It's a phenomenal Isacson. It's a phenomenal &gt;&gt; Steve Jobs. &gt;&gt; Steve Jobs. &gt;&gt; Steve Jobs. &gt;&gt; No, it's not an autobiography although &gt;&gt; No, it's not an autobiography although &gt;&gt; No, it's not an autobiography although there was communication with him in the there was communication with him in the there was communication with him in the process of writing the book. I think process of writing the book. I think process of writing the book. I think that's the that one of the kind of that's the that one of the kind of that's the that one of the kind of agreements for Isacson is you have to be agreements for Isacson is you have to be agreements for Isacson is you have to be willing to talk to him and he can talk willing to talk to him and he can talk willing to talk to him and he can talk to people in one's life and it's to people in one's life and it's to people in one's life and it's spectacular and one of the reasons I spectacular and one of the reasons I spectacular and one of the reasons I was so interested in it is that you know was so interested in it is that you know was so interested in it is that you know the personal computer came out during my the personal computer came out during my the personal computer came out during my you know childhood. Um you know childhood. Um you know childhood. Um &gt;&gt; Steve lived in our area. We'd see him &gt;&gt; Steve lived in our area. We'd see him &gt;&gt; Steve lived in our area. We'd see him around downtown Palo Alto. He'd come around downtown Palo Alto. He'd come around downtown Palo Alto. He'd come into the sport shop where I worked to into the sport shop where I worked to into the sport shop where I worked to get rollerblade wheels and um get rollerblade wheels and um get rollerblade wheels and um &gt;&gt; I was a skateboarder, but we had to &gt;&gt; I was a skateboarder, but we had to &gt;&gt; I was a skateboarder, but we had to assemble rollerblades. It was just part assemble rollerblades. It was just part assemble rollerblades. It was just part of the job and wagons and things. In any of the job and wagons and things. In any of the job and wagons and things. In any case, um he from a very early point case, um he from a very early point case, um he from a very early point apparently understood his own mortality. apparently understood his own mortality. apparently understood his own mortality. And apparently that was a strong driver And apparently that was a strong driver And apparently that was a strong driver for his intense uh drive to create for his intense uh drive to create for his intense uh drive to create things, to envision things. um in some things, to envision things. um in some things, to envision things. um in some sense people say it's part of the reason sense people say it's part of the reason sense people say it's part of the reason why he didn't pay much attention to uh why he didn't pay much attention to uh why he didn't pay much attention to uh kind of typical conventions and he was kind of typical conventions and he was kind of typical conventions and he was able to evolve the world and create able to evolve the world and create able to evolve the world and create these incredible products these incredible products these incredible products &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; devices I mean portals they're really &gt;&gt; devices I mean portals they're really &gt;&gt; devices I mean portals they're really portals of communication and portals of communication and portals of communication and creativity and um creativity and um creativity and um having a strong sense of one's mortality having a strong sense of one's mortality having a strong sense of one's mortality seems very useful in that respect seems very useful in that respect seems very useful in that respect &gt;&gt; the other end of the spectrum I have a &gt;&gt; the other end of the spectrum I have a &gt;&gt; the other end of the spectrum I have a theory which is that all forms of theory which is that all forms of theory which is that all forms of addiction are basically an attempt to try and are basically an attempt to try and are basically an attempt to try and avoid the reality that we're going to avoid the reality that we're going to avoid the reality that we're going to die to just forget that for moments, die to just forget that for moments, die to just forget that for moments, &gt;&gt; shorter or longer moments. &gt;&gt; shorter or longer moments. &gt;&gt; shorter or longer moments. &gt;&gt; And in some sense, the pursuit of flow &gt;&gt; And in some sense, the pursuit of flow &gt;&gt; And in some sense, the pursuit of flow states and creative works are an attempt states and creative works are an attempt states and creative works are an attempt to kind of either forget about that or to kind of either forget about that or to kind of either forget about that or to some people want to immortalize to some people want to immortalize to some people want to immortalize themselves. But I think knowing that one themselves. But I think knowing that one themselves. But I think knowing that one is going to die is an incredible driver. is going to die is an incredible driver. is going to die is an incredible driver. Um, I have always had a lot of energy, Um, I have always had a lot of energy, Um, I have always had a lot of energy, but it was only recently on kind of on but it was only recently on kind of on but it was only recently on kind of on the threshold of my 50th birthday coming the threshold of my 50th birthday coming the threshold of my 50th birthday coming up that I realized like, oh, I'm up that I realized like, oh, I'm up that I realized like, oh, I'm probably at about the halfway mark. You probably at about the halfway mark. You probably at about the halfway mark. You know, realistically, I'm a biologist. I know, realistically, I'm a biologist. I know, realistically, I'm a biologist. I mean, I think, uh, genetic potential on mean, I think, uh, genetic potential on mean, I think, uh, genetic potential on human longevity is probably about 120. human longevity is probably about 120. human longevity is probably about 120. And with certain practices, maybe you And with certain practices, maybe you And with certain practices, maybe you can get out past your, you know, where can get out past your, you know, where can get out past your, you know, where one is faded to die by maybe five, maybe one is faded to die by maybe five, maybe one is faded to die by maybe five, maybe 10, maybe 20 years. And maybe new 10, maybe 20 years. And maybe new 10, maybe 20 years. And maybe new technologies will come along that will, technologies will come along that will, technologies will come along that will, um, expand that number. But I figure I'm um, expand that number. But I figure I'm um, expand that number. But I figure I'm probably about the halfway mark. So it's probably about the halfway mark. So it's probably about the halfway mark. So it's kind of nice to have a like an oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] kind of nice to have a like an oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] kind of nice to have a like an oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] moment because you stop wasting time. moment because you stop wasting time. moment because you stop wasting time. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Like anyone else have wasted time. So &gt;&gt; Like anyone else have wasted time. So &gt;&gt; Like anyone else have wasted time. So how present is how present is how present is your sense of death eventually coming your sense of death eventually coming your sense of death eventually coming hopefully a long time from now. Again hopefully a long time from now. Again hopefully a long time from now. Again you're in spectacularly good health and you're in spectacularly good health and you're in spectacularly good health and um so that's important. But how present um so that's important. But how present um so that's important. But how present is the reaper is the reaper is the reaper in your process? in your process? in your process? &gt;&gt; And do you think having a real sense &gt;&gt; And do you think having a real sense &gt;&gt; And do you think having a real sense that the reaper's coming is useful? that the reaper's coming is useful? that the reaper's coming is useful? &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely. Um, I was uh having breakfast in New York a I was uh having breakfast in New York a I was uh having breakfast in New York a couple of years ago with a friend of couple of years ago with a friend of couple of years ago with a friend of mine who's exactly my age, you know, and mine who's exactly my age, you know, and mine who's exactly my age, you know, and I asked him, I said, "Nick, how often do I asked him, I said, "Nick, how often do I asked him, I said, "Nick, how often do you think about your own mortality?" and you think about your own mortality?" and you think about your own mortality?" and he said every [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] minute of every he said every [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] minute of every he said every [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] minute of every [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] day, you know, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] day, you know, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] day, you know, &gt;&gt; and maybe that's a little bit excessive &gt;&gt; and maybe that's a little bit excessive &gt;&gt; and maybe that's a little bit excessive because it could become paralyzing, too. because it could become paralyzing, too. because it could become paralyzing, too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; So, uh I don't know if I go that &gt;&gt; So, uh I don't know if I go that &gt;&gt; So, uh I don't know if I go that far, but I'm definitely aware of it, you far, but I'm definitely aware of it, you far, but I'm definitely aware of it, you know, like Robert Redford died two days know, like Robert Redford died two days know, like Robert Redford died two days ago, right, in his sleep, you know, to ago, right, in his sleep, you know, to ago, right, in his sleep, you know, to me was like an immortal guy that was me was like an immortal guy that was me was like an immortal guy that was going to live forever. Um, on the other going to live forever. Um, on the other going to live forever. Um, on the other hand, I have another friend who actually hand, I have another friend who actually hand, I have another friend who actually died a couple years ago, was at my one died a couple years ago, was at my one died a couple years ago, was at my one of my bosses in advertising named Phil of my bosses in advertising named Phil of my bosses in advertising named Phil Slott, great smart guy, and he said one Slott, great smart guy, and he said one Slott, great smart guy, and he said one time to me that people tell you that time to me that people tell you that time to me that people tell you that life is short, but really life is long life is short, but really life is long life is short, but really life is long and like thinking about you, Andrew, and like thinking about you, Andrew, and like thinking about you, Andrew, that you're 50 years old, you've got that you're 50 years old, you've got that you're 50 years old, you've got another 50 years ahead of you, you know. another 50 years ahead of you, you know. another 50 years ahead of you, you know. So that one has to think, So that one has to think, So that one has to think, &gt;&gt; you know, it's it can be also a form of &gt;&gt; you know, it's it can be also a form of &gt;&gt; you know, it's it can be also a form of resistance. Like for me at my age, you resistance. Like for me at my age, you resistance. Like for me at my age, you think, well, I'm only going to be around think, well, I'm only going to be around think, well, I'm only going to be around a few more years. I might as well [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] a few more years. I might as well [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] a few more years. I might as well [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off or, you know, I don't have to work off or, you know, I don't have to work off or, you know, I don't have to work that hard, you know? But no, cuz I'm I that hard, you know? But no, cuz I'm I that hard, you know? But no, cuz I'm I might be around for another 20 years or might be around for another 20 years or might be around for another 20 years or more. That's a career. I should I could more. That's a career. I should I could more. That's a career. I should I could write 15 books. I could make them. Who write 15 books. I could make them. Who write 15 books. I could make them. Who knows what. Um certainly I have to which knows what. Um certainly I have to which knows what. Um certainly I have to which is part of why I go to the gym you know is part of why I go to the gym you know is part of why I go to the gym you know to think of uh I don't want to start to think of uh I don't want to start to think of uh I don't want to start thinking that I'm on the way down or I thinking that I'm on the way down or I thinking that I'm on the way down or I haven't got you know life is life is haven't got you know life is life is haven't got you know life is life is long it's longer than we think and long it's longer than we think and long it's longer than we think and we have in the sense of uh it's we have in the sense of uh it's we have in the sense of uh it's opportunity to do stuff but it's also an opportunity to do stuff but it's also an opportunity to do stuff but it's also an obligation to do stuff to keep obligation to do stuff to keep obligation to do stuff to keep evolving so on and so forth. Um, evolving so on and so forth. Um, evolving so on and so forth. Um, on another on another sort of side of I on another on another sort of side of I on another on another sort of side of I don't know if this was I'll this will be don't know if this was I'll this will be don't know if this was I'll this will be confessional for me. I know when I confessional for me. I know when I confessional for me. I know when I was a kid, was a kid, was a kid, um, our family was sort of like the um, our family was sort of like the um, our family was sort of like the black sheep of our bigger family. Like black sheep of our bigger family. Like black sheep of our bigger family. Like everybody, all the my uncles and stuff everybody, all the my uncles and stuff everybody, all the my uncles and stuff were all really successful and my dad were all really successful and my dad were all really successful and my dad was kind of struggling, you know, and so was kind of struggling, you know, and so was kind of struggling, you know, and so it became it became it became a thing in my mind where I said, and a thing in my mind where I said, and a thing in my mind where I said, and it's just looking ahead for how long it's just looking ahead for how long it's just looking ahead for how long you're going to live. I said, 'I'm going you're going to live. I said, 'I'm going you're going to live. I said, 'I'm going to show these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that our to show these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that our to show these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that our family is not what they think they are, family is not what they think they are, family is not what they think they are, you know? And so I um that's been a real you know? And so I um that's been a real you know? And so I um that's been a real driver for me, more so than any idea of driver for me, more so than any idea of driver for me, more so than any idea of mortality, even over those long years mortality, even over those long years mortality, even over those long years where I was getting nowhere that uh um where I was getting nowhere that uh um where I was getting nowhere that uh um to sort of honor my dad and um that I to sort of honor my dad and um that I to sort of honor my dad and um that I was going to, you know, hang in there was going to, you know, hang in there was going to, you know, hang in there and do something. and do something. and do something. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think that's a great &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think that's a great &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think that's a great opportunity for us to talk about um opportunity for us to talk about um opportunity for us to talk about um another kind of resistance which is another kind of resistance which is another kind of resistance which is actually very adaptive and can propel us actually very adaptive and can propel us actually very adaptive and can propel us forward which is um having some friction forward which is um having some friction forward which is um having some friction with someone or something. I know this with someone or something. I know this with someone or something. I know this is a little politically incorrect but in is a little politically incorrect but in is a little politically incorrect but in one's mind to be able to drive yourself one's mind to be able to drive yourself one's mind to be able to drive yourself harder and I think this can take on harder and I think this can take on harder and I think this can take on toxic forms but I think it can also be toxic forms but I think it can also be toxic forms but I think it can also be very beneficial. There's this great very beneficial. There's this great very beneficial. There's this great moment in one of those Dark Knight moment in one of those Dark Knight moment in one of those Dark Knight movies where the Joker has the movies where the Joker has the movies where the Joker has the opportunity to kill Batman opportunity to kill Batman opportunity to kill Batman &gt;&gt; and he says something like just kill me &gt;&gt; and he says something like just kill me &gt;&gt; and he says something like just kill me and the Joker says kill you. He's I and the Joker says kill you. He's I and the Joker says kill you. He's I don't want to kill you. You complete me. don't want to kill you. You complete me. don't want to kill you. You complete me. You know it's this moment where the You know it's this moment where the You know it's this moment where the Joker doesn't exist without Batman and Joker doesn't exist without Batman and Joker doesn't exist without Batman and vice versa, right? that having somebody vice versa, right? that having somebody vice versa, right? that having somebody or something that you're challenging or something that you're challenging or something that you're challenging yourself to uh that you're trying to yourself to uh that you're trying to yourself to uh that you're trying to prove yourself to sometimes to yourself prove yourself to sometimes to yourself prove yourself to sometimes to yourself um can be very beneficial. And at um can be very beneficial. And at um can be very beneficial. And at different times in my career, certainly different times in my career, certainly different times in my career, certainly not now um and I kind of miss it a not now um and I kind of miss it a not now um and I kind of miss it a little bit to be honest, but at various little bit to be honest, but at various little bit to be honest, but at various times in my uh different careers of times in my uh different careers of times in my uh different careers of pursuits, I should say um being in of pursuits, I should say um being in of pursuits, I should say um being in competition can be an incredible driver. competition can be an incredible driver. competition can be an incredible driver. &gt;&gt; I could go into a whole story here, but &gt;&gt; I could go into a whole story here, but &gt;&gt; I could go into a whole story here, but it doesn't matter. I think that it's it doesn't matter. I think that it's it doesn't matter. I think that it's kind of evident what we're talking kind of evident what we're talking kind of evident what we're talking about that having someone that you about that having someone that you about that having someone that you you're not going to let get the best of you're not going to let get the best of you're not going to let get the best of you, that you know you can do better, um you, that you know you can do better, um you, that you know you can do better, um can be very useful. It can also be toxic can be very useful. It can also be toxic can be very useful. It can also be toxic as we pointed out because it's as we pointed out because it's as we pointed out because it's &gt;&gt; I feel having experienced that &gt;&gt; I feel having experienced that &gt;&gt; I feel having experienced that &gt;&gt; and having won by the way. No, just not &gt;&gt; and having won by the way. No, just not &gt;&gt; and having won by the way. No, just not kidding. But that the energy that it pulls on But that the energy that it pulls on But that the energy that it pulls on here, I'm going to put my physiologist here, I'm going to put my physiologist here, I'm going to put my physiologist uh neuroscience hat on is, you know, uh neuroscience hat on is, you know, uh neuroscience hat on is, you know, it's more of an adrenal adrenaline type it's more of an adrenal adrenaline type it's more of an adrenal adrenaline type drive &gt;&gt; than kind of orienting towards your love &gt;&gt; than kind of orienting towards your love &gt;&gt; than kind of orienting towards your love of craft. I mean, it's meshed with that, of craft. I mean, it's meshed with that, of craft. I mean, it's meshed with that, &gt;&gt; right? Hopefully, it's within a craft &gt;&gt; right? Hopefully, it's within a craft &gt;&gt; right? Hopefully, it's within a craft you love, but to just be in sheer you love, but to just be in sheer you love, but to just be in sheer competition all the time can be competition all the time can be competition all the time can be depleting. And one has to be really depleting. And one has to be really depleting. And one has to be really careful with this stuff. So, um, careful with this stuff. So, um, careful with this stuff. So, um, obviously that got you propelled obviously that got you propelled obviously that got you propelled forward. You're going to prove that your forward. You're going to prove that your forward. You're going to prove that your family &gt;&gt; in an unconscious way. It certainly was &gt;&gt; in an unconscious way. It certainly was &gt;&gt; in an unconscious way. It certainly was not, you know, I'm only becoming aware not, you know, I'm only becoming aware not, you know, I'm only becoming aware of it now. of it now. of it now. &gt;&gt; Oh, I see. So, at the time you weren't &gt;&gt; Oh, I see. So, at the time you weren't &gt;&gt; Oh, I see. So, at the time you weren't aware of it. aware of it. aware of it. &gt;&gt; I wasn't even aware of it. &gt;&gt; I wasn't even aware of it. &gt;&gt; I wasn't even aware of it. &gt;&gt; Okay. I was very aware of this &gt;&gt; Okay. I was very aware of this &gt;&gt; Okay. I was very aware of this friction cuz the guy and I had like an friction cuz the guy and I had like an friction cuz the guy and I had like an outright rivalry. Um, and it was a lot outright rivalry. Um, and it was a lot outright rivalry. Um, and it was a lot of fun, too. Actually, years later, we of fun, too. Actually, years later, we of fun, too. Actually, years later, we uh shared a coffee and reflected on how uh shared a coffee and reflected on how uh shared a coffee and reflected on how much great work we each got done. much great work we each got done. much great work we each got done. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; In this I mean, if you think about Larry &gt;&gt; In this I mean, if you think about Larry &gt;&gt; In this I mean, if you think about Larry Bird and Magic Johnson, you know, how Bird and Magic Johnson, you know, how Bird and Magic Johnson, you know, how they kind of made each other, you know, they kind of made each other, you know, they kind of made each other, you know, pum and now they're the best of friends, pum and now they're the best of friends, pum and now they're the best of friends, you know, Steve Jobs and Bill Gates you know, Steve Jobs and Bill Gates you know, Steve Jobs and Bill Gates early on. early on. early on. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Was that true? I didn't &gt;&gt; Yeah. Was that true? I didn't &gt;&gt; Yeah. Was that true? I didn't &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. There was a big competition, &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. There was a big competition, &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. There was a big competition, especially in the Bay Area where you had especially in the Bay Area where you had especially in the Bay Area where you had a was it was and still remains kind of a was it was and still remains kind of a was it was and still remains kind of the seat of tech and computer the seat of tech and computer the seat of tech and computer science. It was like, is it going to be science. It was like, is it going to be science. It was like, is it going to be Windows or is it going to be the Windows or is it going to be the Windows or is it going to be the Mac operating system? And then they the Mac operating system? And then they the Mac operating system? And then they when they join forces later, that would when they join forces later, that would when they join forces later, that would have been like the Yankees and the Red have been like the Yankees and the Red have been like the Yankees and the Red Sox merging. Uh-huh. Sox merging. Uh-huh. Sox merging. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; It's like it was a mind bend. You're &gt;&gt; It's like it was a mind bend. You're &gt;&gt; It's like it was a mind bend. You're like, "This can't be happening." And all like, "This can't be happening." And all like, "This can't be happening." And all the all the nerds and the bear are like, the all the nerds and the bear are like, the all the nerds and the bear are like, "Oh, yeah. This happened." You know, "Oh, yeah. This happened." You know, "Oh, yeah. This happened." You know, next thing you know, everybody's moved next thing you know, everybody's moved next thing you know, everybody's moved on. Um, on. Um, on. Um, &gt;&gt; so I think having resistance with &gt;&gt; so I think having resistance with &gt;&gt; so I think having resistance with a desire to prove to pro to prove with a desire to prove to pro to prove with a desire to prove to pro to prove oneself, I think, can be helpful, right? oneself, I think, can be helpful, right? oneself, I think, can be helpful, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so, too. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so, too. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so, too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um, you know, my trainer at the gym, TR &gt;&gt; Um, you know, my trainer at the gym, TR &gt;&gt; Um, you know, my trainer at the gym, TR Goodman, he's trained a lot of Goodman, he's trained a lot of Goodman, he's trained a lot of professional athletes, particularly professional athletes, particularly professional athletes, particularly hockey players. Um, and a lot of them, hockey players. Um, and a lot of them, hockey players. Um, and a lot of them, he says, because he got to know him very he says, because he got to know him very he says, because he got to know him very well, really had a chip on their shoulder really had a chip on their shoulder really had a chip on their shoulder about something or other, like my dad, about something or other, like my dad, about something or other, like my dad, I'm going to show my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dad that I I'm going to show my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dad that I I'm going to show my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dad that I can do this thing, you know, and it can do this thing, you know, and it can do this thing, you know, and it would drive them, but like you say, it would drive them, but like you say, it would drive them, but like you say, it becomes kind of toxic at some point. You becomes kind of toxic at some point. You becomes kind of toxic at some point. You do have to sort of have that come to do have to sort of have that come to do have to sort of have that come to Jesus moment when you say wait a minute Jesus moment when you say wait a minute Jesus moment when you say wait a minute you know let me get a let me get a you know let me get a let me get a you know let me get a let me get a handle on this and maybe a little handle on this and maybe a little handle on this and maybe a little forgiveness here or a little bit of forgiveness here or a little bit of forgiveness here or a little bit of empathy a little of you know putting empathy a little of you know putting empathy a little of you know putting myself in the position of this person myself in the position of this person myself in the position of this person that I'm trying to show um Greg Norman's that I'm trying to show um Greg Norman's that I'm trying to show um Greg Norman's dad you know the golfer you know that dad you know the golfer you know that dad you know the golfer you know that and so many there's so many thing people and so many there's so many thing people and so many there's so many thing people like that uh it does become toxic like that uh it does become toxic like that uh it does become toxic but it like you say it can produce great but it like you say it can produce great but it like you say it can produce great success because it drives people success because it drives people success because it drives people &gt;&gt; yeah Michael Jordan was famously &gt;&gt; yeah Michael Jordan was famously &gt;&gt; yeah Michael Jordan was famously competitive about everything. competitive about everything. competitive about everything. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Everything. &gt;&gt; Everything. &gt;&gt; Everything. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel very fortunate that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel very fortunate that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel very fortunate that these days I do things and I create out these days I do things and I create out these days I do things and I create out of just a love for what I do. There's of just a love for what I do. There's of just a love for what I do. There's none of that. I never think about none of that. I never think about none of that. I never think about another podcast or another podcast or another podcast or &gt;&gt; what other people I think about &gt;&gt; what other people I think about &gt;&gt; what other people I think about &gt;&gt; none of that truly. I would admit if I &gt;&gt; none of that truly. I would admit if I &gt;&gt; none of that truly. I would admit if I did for you, did for you, did for you, &gt;&gt; but in the past that wasn't the case. &gt;&gt; but in the past that wasn't the case. &gt;&gt; but in the past that wasn't the case. &gt;&gt; It wasn't the case. And and I think that &gt;&gt; It wasn't the case. And and I think that &gt;&gt; It wasn't the case. And and I think that um and at times it brought out my best um and at times it brought out my best um and at times it brought out my best and at times it brought out my best but and at times it brought out my best but and at times it brought out my best but it made the process much more painful. I it made the process much more painful. I it made the process much more painful. I think doing something for love of I think doing something for love of I think doing something for love of craft is really important. craft is really important. craft is really important. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I couldn't agree more. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I couldn't agree more. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I couldn't agree more. &gt;&gt; But as you've pointed out that process &gt;&gt; But as you've pointed out that process &gt;&gt; But as you've pointed out that process can be painful can be painful can be painful &gt;&gt; even though you love the craft. It's a &gt;&gt; even though you love the craft. It's a &gt;&gt; even though you love the craft. It's a weird thing. This is a bizarre dark and weird thing. This is a bizarre dark and weird thing. This is a bizarre dark and light &gt;&gt; braided together. &gt;&gt; braided together. &gt;&gt; braided together. &gt;&gt; This creativity thing. &gt;&gt; This creativity thing. &gt;&gt; This creativity thing. What about feedback from the outside What about feedback from the outside What about feedback from the outside after the thing is done? Uh, reviews. after the thing is done? Uh, reviews. after the thing is done? Uh, reviews. Um, let's talk about King Kong. Um, let's talk about King Kong. Um, let's talk about King Kong. &gt;&gt; I mean, you you've written about the &gt;&gt; I mean, you you've written about the &gt;&gt; I mean, you you've written about the fact that you made this movie and it fact that you made this movie and it fact that you made this movie and it wasn't received with uh with broad wasn't received with uh with broad wasn't received with uh with broad accolades. &gt;&gt; It was quite embarrassing. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It was quite embarrassing. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It was quite embarrassing. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But was the movie that bad? &gt;&gt; But was the movie that bad? &gt;&gt; But was the movie that bad? &gt;&gt; Oh, it was terrible. Yeah, it was really &gt;&gt; Oh, it was terrible. Yeah, it was really &gt;&gt; Oh, it was terrible. Yeah, it was really terrible. Yeah. terrible. Yeah. terrible. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Did you know it was terrible when you &gt;&gt; Did you know it was terrible when you &gt;&gt; Did you know it was terrible when you released it? released it? released it? &gt;&gt; No, that was even worse. &gt;&gt; No, that was even worse. &gt;&gt; No, that was even worse. So, you thought it was awesome? So, you thought it was awesome? So, you thought it was awesome? &gt;&gt; It was King Kong Lives, one of the worst &gt;&gt; It was King Kong Lives, one of the worst &gt;&gt; It was King Kong Lives, one of the worst movies ever. And I remember that uh I movies ever. And I remember that uh I movies ever. And I remember that uh I wrote this with a partner, Ron Shuset, I wrote this with a partner, Ron Shuset, I wrote this with a partner, Ron Shuset, who was one of the guys who originally who was one of the guys who originally who was one of the guys who originally did the first alien, the thing where the did the first alien, the thing where the did the first alien, the thing where the guy burst the alien bursts out of that guy burst the alien bursts out of that guy burst the alien bursts out of that his the guy's chest. That was his along his the guy's chest. That was his along his the guy's chest. That was his along with the whole face hugger thing. That with the whole face hugger thing. That with the whole face hugger thing. That was his too. So, he was like a really was his too. So, he was like a really was his too. So, he was like a really legendary guy, particularly in science legendary guy, particularly in science legendary guy, particularly in science fiction. and I was kind of his fiction. and I was kind of his fiction. and I was kind of his junior partner. And um when we did junior partner. And um when we did junior partner. And um when we did this movie for Dino Dler on a contract this movie for Dino Dler on a contract this movie for Dino Dler on a contract and when and when we were done we and when and when we were done we and when and when we were done we thought this is great. It's how crazy we thought this is great. It's how crazy we thought this is great. It's how crazy we were. And we invited, you know, all of were. And we invited, you know, all of were. And we invited, you know, all of our friends, you know, to the screening our friends, you know, to the screening our friends, you know, to the screening or something. And and when it was over, or something. And and when it was over, or something. And and when it was over, it was like death, deathly silence, you it was like death, deathly silence, you it was like death, deathly silence, you know. And I was telling you before we know. And I was telling you before we know. And I was telling you before we did this thing today, the review and did this thing today, the review and did this thing today, the review and Daily Variety said Ronald said, and Daily Variety said Ronald said, and Daily Variety said Ronald said, and Steven Presfield, we hope these are not Steven Presfield, we hope these are not Steven Presfield, we hope these are not their real names for their parents' their real names for their parents' their real names for their parents' sake. So that was that was definitely an sake. So that was that was definitely an sake. So that was that was definitely an uh a bad moment. But from my point of uh a bad moment. But from my point of uh a bad moment. But from my point of view, it was the first time I got a view, it was the first time I got a view, it was the first time I got a movie made movie made movie made &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; that I was involved with at all. So I &gt;&gt; that I was involved with at all. So I &gt;&gt; that I was involved with at all. So I had to say and a friend of mine, my had to say and a friend of mine, my had to say and a friend of mine, my friend Tony Keelman took me aside and friend Tony Keelman took me aside and friend Tony Keelman took me aside and said, you know, you're in the arena, said, you know, you're in the arena, said, you know, you're in the arena, man. You're taking the blows, but you're man. You're taking the blows, but you're man. You're taking the blows, but you're out there doing it. And he was out there doing it. And he was out there doing it. And he was absolutely right. So I, you know, I absolutely right. So I, you know, I absolutely right. So I, you know, I turned out to be very grateful to that. turned out to be very grateful to that. turned out to be very grateful to that. And I still am grateful to it, but it And I still am grateful to it, but it And I still am grateful to it, but it was a but it certainly was a terrible was a but it certainly was a terrible was a but it certainly was a terrible review and uh kept you kept you humble. review and uh kept you kept you humble. review and uh kept you kept you humble. Did you go back and analyze what was Did you go back and analyze what was Did you go back and analyze what was wrong with the movie and what could have wrong with the movie and what could have wrong with the movie and what could have made it great? made it great? made it great? &gt;&gt; No, it was like too painful to even &gt;&gt; No, it was like too painful to even &gt;&gt; No, it was like too painful to even think about. Yeah. think about. Yeah. think about. Yeah. &gt;&gt; When was the last time you watched it? &gt;&gt; When was the last time you watched it? &gt;&gt; When was the last time you watched it? &gt;&gt; Oh, not since when it came out, which &gt;&gt; Oh, not since when it came out, which &gt;&gt; Oh, not since when it came out, which was like 1980 something or other. Yeah. was like 1980 something or other. Yeah. was like 1980 something or other. Yeah. &gt;&gt; What was the budget for the movie? &gt;&gt; What was the budget for the movie? &gt;&gt; What was the budget for the movie? &gt;&gt; A lot of it was a big budget. &gt;&gt; A lot of it was a big budget. &gt;&gt; A lot of it was a big budget. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um I don't I don't know what it was &gt;&gt; Um I don't I don't know what it was &gt;&gt; Um I don't I don't know what it was then, but it was it was a big budget. then, but it was it was a big budget. then, but it was it was a big budget. Yeah. &gt;&gt; In the millions. &gt;&gt; In the millions. &gt;&gt; In the millions. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Yeah. A lot of special &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Yeah. A lot of special &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Yeah. A lot of special effects. I mean, you know, a King Kong effects. I mean, you know, a King Kong effects. I mean, you know, a King Kong movie had to Yeah. movie had to Yeah. movie had to Yeah. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that was terrible. But uh I'm &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that was terrible. But uh I'm &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that was terrible. But uh I'm definitely a believer that the ideal is definitely a believer that the ideal is definitely a believer that the ideal is to not listen to anything that anybody to not listen to anything that anybody to not listen to anything that anybody says about what you did and to judge it says about what you did and to judge it says about what you did and to judge it only yourself. You know, and if you can, only yourself. You know, and if you can, only yourself. You know, and if you can, I think it's good to get a sort of an I think it's good to get a sort of an I think it's good to get a sort of an objective cross-section. You know, some objective cross-section. You know, some objective cross-section. You know, some things go out there and they sink things go out there and they sink things go out there and they sink without a trace. Some things people without a trace. Some things people without a trace. Some things people really love. Um, but the bottom line is really love. Um, but the bottom line is really love. Um, but the bottom line is like Paul Rink said to me, start the like Paul Rink said to me, start the like Paul Rink said to me, start the next one today. You know, soon as you next one today. You know, soon as you next one today. You know, soon as you because it's a lifelong, like we were because it's a lifelong, like we were because it's a lifelong, like we were saying, it's for the love of the game. saying, it's for the love of the game. saying, it's for the love of the game. It's a lifelong practice. And you know, It's a lifelong practice. And you know, It's a lifelong practice. And you know, uh, a professional does not take success uh, a professional does not take success uh, a professional does not take success or failure personally, but keeps on or failure personally, but keeps on or failure personally, but keeps on going and does the next one and the next going and does the next one and the next going and does the next one and the next one and the next one. with creative one and the next one. with creative one and the next one. with creative works or anything that our name is works or anything that our name is works or anything that our name is closely attached to it uh it's a closely attached to it uh it's a closely attached to it uh it's a challenge right I mean a book with the challenge right I mean a book with the challenge right I mean a book with the author's name there a movie with the you author's name there a movie with the you author's name there a movie with the you know producers and the directors there know producers and the directors there know producers and the directors there and the actors a podcast I mean almost and the actors a podcast I mean almost and the actors a podcast I mean almost every major podcast is named after the every major podcast is named after the every major podcast is named after the podcaster it's kind of funny and in podcaster it's kind of funny and in podcaster it's kind of funny and in science the lab is named after you know science the lab is named after you know science the lab is named after you know Huberman lab or whatever lab I always Huberman lab or whatever lab I always Huberman lab or whatever lab I always thought the lab should be named after a thought the lab should be named after a thought the lab should be named after a particular scientific quest. That's how particular scientific quest. That's how particular scientific quest. That's how they do it in other countries. I think they do it in other countries. I think they do it in other countries. I think that's a lot more elegant and it also that's a lot more elegant and it also that's a lot more elegant and it also &gt;&gt; teaches a lesson to the students and &gt;&gt; teaches a lesson to the students and &gt;&gt; teaches a lesson to the students and postocs that you're after discovery. postocs that you're after discovery. postocs that you're after discovery. It's not just about your career. It's not just about your career. It's not just about your career. &gt;&gt; Um, unfortunately in the United States, &gt;&gt; Um, unfortunately in the United States, &gt;&gt; Um, unfortunately in the United States, we promote this notion of the we promote this notion of the we promote this notion of the independent investigator. It's all about independent investigator. It's all about independent investigator. It's all about the individual or maybe small group of the individual or maybe small group of the individual or maybe small group of two or three of them cracking some two or three of them cracking some two or three of them cracking some really difficult Watson and Crick. And really difficult Watson and Crick. And really difficult Watson and Crick. And it's always been this way. It's it's always been this way. It's it's always been this way. It's it's terrible. It's a feature that if I had a terrible. It's a feature that if I had a terrible. It's a feature that if I had a magic wand and I don't, I would abolish. magic wand and I don't, I would abolish. magic wand and I don't, I would abolish. But when our name is closely attached to But when our name is closely attached to But when our name is closely attached to something, feedback that's great feels pretty good. feedback that's great feels pretty good. feedback that's great feels pretty good. And if you're a self-critical, hard And if you're a self-critical, hard And if you're a self-critical, hard driving person, feedback that's negative driving person, feedback that's negative driving person, feedback that's negative can hurt. I will say my experience is can hurt. I will say my experience is can hurt. I will say my experience is that the larger volume of negative that the larger volume of negative that the larger volume of negative feedback that you get day in and day feedback that you get day in and day feedback that you get day in and day out, the less of an impact it has. You out, the less of an impact it has. You out, the less of an impact it has. You know, initially like the podcast will know, initially like the podcast will know, initially like the podcast will come out, you get a bunch of great come out, you get a bunch of great come out, you get a bunch of great comments and you get some nasty comments and you get some nasty comments and you get some nasty ones and then you're like, "Oh, that ones and then you're like, "Oh, that ones and then you're like, "Oh, that really hurts." You know, you podcast really hurts." You know, you podcast really hurts." You know, you podcast every week, every week, every week, &gt;&gt; two episodes a week or an episode every &gt;&gt; two episodes a week or an episode every &gt;&gt; two episodes a week or an episode every week and pretty soon that just stuff week and pretty soon that just stuff week and pretty soon that just stuff just flies right by the signal, the just flies right by the signal, the just flies right by the signal, the noise, it just goes way down. noise, it just goes way down. noise, it just goes way down. &gt;&gt; So, I offer that to people because it &gt;&gt; So, I offer that to people because it &gt;&gt; So, I offer that to people because it the more you put out there, the more the more you put out there, the more the more you put out there, the more feedback you get feedback you get feedback you get &gt;&gt; and the less of an impact the feedback &gt;&gt; and the less of an impact the feedback &gt;&gt; and the less of an impact the feedback has. But the positive feedback also it has. But the positive feedback also it has. But the positive feedback also it it's just it becomes just noisier in it's just it becomes just noisier in it's just it becomes just noisier in general. So now when you sit down to general. So now when you sit down to general. So now when you sit down to write a book write a book write a book &gt;&gt; you must see some level of feedback. You &gt;&gt; you must see some level of feedback. You &gt;&gt; you must see some level of feedback. You want to know is it selling? Is it doing want to know is it selling? Is it doing want to know is it selling? Is it doing well? Is it not doing well well? Is it not doing well well? Is it not doing well &gt;&gt; and but it sounds like you don't analyze &gt;&gt; and but it sounds like you don't analyze &gt;&gt; and but it sounds like you don't analyze why it might have done well or not well. why it might have done well or not well. why it might have done well or not well. You just assume you know that's where You just assume you know that's where You just assume you know that's where you were at in that point in time and you were at in that point in time and you were at in that point in time and that's where they're at. that's where they're at. that's where they're at. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't analyze it because I &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't analyze it because I &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't analyze it because I don't know if you can ever even figure don't know if you can ever even figure don't know if you can ever even figure it out. And also so much of it has to do it out. And also so much of it has to do it out. And also so much of it has to do with in any thing that you put out with in any thing that you put out with in any thing that you put out with timing. Are people you know is this uh timing. Are people you know is this uh timing. Are people you know is this uh you know ready the moment you know how you know ready the moment you know how you know ready the moment you know how much does it get did it get promoted? much does it get did it get promoted? much does it get did it get promoted? Did it get you know did people even know Did it get you know did people even know Did it get you know did people even know it existed? Um there's so many factors it existed? Um there's so many factors it existed? Um there's so many factors that are above and beyond whether it was that are above and beyond whether it was that are above and beyond whether it was actually good actually good actually good &gt;&gt; and I think you can only you can only &gt;&gt; and I think you can only you can only &gt;&gt; and I think you can only you can only ask your you know did you do your best ask your you know did you do your best ask your you know did you do your best &gt;&gt; you know um did you leave it all on the &gt;&gt; you know um did you leave it all on the &gt;&gt; you know um did you leave it all on the floor and if you did floor and if you did floor and if you did &gt;&gt; then that's all you can ask um but again &gt;&gt; then that's all you can ask um but again &gt;&gt; then that's all you can ask um but again it's for me it's a lifelong practice it's for me it's a lifelong practice it's for me it's a lifelong practice &gt;&gt; and I'm going to do this till they take &gt;&gt; and I'm going to do this till they take &gt;&gt; and I'm going to do this till they take me out you know and whatever the next me out you know and whatever the next me out you know and whatever the next one is I'll do that. It's clear you're one is I'll do that. It's clear you're one is I'll do that. It's clear you're not going to pull the pin. not going to pull the pin. not going to pull the pin. &gt;&gt; No, I'm not going to pull the pin. &gt;&gt; No, I'm not going to pull the pin. &gt;&gt; No, I'm not going to pull the pin. &gt;&gt; Good. Dopamine dynamics in the brain &gt;&gt; Good. Dopamine dynamics in the brain &gt;&gt; Good. Dopamine dynamics in the brain would tell us that if you have a big would tell us that if you have a big would tell us that if you have a big success, say a book or a movie or an success, say a book or a movie or an success, say a book or a movie or an album, what have you, that the next album, what have you, that the next album, what have you, that the next thing, no matter how well it goes, is thing, no matter how well it goes, is thing, no matter how well it goes, is not going to feel that great unless it not going to feel that great unless it not going to feel that great unless it exceeds the previous thing. This is just exceeds the previous thing. This is just exceeds the previous thing. This is just the laws of dopamine circuitry that the laws of dopamine circuitry that the laws of dopamine circuitry that exist in all of us. exist in all of us. exist in all of us. &gt;&gt; I didn't write the script. &gt;&gt; I didn't write the script. &gt;&gt; I didn't write the script. It's hardwired. It's hardwired. It's hardwired. &gt;&gt; Of all your books, which one got the &gt;&gt; Of all your books, which one got the &gt;&gt; Of all your books, which one got the most public acceptance and praise? most public acceptance and praise? most public acceptance and praise? &gt;&gt; It's either The War of Art or Gates of &gt;&gt; It's either The War of Art or Gates of &gt;&gt; It's either The War of Art or Gates of Fire? &gt;&gt; Okay. What book came after that? &gt;&gt; Okay. What book came after that? &gt;&gt; Okay. What book came after that? &gt;&gt; But on uh let me say on both of them, &gt;&gt; But on uh let me say on both of them, &gt;&gt; But on uh let me say on both of them, &gt;&gt; it took years, &gt;&gt; it took years, &gt;&gt; it took years, &gt;&gt; years for that to for either of them to &gt;&gt; years for that to for either of them to &gt;&gt; years for that to for either of them to uh to reach any kind of level. Neither uh to reach any kind of level. Neither uh to reach any kind of level. Neither of them were overnight successes. There of them were overnight successes. There of them were overnight successes. There wasn't any, you know, wasn't any, you know, wasn't any, you know, any of that fanfare, nothing really. any of that fanfare, nothing really. any of that fanfare, nothing really. &gt;&gt; Finally, like maybe eight or 10 years &gt;&gt; Finally, like maybe eight or 10 years &gt;&gt; Finally, like maybe eight or 10 years later, you know, you realize, oh, you later, you know, you realize, oh, you later, you know, you realize, oh, you know, this thing is percolating along know, this thing is percolating along know, this thing is percolating along pretty good, you know, so that's a whole pretty good, you know, so that's a whole pretty good, you know, so that's a whole different sort of there wasn't that much different sort of there wasn't that much different sort of there wasn't that much dopamine coming in to me on that. dopamine coming in to me on that. dopamine coming in to me on that. &gt;&gt; That's probably a good thing. &gt;&gt; That's probably a good thing. &gt;&gt; That's probably a good thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, you know, the whole notion &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, you know, the whole notion &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, you know, the whole notion of one hit wonders like, you know, bands of one hit wonders like, you know, bands of one hit wonders like, you know, bands that get, you know, there's a great that get, you know, there's a great that get, you know, there's a great movie with Tom Hanks about that. I movie with Tom Hanks about that. I movie with Tom Hanks about that. I forget what the title is. forget what the title is. forget what the title is. &gt;&gt; That thing you do. &gt;&gt; That thing you do. &gt;&gt; That thing you do. &gt;&gt; That thing you do. It's a perfect &gt;&gt; That thing you do. It's a perfect &gt;&gt; That thing you do. It's a perfect example of that. And um you know there example of that. And um you know there example of that. And um you know there these one hit wonders are kids that you these one hit wonders are kids that you these one hit wonders are kids that you know they blow up. They get one know they blow up. They get one know they blow up. They get one song they gone. song they gone. song they gone. &gt;&gt; There's actually an incredible movie &gt;&gt; There's actually an incredible movie &gt;&gt; There's actually an incredible movie that if you don't mind I'll just mention that if you don't mind I'll just mention that if you don't mind I'll just mention to people that I wish everyone would to people that I wish everyone would to people that I wish everyone would see. Um it's a documentary that I saw at see. Um it's a documentary that I saw at see. Um it's a documentary that I saw at the Tribeca Film Festival years ago the Tribeca Film Festival years ago the Tribeca Film Festival years ago called My Big Break. And it's a it's a called My Big Break. And it's a it's a called My Big Break. And it's a it's a true story of four guys living in an true story of four guys living in an true story of four guys living in an apartment in Los Angeles who all want to apartment in Los Angeles who all want to apartment in Los Angeles who all want to become actors. become actors. become actors. And I won't give any more information And I won't give any more information And I won't give any more information about it, but let's just say one of them about it, but let's just say one of them about it, but let's just say one of them becomes immensely successful. I won't becomes immensely successful. I won't becomes immensely successful. I won't talk about what happens to the other talk about what happens to the other talk about what happens to the other three, but the takeaway from the movie, three, but the takeaway from the movie, three, but the takeaway from the movie, and I'm not, this is not a spoiler, is and I'm not, this is not a spoiler, is and I'm not, this is not a spoiler, is that everybody gets their big break at that everybody gets their big break at that everybody gets their big break at some point. some point. some point. &gt;&gt; Most people blow it. Ah, &gt;&gt; Most people blow it. Ah, &gt;&gt; Most people blow it. Ah, &gt;&gt; and they don't blow it because they &gt;&gt; and they don't blow it because they &gt;&gt; and they don't blow it because they can't do the thing. They blow it because can't do the thing. They blow it because can't do the thing. They blow it because they can't handle that it's happening they can't handle that it's happening they can't handle that it's happening &gt;&gt; and they it gets in the way of their &gt;&gt; and they it gets in the way of their &gt;&gt; and they it gets in the way of their creative process or their essence. It's creative process or their essence. It's creative process or their essence. It's an awesome documentary. an awesome documentary. an awesome documentary. &gt;&gt; Oh, really? My big break, huh? &gt;&gt; Oh, really? My big break, huh? &gt;&gt; Oh, really? My big break, huh? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Fantastic. And I think anyone that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Fantastic. And I think anyone that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Fantastic. And I think anyone that wants to get good at anything wants to get good at anything wants to get good at anything &gt;&gt; should see it. Uh I certainly learned a &gt;&gt; should see it. Uh I certainly learned a &gt;&gt; should see it. Uh I certainly learned a lot from it. lot from it. lot from it. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, you're not paying attention to &gt;&gt; Okay. So, you're not paying attention to &gt;&gt; Okay. So, you're not paying attention to the criticism is uh the criticism is uh the criticism is uh &gt;&gt; I'm trying not to. I'm human and you &gt;&gt; I'm trying not to. I'm human and you &gt;&gt; I'm trying not to. I'm human and you know but definitely the ideal know but definitely the ideal know but definitely the ideal &gt;&gt; is to really move beyond that. &gt;&gt; is to really move beyond that. &gt;&gt; is to really move beyond that. &gt;&gt; I went to college with Jack Johnson you &gt;&gt; I went to college with Jack Johnson you &gt;&gt; I went to college with Jack Johnson you know guitar player. He's a very know guitar player. He's a very know guitar player. He's a very successful musician and uh years ago we successful musician and uh years ago we successful musician and uh years ago we connected and um connected and um connected and um &gt;&gt; he was telling me about his life cuz I &gt;&gt; he was telling me about his life cuz I &gt;&gt; he was telling me about his life cuz I knew his now wife. She was went to knew his now wife. She was went to knew his now wife. She was went to college with us and he was telling me college with us and he was telling me college with us and he was telling me about his kids and um and it was so about his kids and um and it was so about his kids and um and it was so clear from everything he was telling me clear from everything he was telling me clear from everything he was telling me that he had created methods to not that he had created methods to not that he had created methods to not really come in contact with just how big really come in contact with just how big really come in contact with just how big he had gotten he had gotten he had gotten &gt;&gt; like to really like humble himself &gt;&gt; like to really like humble himself &gt;&gt; like to really like humble himself &gt;&gt; good for him &gt;&gt; good for him &gt;&gt; good for him &gt;&gt; on a daily basis doing house chores &gt;&gt; on a daily basis doing house chores &gt;&gt; on a daily basis doing house chores &gt;&gt; great cleaning the toilet whatever it is &gt;&gt; great cleaning the toilet whatever it is &gt;&gt; great cleaning the toilet whatever it is you know especially the days after big you know especially the days after big you know especially the days after big &gt;&gt; big festivals where you just you know &gt;&gt; big festivals where you just you know &gt;&gt; big festivals where you just you know had immense crowds and you know had immense crowds and you know had immense crowds and you know &gt;&gt; uh that he had built these sort of um &gt;&gt; uh that he had built these sort of um &gt;&gt; uh that he had built these sort of um self-regulatory process. It sounds like self-regulatory process. It sounds like self-regulatory process. It sounds like &gt;&gt; like a very zen sort of story. Pastor &gt;&gt; like a very zen sort of story. Pastor &gt;&gt; like a very zen sort of story. Pastor would say sweep the corner. You know would say sweep the corner. You know would say sweep the corner. You know then &gt;&gt; we grew up in Hawaii so he's got &gt;&gt; we grew up in Hawaii so he's got &gt;&gt; we grew up in Hawaii so he's got that he always had this mellow. It was that he always had this mellow. It was that he always had this mellow. It was amazing from be day one of college. He amazing from be day one of college. He amazing from be day one of college. He was way cooler than everybody was way cooler than everybody was way cooler than everybody &gt;&gt; and super nice. So he didn't act cool. &gt;&gt; and super nice. So he didn't act cool. &gt;&gt; and super nice. So he didn't act cool. He was just cool cuz he was just Jack. He was just cool cuz he was just Jack. He was just cool cuz he was just Jack. Great surfer, great guy. His wife's Great surfer, great guy. His wife's Great surfer, great guy. His wife's awesome. Turn picked up a guitar. He was awesome. Turn picked up a guitar. He was awesome. Turn picked up a guitar. He was in a college band uh that was um okay it in a college band uh that was um okay it in a college band uh that was um okay it was like a backup but he wasn't even the was like a backup but he wasn't even the was like a backup but he wasn't even the main guy. main guy. main guy. &gt;&gt; Ah &gt;&gt; Ah &gt;&gt; Ah &gt;&gt; and then I was in graduate school one &gt;&gt; and then I was in graduate school one &gt;&gt; and then I was in graduate school one day and I think I got iTunes and I day and I think I got iTunes and I day and I think I got iTunes and I looked and I was like Jack Johnson. I looked and I was like Jack Johnson. I looked and I was like Jack Johnson. I called a friend. I was like Jack called a friend. I was like Jack called a friend. I was like Jack Johnson's on iTunes. They're like you Johnson's on iTunes. They're like you Johnson's on iTunes. They're like you haven't noticed. I was like no I've been haven't noticed. I was like no I've been haven't noticed. I was like no I've been nosed down in the lab like he's a really nosed down in the lab like he's a really nosed down in the lab like he's a really big deal and he's I mean he's been a big deal and he's I mean he's been a big deal and he's I mean he's been a really big deal for a very long time. really big deal for a very long time. really big deal for a very long time. Incredibly humble, incredibly kind Incredibly humble, incredibly kind Incredibly humble, incredibly kind &gt;&gt; and self-regulates, &gt;&gt; and self-regulates, &gt;&gt; and self-regulates, &gt;&gt; you know. Um &gt;&gt; you know. Um &gt;&gt; you know. Um &gt;&gt; good for him. Yeah, external validation &gt;&gt; good for him. Yeah, external validation &gt;&gt; good for him. Yeah, external validation sounds like it's an enemy for you as sounds like it's an enemy for you as sounds like it's an enemy for you as much as criticism is an enemy. much as criticism is an enemy. much as criticism is an enemy. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean I certainly don't believe &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean I certainly don't believe &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean I certainly don't believe in it at all. I think it's a seductive in it at all. I think it's a seductive in it at all. I think it's a seductive thing that's only going to pull you in thing that's only going to pull you in thing that's only going to pull you in the wrong direction, you know. Yeah. the wrong direction, you know. Yeah. the wrong direction, you know. Yeah. Third party validation as my uh my Third party validation as my uh my Third party validation as my uh my partner Shawn Coin, my business partner Shawn Coin, my business partner Shawn Coin, my business partner Sean Coin, which I have to give him Sean Coin, which I have to give him Sean Coin, which I have to give him credit before we forget. The title, the credit before we forget. The title, the credit before we forget. The title, the War of Art, was not my title. It was War of Art, was not my title. It was War of Art, was not my title. It was Shawn Coin's title. Shawn Coin's title. Shawn Coin's title. &gt;&gt; He handed that to you. He gave me that &gt;&gt; He handed that to you. He gave me that &gt;&gt; He handed that to you. He gave me that title. Yeah, we published we published title. Yeah, we published we published title. Yeah, we published we published the book together. His little company the book together. His little company the book together. His little company published it. But um that was his title. published it. But um that was his title. published it. But um that was his title. So God bless him. So God bless him. So God bless him. &gt;&gt; Yeah. God bless him. Titles matter. &gt;&gt; Yeah. God bless him. Titles matter. &gt;&gt; Yeah. God bless him. Titles matter. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they do. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they do. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they do. &gt;&gt; Titles matter. &gt;&gt; Titles matter. &gt;&gt; Titles matter. &gt;&gt; Eat, pray, love. &gt;&gt; Eat, pray, love. &gt;&gt; Eat, pray, love. &gt;&gt; How does that It doesn't get better than &gt;&gt; How does that It doesn't get better than &gt;&gt; How does that It doesn't get better than that. Yeah. that. Yeah. that. Yeah. &gt;&gt; The body keeps the score. &gt;&gt; The body keeps the score. &gt;&gt; The body keeps the score. &gt;&gt; Ah yeah. No other book in the field of &gt;&gt; Ah yeah. No other book in the field of &gt;&gt; Ah yeah. No other book in the field of kind of um psychology, biology, wellness kind of um psychology, biology, wellness kind of um psychology, biology, wellness has like resonated in people's minds as has like resonated in people's minds as has like resonated in people's minds as much and as long as the body keeps the much and as long as the body keeps the much and as long as the body keeps the score because it's just an awesome score because it's just an awesome score because it's just an awesome title. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. It's a great one. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. It's a great one. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. It's a great one. &gt;&gt; Yeah. How much or how often do you think &gt;&gt; Yeah. How much or how often do you think &gt;&gt; Yeah. How much or how often do you think about book titles? Is it at the end about book titles? Is it at the end about book titles? Is it at the end during? at the end, but I find that during? at the end, but I find that during? at the end, but I find that they're really hard, you know, and a lot they're really hard, you know, and a lot they're really hard, you know, and a lot of times other people have titled stuff of times other people have titled stuff of times other people have titled stuff for me or I've, you know, it's really for me or I've, you know, it's really for me or I've, you know, it's really hard &gt;&gt; to come up with a great one. Yeah, I &gt;&gt; to come up with a great one. Yeah, I &gt;&gt; to come up with a great one. Yeah, I don't know what the secret is at all. If don't know what the secret is at all. If don't know what the secret is at all. If it sometimes it pops out along the way. it sometimes it pops out along the way. it sometimes it pops out along the way. Um, yeah, I don't know. Um, yeah, I don't know. Um, yeah, I don't know. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. Do you to get early access to Function. Do you to get early access to Function. Do you think that personal sacrifice at the think that personal sacrifice at the think that personal sacrifice at the level of relationships level of relationships level of relationships is necessary to be a successful artist is necessary to be a successful artist is necessary to be a successful artist of any kind? of any kind? of any kind? &gt;&gt; Certainly in my experience, yes. &gt;&gt; Certainly in my experience, yes. &gt;&gt; Certainly in my experience, yes. And um And um And um I was talking to uh a friend of mine I was talking to uh a friend of mine I was talking to uh a friend of mine who's a who's a who's a um a bodybuilder and he was talking he um a bodybuilder and he was talking he um a bodybuilder and he was talking he was just saying to me the other day he was just saying to me the other day he was just saying to me the other day he said, "I don't believe in balance. you said, "I don't believe in balance. you said, "I don't believe in balance. you know, the work life balance, you know, the work life balance, you know, the work life balance, you know, um, and I'm kind of that way, too. You um, and I'm kind of that way, too. You um, and I'm kind of that way, too. You know, that, uh, know, that, uh, know, that, uh, if you want, I mean, I take my hat off if you want, I mean, I take my hat off if you want, I mean, I take my hat off tremendously to Kobe Bryant for being tremendously to Kobe Bryant for being tremendously to Kobe Bryant for being such a family man. Obviously loved his such a family man. Obviously loved his such a family man. Obviously loved his kids, loved his wife, kids, loved his wife, kids, loved his wife, &gt;&gt; but yet was obsessed with basketball, &gt;&gt; but yet was obsessed with basketball, &gt;&gt; but yet was obsessed with basketball, you know, to the nth degree. Somehow he you know, to the nth degree. Somehow he you know, to the nth degree. Somehow he did it did it did it &gt;&gt; and able even to go beyond that, you &gt;&gt; and able even to go beyond that, you &gt;&gt; and able even to go beyond that, you know, and be helpful to people and so know, and be helpful to people and so know, and be helpful to people and so forth. But I do think that uh at some forth. But I do think that uh at some forth. But I do think that uh at some point, you know, if you're going to point, you know, if you're going to point, you know, if you're going to pursue your calling, whatever it is, you pursue your calling, whatever it is, you pursue your calling, whatever it is, you got to pursue it with both feet. And, got to pursue it with both feet. And, got to pursue it with both feet. And, you know, so you know, so you know, so that might lead to an unbalanced, that might lead to an unbalanced, that might lead to an unbalanced, you know, life. you know, life. you know, life. &gt;&gt; So that means telling people you're &gt;&gt; So that means telling people you're &gt;&gt; So that means telling people you're going to bed early. You go to bed very going to bed early. You go to bed very going to bed early. You go to bed very early. I go to bed early, but that early. I go to bed early, but that early. I go to bed early, but that that's just my own quirkyness, you know. that's just my own quirkyness, you know. that's just my own quirkyness, you know. But um but there are a lot of things But um but there are a lot of things But um but there are a lot of things that I've missed in life, including that I've missed in life, including that I've missed in life, including having kids. And um but I don't I don't having kids. And um but I don't I don't having kids. And um but I don't I don't regret it, you know. That's the nature regret it, you know. That's the nature regret it, you know. That's the nature of the game, I think. of the game, I think. of the game, I think. &gt;&gt; Well, you have a rich and full life. &gt;&gt; Well, you have a rich and full life. &gt;&gt; Well, you have a rich and full life. &gt;&gt; I mean, I have an unbalanced life, but &gt;&gt; I mean, I have an unbalanced life, but &gt;&gt; I mean, I have an unbalanced life, but to me, it's what I what I I've chosen. to me, it's what I what I I've chosen. to me, it's what I what I I've chosen. You know, this is uh like that great You know, this is uh like that great You know, this is uh like that great speech in The Godfather Part Two where speech in The Godfather Part Two where speech in The Godfather Part Two where uh is it Lee Stberg who played um uh is it Lee Stberg who played um uh is it Lee Stberg who played um uh the equivalent not Myer Lansky the real the equivalent not Myer Lansky the real the equivalent not Myer Lansky the real whatever I forget his name was but he whatever I forget his name was but he whatever I forget his name was but he said he was talking about when said he was talking about when said he was talking about when &gt;&gt; Hyman Roth &gt;&gt; Hyman Roth &gt;&gt; Hyman Roth &gt;&gt; Heyman Roth Heyman Roth and he said uh &gt;&gt; Heyman Roth Heyman Roth and he said uh &gt;&gt; Heyman Roth Heyman Roth and he said uh he had his this scene with Michael he had his this scene with Michael he had his this scene with Michael Corleone where he says he talked about Corleone where he says he talked about Corleone where he says he talked about Mo Green his protege that they grew up Mo Green his protege that they grew up Mo Green his protege that they grew up somebody put a bullet in his eye. And I somebody put a bullet in his eye. And I somebody put a bullet in his eye. And I never asked who did it because I said to never asked who did it because I said to never asked who did it because I said to myself, "This is the life we've chosen." myself, "This is the life we've chosen." myself, "This is the life we've chosen." And that's how I look at it. It's And that's how I look at it. It's And that's how I look at it. It's interesting. It interesting. It interesting. It &gt;&gt; was a great scene, too. &gt;&gt; was a great scene, too. &gt;&gt; was a great scene, too. &gt;&gt; It is a great scene. Um &gt;&gt; It is a great scene. Um &gt;&gt; It is a great scene. Um &gt;&gt; God, those movies are so good. Yeah. &gt;&gt; God, those movies are so good. Yeah. &gt;&gt; God, those movies are so good. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um the first two anyway. &gt;&gt; Um the first two anyway. &gt;&gt; Um the first two anyway. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Talk about a flop on the third. &gt;&gt; Talk about a flop on the third. &gt;&gt; Talk about a flop on the third. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, in the United States we celebrate high in the United States we celebrate high in the United States we celebrate high achievers and people that really break achievers and people that really break achievers and people that really break off from the pack. It's it's really the off from the pack. It's it's really the off from the pack. It's it's really the essence of the United States in terms of essence of the United States in terms of essence of the United States in terms of how it was how it was how it was &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, u &gt;&gt; You know, u &gt;&gt; You know, u &gt;&gt; more the pity. &gt;&gt; more the pity. &gt;&gt; more the pity. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Now we're paying the price. Yeah. But &gt;&gt; Now we're paying the price. Yeah. But &gt;&gt; Now we're paying the price. Yeah. But you know, Michael Jordan, you know, Kobe you know, Michael Jordan, you know, Kobe you know, Michael Jordan, you know, Kobe Bryant, I mean, these people had, as you Bryant, I mean, these people had, as you Bryant, I mean, these people had, as you pointed out, very um well, maybe Kobe pointed out, very um well, maybe Kobe pointed out, very um well, maybe Kobe was a bit more balanced, but immense was a bit more balanced, but immense was a bit more balanced, but immense number of hours devoted to craft, but I number of hours devoted to craft, but I number of hours devoted to craft, but I feel like if you grow up in the United feel like if you grow up in the United feel like if you grow up in the United States, at some point you get the States, at some point you get the States, at some point you get the message that could be you. message that could be you. message that could be you. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Right. That's that's different than uh &gt;&gt; Right. That's that's different than uh &gt;&gt; Right. That's that's different than uh and I know because my dad's from South and I know because my dad's from South and I know because my dad's from South America and I have family from Europe America and I have family from Europe America and I have family from Europe and uh I've been exposed to the fact and uh I've been exposed to the fact and uh I've been exposed to the fact that not every kid around the world that not every kid around the world that not every kid around the world grows up getting the message in their grows up getting the message in their grows up getting the message in their ear all the time like hey that could be ear all the time like hey that could be ear all the time like hey that could be you. &gt;&gt; You just have to find your thing and &gt;&gt; You just have to find your thing and &gt;&gt; You just have to find your thing and devote yourself. Then now there seems to devote yourself. Then now there seems to devote yourself. Then now there seems to be a bit of a pivot where be a bit of a pivot where be a bit of a pivot where people focus on, you know, the flaws people focus on, you know, the flaws people focus on, you know, the flaws those high achievers had and that they those high achievers had and that they those high achievers had and that they weren't perfect. And I think what we're weren't perfect. And I think what we're weren't perfect. And I think what we're saying here is that or what I'm hearing saying here is that or what I'm hearing saying here is that or what I'm hearing is that it's by definition that if is that it's by definition that if is that it's by definition that if you're going to go for a high peak that you're going to go for a high peak that you're going to go for a high peak that your life is not going to be your life is not going to be your life is not going to be balanced. Sort of like balanced. Sort of like balanced. Sort of like &gt;&gt; um you know Edund Hillary first to climb &gt;&gt; um you know Edund Hillary first to climb &gt;&gt; um you know Edund Hillary first to climb Everest, he was gone for a long time. Everest, he was gone for a long time. Everest, he was gone for a long time. They didn't have cell phones. I imagine They didn't have cell phones. I imagine They didn't have cell phones. I imagine if he had a family, they didn't even if he had a family, they didn't even if he had a family, they didn't even know if he was going to come back. know if he was going to come back. know if he was going to come back. That's not balance. That's not balance. That's not balance. &gt;&gt; That's not balance at all. They weren't &gt;&gt; That's not balance at all. They weren't &gt;&gt; That's not balance at all. They weren't handing out checks at the top of handing out checks at the top of handing out checks at the top of Everest. &gt;&gt; So, this idea that, you know, pursuing &gt;&gt; So, this idea that, you know, pursuing &gt;&gt; So, this idea that, you know, pursuing one's craft at the expense of something one's craft at the expense of something one's craft at the expense of something else, &gt;&gt; is that something that uh you carefully &gt;&gt; is that something that uh you carefully &gt;&gt; is that something that uh you carefully analyzed along the way or do you feel analyzed along the way or do you feel analyzed along the way or do you feel you've been driven by some force inside you've been driven by some force inside you've been driven by some force inside you to just keep leaning into creative you to just keep leaning into creative you to just keep leaning into creative uh works and if things have to gently or uh works and if things have to gently or uh works and if things have to gently or not so gently fall off the side? Um, so not so gently fall off the side? Um, so not so gently fall off the side? Um, so be it. be it. be it. &gt;&gt; I have tried in my life various &gt;&gt; I have tried in my life various &gt;&gt; I have tried in my life various um other endeavors including love, um other endeavors including love, um other endeavors including love, marriage, a straight career, you know, a straight career, you know, a straight career, you know, a bluecollar career, always trying to find bluecollar career, always trying to find bluecollar career, always trying to find something that at the end of the day I something that at the end of the day I something that at the end of the day I could lay my head on the pillow and have could lay my head on the pillow and have could lay my head on the pillow and have peace of mind. And peace of mind. And peace of mind. And nothing worked until I found, you know, nothing worked until I found, you know, nothing worked until I found, you know, pursuing my craft that worked for me. pursuing my craft that worked for me. pursuing my craft that worked for me. You know, I could I could You know, I could I could You know, I could I could at the end of the day I felt okay, I've at the end of the day I felt okay, I've at the end of the day I felt okay, I've earned my place on the planet doing earned my place on the planet doing earned my place on the planet doing this, whereas other things I would at this, whereas other things I would at this, whereas other things I would at the end of the day I would just be the end of the day I would just be the end of the day I would just be crazy, you know. So I was sort of led to crazy, you know. So I was sort of led to crazy, you know. So I was sort of led to that. It was like, thank God I found that. It was like, thank God I found that. It was like, thank God I found something, you know, that I can uh, you something, you know, that I can uh, you something, you know, that I can uh, you know, hang my hat on. And over that was know, hang my hat on. And over that was know, hang my hat on. And over that was a long time ago and over the course of a long time ago and over the course of a long time ago and over the course of those years I sort of from time to time those years I sort of from time to time those years I sort of from time to time I asked myself is this still working for I asked myself is this still working for I asked myself is this still working for you or is this are you did you know you or is this are you did you know you or is this are you did you know should you be evolving into something should you be evolving into something should you be evolving into something beyond this but it is still working beyond this but it is still working beyond this but it is still working for me and it and there is I don't for me and it and there is I don't for me and it and there is I don't really have a bucket list of stuff you really have a bucket list of stuff you really have a bucket list of stuff you know somebody gave me a billion dollars know somebody gave me a billion dollars know somebody gave me a billion dollars I just give it away you know um so yeah I just give it away you know um so yeah I just give it away you know um so yeah uh it just was for me and again it's not uh it just was for me and again it's not uh it just was for me and again it's not even like about peak success because I even like about peak success because I even like about peak success because I haven't had peak success at all. You haven't had peak success at all. You haven't had peak success at all. You know, I've had enough success to pay the know, I've had enough success to pay the know, I've had enough success to pay the rent, which is good enough for me. You rent, which is good enough for me. You rent, which is good enough for me. You know, I'm doing what I want to do and I know, I'm doing what I want to do and I know, I'm doing what I want to do and I don't have to do something else. Um, so don't have to do something else. Um, so don't have to do something else. Um, so it is for me it's really a sort of it is for me it's really a sort of it is for me it's really a sort of pursuit of what I feel like I was pursuit of what I feel like I was pursuit of what I feel like I was put on the planet to do. And it's always put on the planet to do. And it's always put on the planet to do. And it's always been a surprise, too. Book to book to been a surprise, too. Book to book to been a surprise, too. Book to book to book. I'd never each one is a surprise. book. I'd never each one is a surprise. book. I'd never each one is a surprise. Um, which is another sort of weird Um, which is another sort of weird Um, which is another sort of weird counterintuitive thing. It isn't like, counterintuitive thing. It isn't like, counterintuitive thing. It isn't like, oh, could you do a five-year planning? oh, could you do a five-year planning? oh, could you do a five-year planning? Oh, I'm going to do this and this. No, Oh, I'm going to do this and this. No, Oh, I'm going to do this and this. No, you know, something comes, it presents you know, something comes, it presents you know, something comes, it presents itself, it comes in from the goddess itself, it comes in from the goddess itself, it comes in from the goddess &gt;&gt; and there it is, you know, and then you &gt;&gt; and there it is, you know, and then you &gt;&gt; and there it is, you know, and then you do it. do it. do it. &gt;&gt; So, it's clear it's in your nature to &gt;&gt; So, it's clear it's in your nature to &gt;&gt; So, it's clear it's in your nature to create things and to discover what it is create things and to discover what it is create things and to discover what it is you need to create. I you need to create. I you need to create. I so can't help but feel that like we're so can't help but feel that like we're so can't help but feel that like we're all here to do something particular all here to do something particular all here to do something particular to us. to us. to us. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think a lot of times if &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think a lot of times if &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think a lot of times if people don't have a balanced life, people don't have a balanced life, people don't have a balanced life, people assume, oh, well, that's trauma. people assume, oh, well, that's trauma. people assume, oh, well, that's trauma. And sometimes it is. And uh or that's And sometimes it is. And uh or that's And sometimes it is. And uh or that's this or that's that. I mean, nowadays I this or that's that. I mean, nowadays I this or that's that. I mean, nowadays I have more have more have more &gt;&gt; uh you know, quote unquote famous &gt;&gt; uh you know, quote unquote famous &gt;&gt; uh you know, quote unquote famous friends and a lot of them have friends and a lot of them have friends and a lot of them have trauma. A lot of them don't. trauma. A lot of them don't. trauma. A lot of them don't. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Some of them are like really happy &gt;&gt; Mhm. Some of them are like really happy &gt;&gt; Mhm. Some of them are like really happy and a lot of them have and a lot of them have and a lot of them have &gt;&gt; kind of disappointing. &gt;&gt; kind of disappointing. &gt;&gt; kind of disappointing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and a lot of them have what I &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and a lot of them have what I &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and a lot of them have what I call it kind of more of a bento box life call it kind of more of a bento box life call it kind of more of a bento box life like but where their career is, you like but where their career is, you like but where their career is, you know, the main entree and then know, the main entree and then know, the main entree and then there's some other little there's some other little there's some other little &gt;&gt; things and they have relationship and um &gt;&gt; things and they have relationship and um &gt;&gt; things and they have relationship and um of different kinds animals or people and of different kinds animals or people and of different kinds animals or people and um and some people the relationship bin um and some people the relationship bin um and some people the relationship bin is bigger is bigger is bigger &gt;&gt; and their career is less of a less of a &gt;&gt; and their career is less of a less of a &gt;&gt; and their career is less of a less of a focus and they seem very happy. Um so focus and they seem very happy. Um so focus and they seem very happy. Um so this notion of balance is a is a this notion of balance is a is a this notion of balance is a is a peculiar one that people whatever uh peculiar one that people whatever uh peculiar one that people whatever uh bento box people seem to exist in they bento box people seem to exist in they bento box people seem to exist in they sort of like to project onto they sort of like to project onto they sort of like to project onto others. &gt;&gt; Uh how much time do you spend on social &gt;&gt; Uh how much time do you spend on social &gt;&gt; Uh how much time do you spend on social media? &gt;&gt; Maybe an hour a day. you know, I sort of &gt;&gt; Maybe an hour a day. you know, I sort of &gt;&gt; Maybe an hour a day. you know, I sort of uh it's a vice which I've got to uh it's a vice which I've got to uh it's a vice which I've got to definitely stop doing. But I will go definitely stop doing. But I will go definitely stop doing. But I will go like through Instagram and do that, you like through Instagram and do that, you like through Instagram and do that, you know, just kind of as far as like com know, just kind of as far as like com know, just kind of as far as like com communicating with people, very little, communicating with people, very little, communicating with people, very little, you know, like you know, like you know, like &gt;&gt; my email I'm get I'm done with my email &gt;&gt; my email I'm get I'm done with my email &gt;&gt; my email I'm get I'm done with my email in like two minutes in the morning, you in like two minutes in the morning, you in like two minutes in the morning, you know. &gt;&gt; But I do think it's great that it's you &gt;&gt; But I do think it's great that it's you &gt;&gt; But I do think it's great that it's you on social media, you know, that it's on social media, you know, that it's on social media, you know, that it's your voice for your content. I think um your voice for your content. I think um your voice for your content. I think um I think that's great because I think I think that's great because I think I think that's great because I think that there's a real thing to that people that there's a real thing to that people that there's a real thing to that people now can get in near direct contact with now can get in near direct contact with now can get in near direct contact with the creators that they're the creators that they're the creators that they're &gt;&gt; inspiring with other people that are &gt;&gt; inspiring with other people that are &gt;&gt; inspiring with other people that are doing whatever they're doing. Yeah. doing whatever they're doing. Yeah. doing whatever they're doing. Yeah. &gt;&gt; One thing that I really appreciate about &gt;&gt; One thing that I really appreciate about &gt;&gt; One thing that I really appreciate about all your work is that all your work is that all your work is that &gt;&gt; um there doesn't seem to be a consistent &gt;&gt; um there doesn't seem to be a consistent &gt;&gt; um there doesn't seem to be a consistent theme. Some of them overlap, theme. Some of them overlap, theme. Some of them overlap, &gt;&gt; right? Um but &gt;&gt; right? Um but &gt;&gt; right? Um but &gt;&gt; there are a lot of different themes in &gt;&gt; there are a lot of different themes in &gt;&gt; there are a lot of different themes in there. Before we move to some of the there. Before we move to some of the there. Before we move to some of the themes that perhaps people are not themes that perhaps people are not themes that perhaps people are not expecting that I'd like to parse with expecting that I'd like to parse with expecting that I'd like to parse with you. Um talk about turning pro and the you. Um talk about turning pro and the you. Um talk about turning pro and the concept of being a professional. concept of being a professional. concept of being a professional. Um if we accept the idea of resistance with if we accept the idea of resistance with if we accept the idea of resistance with a capital R that's our own internal a capital R that's our own internal a capital R that's our own internal tendency to sabotage ourselves when we tendency to sabotage ourselves when we tendency to sabotage ourselves when we try to uh set out to write our book or try to uh set out to write our book or try to uh set out to write our book or do our movie or follow our calling do our movie or follow our calling do our movie or follow our calling whatever it is. Then the question whatever it is. Then the question whatever it is. Then the question becomes well how do you overcome this becomes well how do you overcome this becomes well how do you overcome this thing? And uh what worked for me was the thing? And uh what worked for me was the thing? And uh what worked for me was the idea of turning pro. For years when I idea of turning pro. For years when I idea of turning pro. For years when I was struggling and could never get it was struggling and could never get it was struggling and could never get it together, I realized that at one point together, I realized that at one point together, I realized that at one point that I was just thinking like an amateur that I was just thinking like an amateur that I was just thinking like an amateur and that if I could flip a switch in my and that if I could flip a switch in my and that if I could flip a switch in my mind and think like a professional that mind and think like a professional that mind and think like a professional that I could overcome some of the things I could overcome some of the things I could overcome some of the things like um when I think of uh a great like um when I think of uh a great like um when I think of uh a great pro, I think of Kobe Bryant or Michael pro, I think of Kobe Bryant or Michael pro, I think of Kobe Bryant or Michael Jordan or Tom Brady or somebody like Jordan or Tom Brady or somebody like Jordan or Tom Brady or somebody like that. And um so like a professional some that. And um so like a professional some that. And um so like a professional some of the characteristics of a professional of the characteristics of a professional of the characteristics of a professional as opposed to an amateur. as opposed to an amateur. as opposed to an amateur. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; A professional shows up every day. &gt;&gt; A professional shows up every day. &gt;&gt; A professional shows up every day. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; A professional stays on the job all day &gt;&gt; A professional stays on the job all day &gt;&gt; A professional stays on the job all day or the equivalent of all day. I mean or the equivalent of all day. I mean or the equivalent of all day. I mean a lot of us who have jobs are a lot of us who have jobs are a lot of us who have jobs are professionals in our jobs but when we professionals in our jobs but when we professionals in our jobs but when we come home at night and we try to you come home at night and we try to you come home at night and we try to you know start our band or you know our know start our band or you know our know start our band or you know our fiddle band we flame out on that sort of fiddle band we flame out on that sort of fiddle band we flame out on that sort of because we can't sort of carry over that because we can't sort of carry over that because we can't sort of carry over that professional attitude. A prof a professional attitude. A prof a professional attitude. A prof a professional as I said this before does professional as I said this before does professional as I said this before does not take success or failure personally. not take success or failure personally. not take success or failure personally. An amateur will right? An amateur gets a An amateur will right? An amateur gets a An amateur will right? An amateur gets a bad review bad response of this and they bad review bad response of this and they bad review bad response of this and they just crap out. I don't want to do this just crap out. I don't want to do this just crap out. I don't want to do this anymore. Right? uh professional plays anymore. Right? uh professional plays anymore. Right? uh professional plays hurt like if uh Kobe Bryant, Michael hurt like if uh Kobe Bryant, Michael hurt like if uh Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan, you know, if they've tweaked the Jordan, you know, if they've tweaked the Jordan, you know, if they've tweaked the hamstring, they're out there, you know, hamstring, they're out there, you know, hamstring, they're out there, you know, they'll die before they'll get be taken they'll die before they'll get be taken they'll die before they'll get be taken off the court, you know. Uh whereas an off the court, you know. Uh whereas an off the court, you know. Uh whereas an amateur when he or she confronts amateur when he or she confronts amateur when he or she confronts adversity will fold. adversity will fold. adversity will fold. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's too cold out, you know. I've &gt;&gt; Oh, it's too cold out, you know. I've &gt;&gt; Oh, it's too cold out, you know. I've got a I got a you know, I've got the got a I got a you know, I've got the got a I got a you know, I've got the flu. That kind of thing. Um, another flu. That kind of thing. Um, another flu. That kind of thing. Um, another thing, uh, an amateur worries about how thing, uh, an amateur worries about how thing, uh, an amateur worries about how they feel, like, "Oh, I don't feel like they feel, like, "Oh, I don't feel like they feel, like, "Oh, I don't feel like getting out of bed this morning. I don't getting out of bed this morning. I don't getting out of bed this morning. I don't feel like really doing my work today." A feel like really doing my work today." A feel like really doing my work today." A professional doesn't care how they feel. professional doesn't care how they feel. professional doesn't care how they feel. They they do it, right? Um, so an They they do it, right? Um, so an They they do it, right? Um, so an amateur has amateur habits and a amateur has amateur habits and a amateur has amateur habits and a professional has professional habits. professional has professional habits. professional has professional habits. And my book, Turning Pro, is about that, And my book, Turning Pro, is about that, And my book, Turning Pro, is about that, flipping that switch in your head that flipping that switch in your head that flipping that switch in your head that costs no money. You don't have to take a costs no money. You don't have to take a costs no money. You don't have to take a course. You don't have to get certified. course. You don't have to get certified. course. You don't have to get certified. All you have to do is sort of say to All you have to do is sort of say to All you have to do is sort of say to yourself, if you can do it, and it ain't yourself, if you can do it, and it ain't yourself, if you can do it, and it ain't easy. Okay, I'm going to attack this easy. Okay, I'm going to attack this easy. Okay, I'm going to attack this thing, whatever it is now, as if I were thing, whatever it is now, as if I were thing, whatever it is now, as if I were Kobe Bryant, you know, would he quit, Kobe Bryant, you know, would he quit, Kobe Bryant, you know, would he quit, you know, when he didn't feel like doing you know, when he didn't feel like doing you know, when he didn't feel like doing it? Absolutely not. So, and um oh, it? Absolutely not. So, and um oh, it? Absolutely not. So, and um oh, here's another aspect of turning pro here's another aspect of turning pro here's another aspect of turning pro that worked for me. Uh, I had like about that worked for me. Uh, I had like about that worked for me. Uh, I had like about a 10-year career as a screenwriter, as a 10-year career as a screenwriter, as a 10-year career as a screenwriter, as we talked about with King Kong Lives. we talked about with King Kong Lives. we talked about with King Kong Lives. And, um, And, um, And, um, one of the things you learn is that one of the things you learn is that one of the things you learn is that screenwriters a lot of times will have screenwriters a lot of times will have screenwriters a lot of times will have their one-man corporations and they will their one-man corporations and they will their one-man corporations and they will not sign a contract as themselves. You not sign a contract as themselves. You not sign a contract as themselves. You know, it won't be Andrew Huberman is on know, it won't be Andrew Huberman is on know, it won't be Andrew Huberman is on the contract. It'll be your corporation, the contract. It'll be your corporation, the contract. It'll be your corporation, Huberman Lab, FSO, for services of Huberman Lab, FSO, for services of Huberman Lab, FSO, for services of Andrew Huberman. And I really love that Andrew Huberman. And I really love that Andrew Huberman. And I really love that idea of thinking of yourself as a idea of thinking of yourself as a idea of thinking of yourself as a twopart thing. This you're the CEO of twopart thing. This you're the CEO of twopart thing. This you're the CEO of this thing and then you're the also the this thing and then you're the also the this thing and then you're the also the guy that does the work. guy that does the work. guy that does the work. &gt;&gt; And I would find that &gt;&gt; And I would find that &gt;&gt; And I would find that if I was just thinking of myself as the if I was just thinking of myself as the if I was just thinking of myself as the guy that's doing the work, guy that's doing the work, guy that's doing the work, I have a hard time pitching my ideas. I have a hard time pitching my ideas. I have a hard time pitching my ideas. I'm sort of too shy. But if I'm the CEO I'm sort of too shy. But if I'm the CEO I'm sort of too shy. But if I'm the CEO of my company, of my corporation, I'm a of my company, of my corporation, I'm a of my company, of my corporation, I'm a pro. I can go in there and pimp the hell pro. I can go in there and pimp the hell pro. I can go in there and pimp the hell out of it, you know? out of it, you know? out of it, you know? So that idea of being a of looking at So that idea of being a of looking at So that idea of being a of looking at yourself as a professional kind of takes yourself as a professional kind of takes yourself as a professional kind of takes all judgment out of any failures that all judgment out of any failures that all judgment out of any failures that we've had. We don't blame ourselves we've had. We don't blame ourselves we've had. We don't blame ourselves anymore for procrastinating or being anymore for procrastinating or being anymore for procrastinating or being perfectionists or giving into fear or perfectionists or giving into fear or perfectionists or giving into fear or self-doubt or anything. We just say, self-doubt or anything. We just say, self-doubt or anything. We just say, "Well, okay, I did that when I was "Well, okay, I did that when I was "Well, okay, I did that when I was thinking like an amateur, but now I'm thinking like an amateur, but now I'm thinking like an amateur, but now I'm going to think like a pro." And a pro going to think like a pro." And a pro going to think like a pro." And a pro just doesn't yield to that just doesn't yield to that just doesn't yield to that stuff. So, it's a that that's a mind stuff. So, it's a that that's a mind stuff. So, it's a that that's a mind shift, a mindset shift that really shift, a mindset shift that really shift, a mindset shift that really helped me a lot. helped me a lot. helped me a lot. &gt;&gt; I love that. I mean, so much of that &gt;&gt; I love that. I mean, so much of that &gt;&gt; I love that. I mean, so much of that feels is nested in taking oneself feels is nested in taking oneself feels is nested in taking oneself seriously. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, I think when people hear the &gt;&gt; You know, I think when people hear the &gt;&gt; You know, I think when people hear the words taking oneself seriously, they words taking oneself seriously, they words taking oneself seriously, they think, "Oh, well, someone's going to be think, "Oh, well, someone's going to be think, "Oh, well, someone's going to be heavy. They're never going to joke. No heavy. They're never going to joke. No heavy. They're never going to joke. No sense of humor." But that's not what I'm sense of humor." But that's not what I'm sense of humor." But that's not what I'm referring to. referring to. referring to. &gt;&gt; I wish people would take themselves more &gt;&gt; I wish people would take themselves more &gt;&gt; I wish people would take themselves more seriously, including their creative seriously, including their creative seriously, including their creative sparks inside of them. Um, you said sparks inside of them. Um, you said sparks inside of them. Um, you said there's no cost to turning pro. I agree there's no cost to turning pro. I agree there's no cost to turning pro. I agree there's no u monetary cost. You can there's no u monetary cost. You can there's no u monetary cost. You can decide to flip that switch. Uh, I would decide to flip that switch. Uh, I would decide to flip that switch. Uh, I would argue and I'm not arguing against argue and I'm not arguing against argue and I'm not arguing against because I don't think that uh because I don't think that uh because I don't think that uh &gt;&gt; No, I know what you're going to say. I &gt;&gt; No, I know what you're going to say. I &gt;&gt; No, I know what you're going to say. I agree with you. I think there's a huge agree with you. I think there's a huge agree with you. I think there's a huge cost and the huge cost I'm referring cost and the huge cost I'm referring cost and the huge cost I'm referring to is the one of how people around you to is the one of how people around you to is the one of how people around you react when you start taking yourself react when you start taking yourself react when you start taking yourself seriously. I mean, I don't need to go seriously. I mean, I don't need to go seriously. I mean, I don't need to go into the story. I've done it elsewhere, into the story. I've done it elsewhere, into the story. I've done it elsewhere, but I was a an unimpressive high school but I was a an unimpressive high school but I was a an unimpressive high school student. Thank God for my high school student. Thank God for my high school student. Thank God for my high school girlfriend going off to college and girlfriend going off to college and girlfriend going off to college and discovering that. And then thank God for discovering that. And then thank God for discovering that. And then thank God for the biology teacher that turned me on to the biology teacher that turned me on to the biology teacher that turned me on to biology. Thank God for Harry Carl. But biology. Thank God for Harry Carl. But biology. Thank God for Harry Carl. But &gt;&gt; I had the drive, but certainly it wasn't &gt;&gt; I had the drive, but certainly it wasn't &gt;&gt; I had the drive, but certainly it wasn't organized in the right ways. But when I organized in the right ways. But when I organized in the right ways. But when I switched from being a fun guy to be switched from being a fun guy to be switched from being a fun guy to be around in a lot of context to the guy around in a lot of context to the guy around in a lot of context to the guy that is absolutely going to ace the exam that is absolutely going to ace the exam that is absolutely going to ace the exam no matter how much work I have to put no matter how much work I have to put no matter how much work I have to put into it that's absolutely going to be in into it that's absolutely going to be in into it that's absolutely going to be in the gym three days a week that's the gym three days a week that's the gym three days a week that's absolutely going to get my sleep and you absolutely going to get my sleep and you absolutely going to get my sleep and you know you get a lot of flack especially know you get a lot of flack especially know you get a lot of flack especially in your early 20 late teens early 20s in your early 20 late teens early 20s in your early 20 late teens early 20s now I did go out and party then I was I now I did go out and party then I was I now I did go out and party then I was I didn't never drank a lot but I went to didn't never drank a lot but I went to didn't never drank a lot but I went to parties and but across the years I did parties and but across the years I did parties and but across the years I did fewer and fewer social things. Even as a fewer and fewer social things. Even as a fewer and fewer social things. Even as a as a graduate student, postoc and a as a graduate student, postoc and a as a graduate student, postoc and a junior professor, you know, at meetings, junior professor, you know, at meetings, junior professor, you know, at meetings, everyone would go to happy hour. I would everyone would go to happy hour. I would everyone would go to happy hour. I would go work out if I hadn't done it that go work out if I hadn't done it that go work out if I hadn't done it that morning. And I would go to sleep at morning. And I would go to sleep at morning. And I would go to sleep at night instead of staying up late talking night instead of staying up late talking night instead of staying up late talking in the bar because great interactions in the bar because great interactions in the bar because great interactions would happen in those bars, scientific would happen in those bars, scientific would happen in those bars, scientific discussions and so forth. But the next discussions and so forth. But the next discussions and so forth. But the next morning, I wanted to be on point during morning, I wanted to be on point during morning, I wanted to be on point during the seminar and be able to learn and be the seminar and be able to learn and be the seminar and be able to learn and be able to contribute. And so the big cost able to contribute. And so the big cost able to contribute. And so the big cost is not everybody likes that because they is not everybody likes that because they is not everybody likes that because they feel it as pressure. It's sort of like feel it as pressure. It's sort of like feel it as pressure. It's sort of like if you're eating well, you're eating if you're eating well, you're eating if you're eating well, you're eating healthy. People pay more attention to healthy. People pay more attention to healthy. People pay more attention to the ways they are not eating healthy and the ways they are not eating healthy and the ways they are not eating healthy and they will do everything they can to try they will do everything they can to try they will do everything they can to try and make you feel bad about that. and make you feel bad about that. and make you feel bad about that. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; we see this in mass. We see this in &gt;&gt; we see this in mass. We see this in &gt;&gt; we see this in mass. We see this in culture. You know it, you know, even culture. You know it, you know, even culture. You know it, you know, even there are extremes of, you know, body there are extremes of, you know, body there are extremes of, you know, body dysmorphia and people taking fitness to dysmorphia and people taking fitness to dysmorphia and people taking fitness to extremes that aren't healthy or anything extremes that aren't healthy or anything extremes that aren't healthy or anything to extremes. But we see people being bas to extremes. But we see people being bas to extremes. But we see people being bas basically not shamed but uh ridiculed basically not shamed but uh ridiculed basically not shamed but uh ridiculed for being serious about their health. for being serious about their health. for being serious about their health. It's nuts. But it's all about them. It's nuts. But it's all about them. It's nuts. But it's all about them. It's very clear. It's all about their own very clear. It's all about their own very clear. It's all about their own unwillingness to give up the second unwillingness to give up the second unwillingness to give up the second chocolate croissant. chocolate croissant. chocolate croissant. &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, or to feel like maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, or to feel like maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, or to feel like maybe they're not as fit as the people around they're not as fit as the people around they're not as fit as the people around them. I mean, when standards around you them. I mean, when standards around you them. I mean, when standards around you are at risk of rising, are at risk of rising, are at risk of rising, that can be really scary to people. that can be really scary to people. that can be really scary to people. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we were talking about that &gt;&gt; Yeah, we were talking about that &gt;&gt; Yeah, we were talking about that earlier, Andrew, when I was saying that earlier, Andrew, when I was saying that earlier, Andrew, when I was saying that like um it becomes when you start eating like um it becomes when you start eating like um it becomes when you start eating healthy and sleeping and getting up healthy and sleeping and getting up healthy and sleeping and getting up early and stuff, it becomes a reproach early and stuff, it becomes a reproach early and stuff, it becomes a reproach to your friends who know that they're to your friends who know that they're to your friends who know that they're not doing that, know they should be not doing that, know they should be not doing that, know they should be doing that, and they say, "Who is this doing that, and they say, "Who is this doing that, and they say, "Who is this guy to do that?" you know, and then they guy to do that?" you know, and then they guy to do that?" you know, and then they will try to sabotage you and undermine will try to sabotage you and undermine will try to sabotage you and undermine you and ridicule you. And so, you're you and ridicule you. And so, you're you and ridicule you. And so, you're right, turning pro does have a cost. A right, turning pro does have a cost. A right, turning pro does have a cost. A lot of times, you know, if you take that lot of times, you know, if you take that lot of times, you know, if you take that course, you have to leave people behind. course, you have to leave people behind. course, you have to leave people behind. You know, people who were your friends, You know, people who were your friends, You know, people who were your friends, you can't be friends with them anymore, you can't be friends with them anymore, you can't be friends with them anymore, you know, because a lot of times groups you know, because a lot of times groups you know, because a lot of times groups of friends will have an unspoken kind of friends will have an unspoken kind of friends will have an unspoken kind of compact among them that we're all going compact among them that we're all going compact among them that we're all going to stay mediocre. to stay mediocre. to stay mediocre. That's the deal, right? And in fact, um, That's the deal, right? And in fact, um, That's the deal, right? And in fact, um, Goodwill Hunting, that was what that Goodwill Hunting, that was what that Goodwill Hunting, that was what that movie was about, right? That, uh, the, movie was about, right? That, uh, the, movie was about, right? That, uh, the, um, Matt Damon character was this um, Matt Damon character was this um, Matt Damon character was this mathematical genius, right? And, uh, his mathematical genius, right? And, uh, his mathematical genius, right? And, uh, his buddies, all of his, you know, fist buddies, all of his, you know, fist buddies, all of his, you know, fist fighting Boston Souy guys were had this fighting Boston Souy guys were had this fighting Boston Souy guys were had this compact. They were all going to stay, compact. They were all going to stay, compact. They were all going to stay, you know, kind of bluecollar guys and you know, kind of bluecollar guys and you know, kind of bluecollar guys and we're all going to be buddies and we're all going to be buddies and we're all going to be buddies and we're going to have a wonderful time, you And going to have a wonderful time, you And going to have a wonderful time, you And then there's that great scene at the end then there's that great scene at the end then there's that great scene at the end of the movie where um Ben Affleck, his of the movie where um Ben Affleck, his of the movie where um Ben Affleck, his best friend, says to him, you know, if I best friend, says to him, you know, if I best friend, says to him, you know, if I come back 20 years from now and you're come back 20 years from now and you're come back 20 years from now and you're still here, I'm going to kill you cuz still here, I'm going to kill you cuz still here, I'm going to kill you cuz you won the lottery. You got this thing you won the lottery. You got this thing you won the lottery. You got this thing and you this gift and you got to use and you this gift and you got to use and you this gift and you got to use it. So there are those kind of packs it. So there are those kind of packs it. So there are those kind of packs that people make. We're all going to that people make. We're all going to that people make. We're all going to stay mediocre right here where we are. stay mediocre right here where we are. stay mediocre right here where we are. And if you Andrew try to rise above you And if you Andrew try to rise above you And if you Andrew try to rise above you be the tall poppy, somebody's going to, be the tall poppy, somebody's going to, be the tall poppy, somebody's going to, you know, cut you off. So sometimes we you know, cut you off. So sometimes we you know, cut you off. So sometimes we do have to leave people behind you know. do have to leave people behind you know. do have to leave people behind you know. &gt;&gt; Well the good news is and I can say this &gt;&gt; Well the good news is and I can say this &gt;&gt; Well the good news is and I can say this from experience that there are people from experience that there are people from experience that there are people waiting for you who have high standards waiting for you who have high standards waiting for you who have high standards that are that are that are &gt;&gt; make excellent friends and many of the &gt;&gt; make excellent friends and many of the &gt;&gt; make excellent friends and many of the people that at one point we feel we've people that at one point we feel we've people that at one point we feel we've left behind left behind left behind &gt;&gt; later come back and ask for ways to &gt;&gt; later come back and ask for ways to &gt;&gt; later come back and ask for ways to better themselves physically creative better themselves physically creative better themselves physically creative creatively etc. Um yeah, I think um the creatively etc. Um yeah, I think um the creatively etc. Um yeah, I think um the notion of dominant culture is one that notion of dominant culture is one that notion of dominant culture is one that um my dad internalized in me really um my dad internalized in me really um my dad internalized in me really early on. One of the things I love about early on. One of the things I love about early on. One of the things I love about being a professor at Stanford is you being a professor at Stanford is you being a professor at Stanford is you look to your right or you look to your look to your right or you look to your look to your right or you look to your left and people are awesome. People are left and people are awesome. People are left and people are awesome. People are going it's it has if anything I mean you going it's it has if anything I mean you going it's it has if anything I mean you know it's the issue that you go well how know it's the issue that you go well how know it's the issue that you go well how much pressure is this? And um you know I much pressure is this? And um you know I much pressure is this? And um you know I would say actually very little from the would say actually very little from the would say actually very little from the outside. Everyone who's a faculty member outside. Everyone who's a faculty member outside. Everyone who's a faculty member at Stanford is putting so much pressure at Stanford is putting so much pressure at Stanford is putting so much pressure on themselves to live out their vision on themselves to live out their vision on themselves to live out their vision of what they're trying to create. I of what they're trying to create. I of what they're trying to create. I mean, it's spectacular. I've got mean, it's spectacular. I've got mean, it's spectacular. I've got colleagues that I could tell you about colleagues that I could tell you about colleagues that I could tell you about multiple domains of life where they're multiple domains of life where they're multiple domains of life where they're just &gt;&gt; 11 out of 10, right? And some it's only &gt;&gt; 11 out of 10, right? And some it's only &gt;&gt; 11 out of 10, right? And some it's only one and in some they have more one and in some they have more one and in some they have more challenged personal lives like anything challenged personal lives like anything challenged personal lives like anything else. And in some they seem to just do else. And in some they seem to just do else. And in some they seem to just do it all. But the uh I think the notion a it all. But the uh I think the notion a it all. But the uh I think the notion a former guest on this podcast who's a former guest on this podcast who's a former guest on this podcast who's a tier former tier one operator um DJ tier former tier one operator um DJ tier former tier one operator um DJ Shipley uh said you never want to be the Shipley uh said you never want to be the Shipley uh said you never want to be the big fish in the small pond. That's the big fish in the small pond. That's the big fish in the small pond. That's the worst place to be. It's the most worst place to be. It's the most worst place to be. It's the most uncomfortable, sad, low place to be. You uncomfortable, sad, low place to be. You uncomfortable, sad, low place to be. You want to be surrounded by people who are want to be surrounded by people who are want to be surrounded by people who are really striving but really pushing really striving but really pushing really striving but really pushing themselves. your standards go up and you themselves. your standards go up and you themselves. your standards go up and you get better and you realize all sorts of get better and you realize all sorts of get better and you realize all sorts of wonderful things about who you can wonderful things about who you can wonderful things about who you can become. I think that's one good feature become. I think that's one good feature become. I think that's one good feature of social media now, which is that of social media now, which is that of social media now, which is that people can find mentors. They can find people can find mentors. They can find people can find mentors. They can find people who are um are not giving the people who are um are not giving the people who are um are not giving the illusion of being perfect. You know, we illusion of being perfect. You know, we illusion of being perfect. You know, we used to think that famous people were used to think that famous people were used to think that famous people were perfect. &gt;&gt; Nowadays, the more famous you are, the &gt;&gt; Nowadays, the more famous you are, the &gt;&gt; Nowadays, the more famous you are, the harder it is to control your reputation. harder it is to control your reputation. harder it is to control your reputation. &gt;&gt; And I think that's in some ways a good &gt;&gt; And I think that's in some ways a good &gt;&gt; And I think that's in some ways a good thing. has its darker side but the thing. has its darker side but the thing. has its darker side but the idea that nobody's perfect. It's just idea that nobody's perfect. It's just idea that nobody's perfect. It's just that people are emphasizing or that people are emphasizing or that people are emphasizing or deemphasizing certain aspects of life. deemphasizing certain aspects of life. deemphasizing certain aspects of life. &gt;&gt; So, but yeah, I think uh turning oneself &gt;&gt; So, but yeah, I think uh turning oneself &gt;&gt; So, but yeah, I think uh turning oneself pro, which is as you pointed out, pro, which is as you pointed out, pro, which is as you pointed out, something that people can just do for something that people can just do for something that people can just do for themselves, is really about taking themselves, is really about taking themselves, is really about taking yourself seriously and taking life yourself seriously and taking life yourself seriously and taking life seriously. &gt;&gt; And that brings me to a bigger question, &gt;&gt; And that brings me to a bigger question, &gt;&gt; And that brings me to a bigger question, which is which is which is &gt;&gt; so much of what you talk about, this is &gt;&gt; so much of what you talk about, this is &gt;&gt; so much of what you talk about, this is why I love it so much, is about the why I love it so much, is about the why I love it so much, is about the practical. We started off talking about practical. We started off talking about practical. We started off talking about like what you do and when and how and like what you do and when and how and like what you do and when and how and how you close out a session and how you how you close out a session and how you how you close out a session and how you reopen a session, reopen a session, reopen a session, &gt;&gt; but it seems like you're also very &gt;&gt; but it seems like you're also very &gt;&gt; but it seems like you're also very connected to the spiritual aspects of connected to the spiritual aspects of connected to the spiritual aspects of the creative process that you really the creative process that you really the creative process that you really bookend these for lack of a better bookend these for lack of a better bookend these for lack of a better phrase that you really bookend the two phrase that you really bookend the two phrase that you really bookend the two aspects of the creative process because aspects of the creative process because aspects of the creative process because for many people they hear about for many people they hear about for many people they hear about creativity and it can seem kind of creativity and it can seem kind of creativity and it can seem kind of mystical &gt;&gt; and it almost like trying to grab fog &gt;&gt; and it almost like trying to grab fog &gt;&gt; and it almost like trying to grab fog and many times it the process is like and many times it the process is like and many times it the process is like trying to grab fog. So, you've given a trying to grab fog. So, you've given a trying to grab fog. So, you've given a lot of extremely practical advice, but lot of extremely practical advice, but lot of extremely practical advice, but when it comes to the kind of spiritual when it comes to the kind of spiritual when it comes to the kind of spiritual um higher order stuff, if you will, the um higher order stuff, if you will, the um higher order stuff, if you will, the muse um muse um muse um how large a role does that play in your how large a role does that play in your how large a role does that play in your reflections about where you're going? Uh reflections about where you're going? Uh reflections about where you're going? Uh because sounds like you believe that a because sounds like you believe that a because sounds like you believe that a lot of this stuff is not us, it's coming lot of this stuff is not us, it's coming lot of this stuff is not us, it's coming through us. through us. through us. &gt;&gt; I absolutely believe that. And I, you &gt;&gt; I absolutely believe that. And I, you &gt;&gt; I absolutely believe that. And I, you know, you're right, Andrew, and it's a know, you're right, Andrew, and it's a know, you're right, Andrew, and it's a the creative life, I think, is a the creative life, I think, is a the creative life, I think, is a twosided thing. You know, the one side twosided thing. You know, the one side twosided thing. You know, the one side is kind of the bluecollar practical is kind of the bluecollar practical is kind of the bluecollar practical aspect of being a professional that you aspect of being a professional that you aspect of being a professional that you know, you can sit down, you can do your know, you can sit down, you can do your know, you can sit down, you can do your work, you discipline yourself, you know work, you discipline yourself, you know work, you discipline yourself, you know what you're going to do, but the other what you're going to do, but the other what you're going to do, but the other side is that where do ideas come from? side is that where do ideas come from? side is that where do ideas come from? They don't come from us, you know, they They don't come from us, you know, they They don't come from us, you know, they come from someplace else. And um so I'm come from someplace else. And um so I'm come from someplace else. And um so I'm definitely a believer that we live I'm definitely a believer that we live I'm definitely a believer that we live on the material plane here, but there's on the material plane here, but there's on the material plane here, but there's a plane above us and we're trying to a plane above us and we're trying to a plane above us and we're trying to communicate to that plane and that plane communicate to that plane and that plane communicate to that plane and that plane is trying to communicate to us. And our is trying to communicate to us. And our is trying to communicate to us. And our job as artists um like if we were in a job as artists um like if we were in a job as artists um like if we were in a in a monastery or something, the in a monastery or something, the in a monastery or something, the move from here to here would be called move from here to here would be called move from here to here would be called prayer. But if we're artist, the move prayer. But if we're artist, the move prayer. But if we're artist, the move from here to here is like the invocation from here to here is like the invocation from here to here is like the invocation of the muse. It's kind of saying, "Give of the muse. It's kind of saying, "Give of the muse. It's kind of saying, "Give me an idea. help me, you know, and me an idea. help me, you know, and me an idea. help me, you know, and one we on the material plane put and one we on the material plane put and one we on the material plane put ourselves at the service of this higher ourselves at the service of this higher ourselves at the service of this higher plane of our illumined self or whatever plane of our illumined self or whatever plane of our illumined self or whatever you want to call it, the yungian self, you want to call it, the yungian self, you want to call it, the yungian self, whatever we want to call it, and um try whatever we want to call it, and um try whatever we want to call it, and um try to channel it as best we can. And our to channel it as best we can. And our to channel it as best we can. And our job here to be is to be a in terms of job here to be is to be a in terms of job here to be is to be a in terms of being a pro is to sort of be ready to being a pro is to sort of be ready to being a pro is to sort of be ready to take that voltage as it comes in. And take that voltage as it comes in. And take that voltage as it comes in. And like Beethoven could play on the piano like Beethoven could play on the piano like Beethoven could play on the piano what he was hearing in his in his head, what he was hearing in his in his head, what he was hearing in his in his head, right? So that's our job. We we have to right? So that's our job. We we have to right? So that's our job. We we have to be able to know how to produce that be able to know how to produce that be able to know how to produce that in material form, whatever that is, but in material form, whatever that is, but in material form, whatever that is, but it's coming from another place. So I'm it's coming from another place. So I'm it's coming from another place. So I'm absolutely a believer that uh you I'm absolutely a believer that uh you I'm absolutely a believer that uh you know there are higher dimensions and know there are higher dimensions and know there are higher dimensions and there's probably a lot of higher there's probably a lot of higher there's probably a lot of higher dimensions. Um, dimensions. Um, dimensions. Um, and I think the Greeks were really kind and I think the Greeks were really kind and I think the Greeks were really kind of on to something in the ancient Greeks of on to something in the ancient Greeks of on to something in the ancient Greeks in their concept of uh the muses and the in their concept of uh the muses and the in their concept of uh the muses and the various gods and goddesses that are uh, various gods and goddesses that are uh, various gods and goddesses that are uh, you know, interacting with this material you know, interacting with this material you know, interacting with this material plane that we're on. I, you know, that's plane that we're on. I, you know, that's plane that we're on. I, you know, that's a way of anthropomorphizing it. I'm sure a way of anthropomorphizing it. I'm sure a way of anthropomorphizing it. I'm sure you could, we could come up with some you could, we could come up with some you could, we could come up with some way in the quantum field or something. way in the quantum field or something. way in the quantum field or something. If you're a scientist, you probably know If you're a scientist, you probably know If you're a scientist, you probably know how to that it has to do with something. how to that it has to do with something. how to that it has to do with something. I don't know what, but there is I don't know what, but there is I don't know what, but there is something coming from somewhere and it something coming from somewhere and it something coming from somewhere and it ain't us. ain't us. ain't us. &gt;&gt; Well, I have my ideas about that. Very &gt;&gt; Well, I have my ideas about that. Very &gt;&gt; Well, I have my ideas about that. Very few of them are grounded in um neurons few of them are grounded in um neurons few of them are grounded in um neurons and cells, but they interact with and cells, but they interact with and cells, but they interact with neurons and cells. It's an evolving neurons and cells. It's an evolving neurons and cells. It's an evolving area. You know, we had um a guest on the area. You know, we had um a guest on the area. You know, we had um a guest on the podcast uh David Denno, who's a um podcast uh David Denno, who's a um podcast uh David Denno, who's a um professor at Northeastern University professor at Northeastern University professor at Northeastern University talk about the relationship between talk about the relationship between talk about the relationship between science and religion and how acts of science and religion and how acts of science and religion and how acts of faith, not just saying one believes in faith, not just saying one believes in faith, not just saying one believes in God. um not just saying one believes in God. um not just saying one believes in God. um not just saying one believes in a higher order consciousness but acts of a higher order consciousness but acts of a higher order consciousness but acts of faith, &gt;&gt; prayer for you, maybe it's through &gt;&gt; prayer for you, maybe it's through &gt;&gt; prayer for you, maybe it's through writing or other expressions that writing or other expressions that writing or other expressions that involve action that those absolutely involve action that those absolutely involve action that those absolutely have positive health benefits. We now have positive health benefits. We now have positive health benefits. We now know that um but that it's really about know that um but that it's really about know that um but that it's really about the acts of faith the acts of faith the acts of faith &gt;&gt; that &gt;&gt; that &gt;&gt; that &gt;&gt; I love that phrase. That's a great one &gt;&gt; I love that phrase. That's a great one &gt;&gt; I love that phrase. That's a great one and it is true. and it is true. and it is true. &gt;&gt; Yeah. He it struck a chord with me &gt;&gt; Yeah. He it struck a chord with me &gt;&gt; Yeah. He it struck a chord with me too because in biology you learn that too because in biology you learn that too because in biology you learn that you need to understand the names of you need to understand the names of you need to understand the names of things. Mitochondria, Golgi apparat you things. Mitochondria, Golgi apparat you things. Mitochondria, Golgi apparat you need to know that but those are just need to know that but those are just need to know that but those are just names. But the real magic in names. But the real magic in names. But the real magic in understanding biology and being able to understanding biology and being able to understanding biology and being able to internalize it is understanding things internalize it is understanding things internalize it is understanding things in their verb states, right? in their verb states, right? in their verb states, right? Understanding how neurons work, not just Understanding how neurons work, not just Understanding how neurons work, not just as a description, but being able to as a description, but being able to as a description, but being able to think about that and visualize it. I think about that and visualize it. I think about that and visualize it. I think it's the same with ourselves. This think it's the same with ourselves. This think it's the same with ourselves. This is why like you know clinical labels can is why like you know clinical labels can is why like you know clinical labels can be useful but understanding when one is be useful but understanding when one is be useful but understanding when one is in a uh sort of a place verb actions of in a uh sort of a place verb actions of in a uh sort of a place verb actions of gratitude as opposed to just a reciting gratitude as opposed to just a reciting gratitude as opposed to just a reciting some gratitude thing that there's it's some gratitude thing that there's it's some gratitude thing that there's it's subtle but it's meaningful. Anyway, I subtle but it's meaningful. Anyway, I subtle but it's meaningful. Anyway, I don't quite know how to articulate it, don't quite know how to articulate it, don't quite know how to articulate it, but Denno but Denno but Denno described this and the data from his described this and the data from his described this and the data from his laboratory um are showing that when laboratory um are showing that when laboratory um are showing that when people start to think in terms of people start to think in terms of people start to think in terms of faith-based actions faith-based actions faith-based actions for many people through, you know, for many people through, you know, for many people through, you know, religious, you know, scripture, reading religious, you know, scripture, reading religious, you know, scripture, reading scripture or whatever it is. But there scripture or whatever it is. But there scripture or whatever it is. But there are many ways to access this that um are many ways to access this that um are many ways to access this that um all sorts of interesting things start to all sorts of interesting things start to all sorts of interesting things start to happen at the level of morality at the happen at the level of morality at the happen at the level of morality at the level of their own consciousness at level of their own consciousness at level of their own consciousness at their level of feelings of connectedness their level of feelings of connectedness their level of feelings of connectedness that go beyond any kind of simple 2 plus that go beyond any kind of simple 2 plus that go beyond any kind of simple 2 plus 2 equals 4 outcome. So I totally agree 2 equals 4 outcome. So I totally agree 2 equals 4 outcome. So I totally agree with you. There's something else with you. There's something else with you. There's something else &gt;&gt; definitely something else going on. &gt;&gt; definitely something else going on. &gt;&gt; definitely something else going on. &gt;&gt; It's exciting. I think that you know &gt;&gt; It's exciting. I think that you know &gt;&gt; It's exciting. I think that you know &gt;&gt; I know you're not a big drinker. Neither &gt;&gt; I know you're not a big drinker. Neither &gt;&gt; I know you're not a big drinker. Neither am I. Maybe that's why you um you look am I. Maybe that's why you um you look am I. Maybe that's why you um you look so young for your age and so robust. so young for your age and so robust. so young for your age and so robust. Although I think uh if I were to wager, Although I think uh if I were to wager, Although I think uh if I were to wager, I'd say it's also because you're I'd say it's also because you're I'd say it's also because you're pursuing what you love. You're you're pursuing what you love. You're you're pursuing what you love. You're you're answering your calling. Certainly, answering your calling. Certainly, answering your calling. Certainly, that's the neverending source of that's the neverending source of that's the neverending source of dopamine. &gt;&gt; Ah, is it? &gt;&gt; Ah, is it? &gt;&gt; Ah, is it? &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Because it's &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Because it's &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Because it's self-replenishing. &gt;&gt; Ah, I mean that's a great word, &gt;&gt; Ah, I mean that's a great word, &gt;&gt; Ah, I mean that's a great word, self-relening. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a you know that's the clearly &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a you know that's the clearly &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a you know that's the clearly the thing. clearly the thing. Uh the thing. clearly the thing. Uh the thing. clearly the thing. Uh &gt;&gt; so &gt;&gt; so &gt;&gt; so &gt;&gt; you don't drink much but nowadays &gt;&gt; you don't drink much but nowadays &gt;&gt; you don't drink much but nowadays there's a lot of discussion and perhaps there's a lot of discussion and perhaps there's a lot of discussion and perhaps there always was about taking things to there always was about taking things to there always was about taking things to be able to at to bridge this plane be able to at to bridge this plane be able to at to bridge this plane between the self and the this higher between the self and the this higher between the self and the this higher order uh these messages that we can order uh these messages that we can order uh these messages that we can receive and can come through us. Um I receive and can come through us. Um I receive and can come through us. Um I know a lot of writers drink a lot a know a lot of writers drink a lot a know a lot of writers drink a lot a there have been a lot of alcohol there have been a lot of alcohol there have been a lot of alcohol alcoholic writers um alcoholic writers um alcoholic writers um &gt;&gt; there you hear that anyway not that I &gt;&gt; there you hear that anyway not that I &gt;&gt; there you hear that anyway not that I know anybody. know anybody. know anybody. &gt;&gt; Yeah I think historically that was &gt;&gt; Yeah I think historically that was &gt;&gt; Yeah I think historically that was true. I think a lot of writers have true. I think a lot of writers have true. I think a lot of writers have relied on amphetamines and alcohol to relied on amphetamines and alcohol to relied on amphetamines and alcohol to get their work done get their work done get their work done &gt;&gt; and nicotine. &gt;&gt; and nicotine. &gt;&gt; and nicotine. &gt;&gt; Nicotine's kind of making a comeback in &gt;&gt; Nicotine's kind of making a comeback in &gt;&gt; Nicotine's kind of making a comeback in non-smoke form. So, let's set that non-smoke form. So, let's set that non-smoke form. So, let's set that aside. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; you do this through sheer good old &gt;&gt; you do this through sheer good old &gt;&gt; you do this through sheer good old marine style grit, it sounds like. marine style grit, it sounds like. marine style grit, it sounds like. &gt;&gt; Yeah. or kind of surrendering to it, &gt;&gt; Yeah. or kind of surrendering to it, &gt;&gt; Yeah. or kind of surrendering to it, you know, like I'm not a meditator, but you know, like I'm not a meditator, but you know, like I'm not a meditator, but from what I gather, that's sort of what from what I gather, that's sort of what from what I gather, that's sort of what meditation is about, you know? So, yeah, meditation is about, you know? So, yeah, meditation is about, you know? So, yeah, just sort of that's how I that's how I just sort of that's how I that's how I just sort of that's how I that's how I do it. I'm not even sure how I do it. I do it. I'm not even sure how I do it. I do it. I'm not even sure how I do it. I just put myself at the service of what just put myself at the service of what just put myself at the service of what I'm trying to do and try to get out I'm trying to do and try to get out I'm trying to do and try to get out of the way as much as I can. of the way as much as I can. of the way as much as I can. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 gram of protein, only other. It has 28 gram of protein, only other. It has 28 gram of protein, only 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. of its calories come from protein. of its calories come from protein. That's 50% higher than the next closest That's 50% higher than the next closest That's 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. These bars from David also protein bar. These bars from David also protein bar. These bars from David also taste amazing. Right now, my favorite taste amazing. Right now, my favorite taste amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I also like the chocolate chip but I also like the chocolate chip but I also like the chocolate chip cookie dough flavor, and I also like the cookie dough flavor, and I also like the cookie dough flavor, and I also like the salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like all the flavors. They're all I like all the flavors. They're all I like all the flavors. They're all delicious. Also, big news. David bars delicious. Also, big news. David bars delicious. Also, big news. David bars are now back in stock. They were sold are now back in stock. They were sold are now back in stock. They were sold out for several months because they are out for several months because they are out for several months because they are that popular, but they are now back in that popular, but they are now back in that popular, but they are now back in stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the to get 28 grams of protein in the to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it very calories of a snack, which makes it very calories of a snack, which makes it very easy for me to meet my protein goals of easy for me to meet my protein goals of easy for me to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per day and to do so without weight per day and to do so without weight per day and to do so without eating excess calories. I generally eat eating excess calories. I generally eat eating excess calories. I generally eat a David Bar most afternoons and I always a David Bar most afternoons and I always a David Bar most afternoons and I always keep them with me when I'm away from keep them with me when I'm away from keep them with me when I'm away from home or traveling because they're home or traveling because they're home or traveling because they're incredibly convenient to get enough incredibly convenient to get enough incredibly convenient to get enough protein. As I mentioned, they're protein. As I mentioned, they're protein. As I mentioned, they're incredibly delicious. And given that 28 incredibly delicious. And given that 28 incredibly delicious. And given that 28 grams of protein, they're pretty filling grams of protein, they're pretty filling grams of protein, they're pretty filling for just 150 calories, so they're great for just 150 calories, so they're great for just 150 calories, so they're great between meals as well. If you'd like to between meals as well. If you'd like to between meals as well. If you'd like to try David, you can go to try David, you can go to try David, you can go to davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Throughout today's discussion, you've Throughout today's discussion, you've Throughout today's discussion, you've mentioned various physical labor jobs. I mentioned various physical labor jobs. I mentioned various physical labor jobs. I have a very practical question. How have a very practical question. How have a very practical question. How comfortable is the chair you sit in when comfortable is the chair you sit in when comfortable is the chair you sit in when you write? Uh, not very comfortable, but you write? Uh, not very comfortable, but you write? Uh, not very comfortable, but I'm only sitting there for a couple I'm only sitting there for a couple I'm only sitting there for a couple hours, so it's okay. Yeah. hours, so it's okay. Yeah. hours, so it's okay. Yeah. &gt;&gt; How much do you care that it's unc not &gt;&gt; How much do you care that it's unc not &gt;&gt; How much do you care that it's unc not that comfortable? that comfortable? that comfortable? &gt;&gt; It probably should not be comfortable, &gt;&gt; It probably should not be comfortable, &gt;&gt; It probably should not be comfortable, you know. you know. you know. &gt;&gt; But, uh, hopefully you're in your head &gt;&gt; But, uh, hopefully you're in your head &gt;&gt; But, uh, hopefully you're in your head and you're not really noticing that sort and you're not really noticing that sort and you're not really noticing that sort of thing. Why do you ask that question, of thing. Why do you ask that question, of thing. Why do you ask that question, Andrew? &gt;&gt; Because years ago, I went online and I &gt;&gt; Because years ago, I went online and I &gt;&gt; Because years ago, I went online and I was like looking at some stuff about was like looking at some stuff about was like looking at some stuff about writers and there's a very famous writers and there's a very famous writers and there's a very famous writer. I won't mention his name. And he writer. I won't mention his name. And he writer. I won't mention his name. And he said, you know, it's very important that said, you know, it's very important that said, you know, it's very important that you have a super comfortable chair you have a super comfortable chair you have a super comfortable chair because otherwise you're going to be and because otherwise you're going to be and because otherwise you're going to be and I and you know what my first thought I and you know what my first thought I and you know what my first thought was, even though I he's far more was, even though I he's far more was, even though I he's far more successful at writing than I am. Um I successful at writing than I am. Um I successful at writing than I am. Um I thought that's terrible advice because thought that's terrible advice because thought that's terrible advice because if someone were going to ask me, you if someone were going to ask me, you if someone were going to ask me, you know, how to do, I don't know, like a know, how to do, I don't know, like a know, how to do, I don't know, like a really clean uh protein labeling really clean uh protein labeling really clean uh protein labeling experiment in the lab, you know, experiment in the lab, you know, experiment in the lab, you know, imunohistochemistry or something like imunohistochemistry or something like imunohistochemistry or something like that. I would make sure that they had that. I would make sure that they had that. I would make sure that they had everything. I would make sure that the everything. I would make sure that the everything. I would make sure that the antibodies were fresh out of the but antibodies were fresh out of the but antibodies were fresh out of the but then &gt;&gt; I would not want them to even know that &gt;&gt; I would not want them to even know that &gt;&gt; I would not want them to even know that there are now you know like there are now you know like there are now you know like &gt;&gt; kits that can make certain aspects of &gt;&gt; kits that can make certain aspects of &gt;&gt; kits that can make certain aspects of the process much easier because the process much easier because the process much easier because the moment you experience that creature moment you experience that creature moment you experience that creature comfort the more painful the good comfort the more painful the good comfort the more painful the good old classic way of doing it is. Now, old classic way of doing it is. Now, old classic way of doing it is. Now, that's not to say I wouldn't embrace new that's not to say I wouldn't embrace new that's not to say I wouldn't embrace new technologies, but this notion of technologies, but this notion of technologies, but this notion of optimization, which sometimes gets optimization, which sometimes gets optimization, which sometimes gets thrown at me, is a terrible one with thrown at me, is a terrible one with thrown at me, is a terrible one with respect to the creative process because respect to the creative process because respect to the creative process because I believe that if you're thinking about, I believe that if you're thinking about, I believe that if you're thinking about, oh, like, am I comfortable or not? Am I oh, like, am I comfortable or not? Am I oh, like, am I comfortable or not? Am I in an optimal place to create it? We in an optimal place to create it? We in an optimal place to create it? We started this podcast in a closet, started this podcast in a closet, started this podcast in a closet, &gt;&gt; a small closet with me, Rob, and the &gt;&gt; a small closet with me, Rob, and the &gt;&gt; a small closet with me, Rob, and the bulldog. Yeah. bulldog. Yeah. bulldog. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And we were not thinking about &gt;&gt; And we were not thinking about &gt;&gt; And we were not thinking about optimizing anything except getting the optimizing anything except getting the optimizing anything except getting the audio and the visuals just right enough audio and the visuals just right enough audio and the visuals just right enough that we could get it out there. that we could get it out there. that we could get it out there. &gt;&gt; So I love and I'm not &gt;&gt; So I love and I'm not &gt;&gt; So I love and I'm not surprised that you have a slightly surprised that you have a slightly surprised that you have a slightly uncomfortable chair and then you don't uncomfortable chair and then you don't uncomfortable chair and then you don't really care so much. really care so much. really care so much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, &gt;&gt; You know, &gt;&gt; You know, &gt;&gt; yeah, I agree completely that you know &gt;&gt; yeah, I agree completely that you know &gt;&gt; yeah, I agree completely that you know that advice was really bad. I would go that advice was really bad. I would go that advice was really bad. I would go to the absolute opposite. You know, get to the absolute opposite. You know, get to the absolute opposite. You know, get the most uncomfortable chair you the most uncomfortable chair you the most uncomfortable chair you possibly can have. possibly can have. possibly can have. Do you think those years of physical Do you think those years of physical Do you think those years of physical labor, marine training, and your morning labor, marine training, and your morning labor, marine training, and your morning ritual of going to the gym uh have ritual of going to the gym uh have ritual of going to the gym uh have allowed your mind to be more durable by allowed your mind to be more durable by allowed your mind to be more durable by virtue of the fact that you can toler I virtue of the fact that you can toler I virtue of the fact that you can toler I think you can tolerate a fair amount of think you can tolerate a fair amount of think you can tolerate a fair amount of physical discomfort that you probably physical discomfort that you probably physical discomfort that you probably don't even realize because you have no don't even realize because you have no don't even realize because you have no comparison that most people would um comparison that most people would um comparison that most people would um &gt;&gt; probably buckle under or at least be &gt;&gt; probably buckle under or at least be &gt;&gt; probably buckle under or at least be kind of like you that kind of like you that kind of like you that &gt;&gt; I don't know. &gt;&gt; I don't know. &gt;&gt; I don't know. &gt;&gt; I feel like you are the opposite of like &gt;&gt; I feel like you are the opposite of like &gt;&gt; I feel like you are the opposite of like crotchety, you know? Yeah. Terrible word crotchety, you know? Yeah. Terrible word crotchety, you know? Yeah. Terrible word to describe. You know, to describe. You know, to describe. You know, &gt;&gt; you don't see me at home, Andrew. &gt;&gt; you don't see me at home, Andrew. &gt;&gt; you don't see me at home, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. Are you you're not a Are you &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. Are you you're not a Are you &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. Are you you're not a Are you a complainer? a complainer? a complainer? &gt;&gt; No, I'm I've really tried. I never &gt;&gt; No, I'm I've really tried. I never &gt;&gt; No, I'm I've really tried. I never complain at all. I think it's a real complain at all. I think it's a real complain at all. I think it's a real vice. It's another form of resistance. vice. It's another form of resistance. vice. It's another form of resistance. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Well, Stephen Presfield, &gt;&gt; Interesting. Well, Stephen Presfield, &gt;&gt; Interesting. Well, Stephen Presfield, this has been awesome. Before we this has been awesome. Before we this has been awesome. Before we conclude, I do want to ask you, what's conclude, I do want to ask you, what's conclude, I do want to ask you, what's your most recent book and what's it your most recent book and what's it your most recent book and what's it about? And about? And about? And if you're willing, maybe give us a if you're willing, maybe give us a if you're willing, maybe give us a little peak behind the veil of what little peak behind the veil of what little peak behind the veil of what might be coming next. might be coming next. might be coming next. &gt;&gt; I have a book coming next June. &gt;&gt; I have a book coming next June. &gt;&gt; I have a book coming next June. &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; Uh we were talking about this before. I we were talking about this before. I we were talking about this before. I had a book uh a few years ago called A had a book uh a few years ago called A had a book uh a few years ago called A Man at Arms, which was about it's about Man at Arms, which was about it's about Man at Arms, which was about it's about a recurring character that I have who I a recurring character that I have who I a recurring character that I have who I call the oneman killing machine of the call the oneman killing machine of the call the oneman killing machine of the ancient world. Kind of the Clint ancient world. Kind of the Clint ancient world. Kind of the Clint Eastwood of the ancient world, Telmon of Eastwood of the ancient world, Telmon of Eastwood of the ancient world, Telmon of Arcadia. And that book took place around Arcadia. And that book took place around Arcadia. And that book took place around the time of the crucifixion the time of the crucifixion the time of the crucifixion um fiction. Um the new book is one of um fiction. Um the new book is one of um fiction. Um the new book is one of the aspects of Telmont is he keeps the aspects of Telmont is he keeps the aspects of Telmont is he keeps living life after life after life. And living life after life after life. And living life after life after life. And he is he's doomed because of crimes he is he's doomed because of crimes he is he's doomed because of crimes he committed in the past to live life after committed in the past to live life after committed in the past to live life after life as a soldier. Always as a soldier, life as a soldier. Always as a soldier, life as a soldier. Always as a soldier, always fighting, always killing, always fighting, always killing, always fighting, always killing, always being killed, so on and so forth. So, being killed, so on and so forth. So, being killed, so on and so forth. So, this new book that's coming out, it's this new book that's coming out, it's this new book that's coming out, it's called The Arcadian, is about his final called The Arcadian, is about his final called The Arcadian, is about his final life. And uh I won't say any more than that And uh I won't say any more than that And uh I won't say any more than that except that it takes place in the past except that it takes place in the past except that it takes place in the past and that um it's pretty and that um it's pretty and that um it's pretty interesting and that uh how this all interesting and that uh how this all interesting and that uh how this all sort of plays out. It really kind of sort of plays out. It really kind of sort of plays out. It really kind of goes what we were talking about before goes what we were talking about before goes what we were talking about before about are there different levels of about are there different levels of about are there different levels of reality? And in this case, um there reality? And in this case, um there reality? And in this case, um there definitely are different levels of definitely are different levels of definitely are different levels of reality. and this character has to deal reality. and this character has to deal reality. and this character has to deal with them um on the field of justice and with them um on the field of justice and with them um on the field of justice and payback. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Next June. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Next June. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Next June. &gt;&gt; Next June. Yeah. Okay. The Arcadian. &gt;&gt; Next June. Yeah. Okay. The Arcadian. &gt;&gt; Next June. Yeah. Okay. The Arcadian. &gt;&gt; The Arcadian. We'll keep our eyes and &gt;&gt; The Arcadian. We'll keep our eyes and &gt;&gt; The Arcadian. We'll keep our eyes and ears out for that. Meanwhile, uh you ears out for that. Meanwhile, uh you ears out for that. Meanwhile, uh you know, I don't know which book to know, I don't know which book to know, I don't know which book to recommend most, but you know, I love War recommend most, but you know, I love War recommend most, but you know, I love War of Art. Um I love Do the Work. There's of Art. Um I love Do the Work. There's of Art. Um I love Do the Work. There's so many. Um you know, so I won't ask you so many. Um you know, so I won't ask you so many. Um you know, so I won't ask you to add uh just one other Gates of to add uh just one other Gates of to add uh just one other Gates of Fire. They're all awesome. They're Fire. They're all awesome. They're Fire. They're all awesome. They're awesome listens and they're awesome listens and they're awesome listens and they're awesome reads. Uh people should definitely check reads. Uh people should definitely check reads. Uh people should definitely check these out. It's uh clear you've had an these out. It's uh clear you've had an these out. It's uh clear you've had an enormous impact on people's creative enormous impact on people's creative enormous impact on people's creative process. And these books are also very process. And these books are also very process. And these books are also very &gt;&gt; entertaining to listen to. It's not &gt;&gt; entertaining to listen to. It's not &gt;&gt; entertaining to listen to. It's not a bunch of lists. Yeah, they really a bunch of lists. Yeah, they really a bunch of lists. Yeah, they really are. And um and I'm actually very are. And um and I'm actually very are. And um and I'm actually very grateful I should say that you didn't grateful I should say that you didn't grateful I should say that you didn't have a ton of like immediate and big have a ton of like immediate and big have a ton of like immediate and big success with your movie with the King success with your movie with the King success with your movie with the King Kong movie or and that War of Art took Kong movie or and that War of Art took Kong movie or and that War of Art took some time because I do think everything some time because I do think everything some time because I do think everything we know about dopamine dynamics tells us we know about dopamine dynamics tells us we know about dopamine dynamics tells us that who knows maybe you would have not that who knows maybe you would have not that who knows maybe you would have not written the subsequent books and I written the subsequent books and I written the subsequent books and I look at your work as a as a body of work look at your work as a as a body of work look at your work as a as a body of work and as a scientist that's something that and as a scientist that's something that and as a scientist that's something that I can really appreciate. body of work is I can really appreciate. body of work is I can really appreciate. body of work is really what makes for an awesome really what makes for an awesome really what makes for an awesome &gt;&gt; and what you just said about dopamine. I &gt;&gt; and what you just said about dopamine. I &gt;&gt; and what you just said about dopamine. I never had thought about that about it never had thought about that about it never had thought about that about it that way. That's true. Sort of a slow that way. That's true. Sort of a slow that way. That's true. Sort of a slow release dopamine for me, you know, over release dopamine for me, you know, over release dopamine for me, you know, over many years many years many years &gt;&gt; and well and it compounds the way that &gt;&gt; and well and it compounds the way that &gt;&gt; and well and it compounds the way that you've experienced uh your wins. I mean, you've experienced uh your wins. I mean, you've experienced uh your wins. I mean, oh, I've got stories and go on for days oh, I've got stories and go on for days oh, I've got stories and go on for days about people I knew that had big papers about people I knew that had big papers about people I knew that had big papers published in Science or Nature that then published in Science or Nature that then published in Science or Nature that then disappeared completely. They're just gone. They're completely. They're just gone. They're completely. They're just gone. They're just completely gone because they just completely gone because they just completely gone because they couldn't take that the next thing didn't couldn't take that the next thing didn't couldn't take that the next thing didn't match up to the first thing. Um, you match up to the first thing. Um, you match up to the first thing. Um, you know, th this stuff is real. The one hit know, th this stuff is real. The one hit know, th this stuff is real. The one hit wonder thing happens in every field. wonder thing happens in every field. wonder thing happens in every field. And, uh, that movie, My Big Break, like And, uh, that movie, My Big Break, like And, uh, that movie, My Big Break, like really captures it in the in the realm really captures it in the in the realm really captures it in the in the realm of, uh, acting. of, uh, acting. of, uh, acting. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; you know, a lot of things we're talking &gt;&gt; you know, a lot of things we're talking &gt;&gt; you know, a lot of things we're talking about here today, Andrew, they don't about here today, Andrew, they don't about here today, Andrew, they don't teach you in school. You know, nobody teach you in school. You know, nobody teach you in school. You know, nobody teaches you about what if you are have a teaches you about what if you are have a teaches you about what if you are have a one hit, how do you handle, nobody even one hit, how do you handle, nobody even one hit, how do you handle, nobody even that's the topic doesn't come up at all that's the topic doesn't come up at all that's the topic doesn't come up at all or how to how to handle negative or how to how to handle negative or how to how to handle negative criticism, how to handle positive stuff criticism, how to handle positive stuff criticism, how to handle positive stuff like that. What's the idea of turning like that. What's the idea of turning like that. What's the idea of turning pro? Nobody, you never learn this, you pro? Nobody, you never learn this, you pro? Nobody, you never learn this, you know, and they're all absolutely vital know, and they're all absolutely vital know, and they're all absolutely vital life skills that you hope you encounter life skills that you hope you encounter life skills that you hope you encounter mentors along the way that teach you mentors along the way that teach you mentors along the way that teach you because it's not taught in school. because it's not taught in school. because it's not taught in school. &gt;&gt; Well, God bless you for stepping up and &gt;&gt; Well, God bless you for stepping up and &gt;&gt; Well, God bless you for stepping up and being that mentor to so many people, being that mentor to so many people, being that mentor to so many people, including to me. You're on that list. I including to me. You're on that list. I including to me. You're on that list. I swear you're on that list, and it's I swear you're on that list, and it's I swear you're on that list, and it's not a long list. Embarrassed. No. Well, not a long list. Embarrassed. No. Well, not a long list. Embarrassed. No. Well, for the right reasons, I should say. for the right reasons, I should say. for the right reasons, I should say. &gt;&gt; And thank you for coming here today. And &gt;&gt; And thank you for coming here today. And &gt;&gt; And thank you for coming here today. And &gt;&gt; thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; Yeah, this has been a real pleasure. &gt;&gt; Yeah, this has been a real pleasure. &gt;&gt; Yeah, this has been a real pleasure. &gt;&gt; We've been talking about this for years. &gt;&gt; We've been talking about this for years. &gt;&gt; We've been talking about this for years. &gt;&gt; It was great when we discovered we were &gt;&gt; It was great when we discovered we were &gt;&gt; It was great when we discovered we were neighbors. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I hope we haven't squeezed all the fruit &gt;&gt; I hope we haven't squeezed all the fruit &gt;&gt; I hope we haven't squeezed all the fruit out of the orange here. We can do this out of the orange here. We can do this out of the orange here. We can do this again sometime. again sometime. again sometime. &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. And I'll see you in the &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. And I'll see you in the &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. And I'll see you in the gym. I'll try and get up a little gym. I'll try and get up a little gym. I'll try and get up a little earlier. That's actually starting after earlier. That's actually starting after earlier. That's actually starting after my &gt;&gt; a little later. &gt;&gt; a little later. &gt;&gt; a little later. &gt;&gt; Starting after my 50th birthday, I'm &gt;&gt; Starting after my 50th birthday, I'm &gt;&gt; Starting after my 50th birthday, I'm going to be a 5:00 a.m. riser. ah going to be a 5:00 a.m. riser. ah going to be a 5:00 a.m. riser. ah &gt;&gt; no matter what time I went to sleep that &gt;&gt; no matter what time I went to sleep that &gt;&gt; no matter what time I went to sleep that was something I resolved a few days ago was something I resolved a few days ago was something I resolved a few days ago with um after a different discussion on with um after a different discussion on with um after a different discussion on here but um I feel a strong here but um I feel a strong here but um I feel a strong anti-depressant effect of waking up and anti-depressant effect of waking up and anti-depressant effect of waking up and you just get so much more done you just get so much more done you just get so much more done &gt;&gt; you know but that getting out of bed &gt;&gt; you know but that getting out of bed &gt;&gt; you know but that getting out of bed &gt;&gt; when you haven't slept &gt;&gt; when you haven't slept &gt;&gt; when you haven't slept &gt;&gt; quite as much as you would like is &gt;&gt; quite as much as you would like is &gt;&gt; quite as much as you would like is brutal &gt;&gt; and as I said to you before 50 is &gt;&gt; and as I said to you before 50 is &gt;&gt; and as I said to you before 50 is nothing at all you're just a kid you nothing at all you're just a kid you nothing at all you're just a kid you know you got another 50 plus years ahead know you got another 50 plus years ahead know you got another 50 plus years ahead of yourself so I know when you turn 50, of yourself so I know when you turn 50, of yourself so I know when you turn 50, you turn 40, you turn 30, oh my god, my you turn 40, you turn 30, oh my god, my you turn 40, you turn 30, oh my god, my life is over, you know, not so, you life is over, you know, not so, you life is over, you know, not so, you know, take it from me. I' I'd give my know, take it from me. I' I'd give my know, take it from me. I' I'd give my left arm to be 50 again. You got it left arm to be 50 again. You got it left arm to be 50 again. You got it made. Awesome. Well, that perhaps is the made. Awesome. Well, that perhaps is the made. Awesome. Well, that perhaps is the best birthday gift I could have best birthday gift I could have best birthday gift I could have received. Feels good. Thank you. Please received. Feels good. Thank you. Please received. Feels good. Thank you. Please come back again. Thanks for doing come back again. Thanks for doing come back again. Thanks for doing everything you're doing. I know I do not everything you're doing. I know I do not everything you're doing. I know I do not need to tell you this, but please just need to tell you this, but please just need to tell you this, but please just keep going. We're all keep going. We're all keep going. We're all &gt;&gt; I will if you will. &gt;&gt; I will if you will. &gt;&gt; I will if you will. &gt;&gt; Deal. &gt;&gt; Deal. &gt;&gt; Deal. &gt;&gt; All right. &gt;&gt; All right. &gt;&gt; All right. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Steven Presfield. To discussion with Steven Presfield. To discussion with Steven Presfield. To learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find links to his various books, please see links to his various books, please see links to his various books, please see the show note captions. If you're the show note captions. If you're the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years, and that's based on than five years, and that's based on than five years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and more than 30 years of research and more than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Steven today's discussion with Steven today's discussion with Steven Presfield. And last, but certainly not Presfield. And last, but certainly not Presfield. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]