Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything episode or Today is an Ask Me Anything episode or Today is an Ask Me Anything episode or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber This is part of our premium subscriber This is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel channel. Our premium subscriber channel channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support was started in order to provide support was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday and is which comes out every Monday and is which comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on available at zero cost to everybody on available at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate the premium channel as a way to generate the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm physical health, and performance. I'm physical health, and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount. So, now we are able to that amount. So, now we are able to that amount. So, now we are able to double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance. If you'd health, and human performance. If you'd health, and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, please go to podcast premium channel, please go to podcast premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe or you It is $10 a month to subscribe or you It is $10 a month to subscribe or you can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment and model that is a one-time payment and model that is a one-time payment and again, you can find that option at again, you can find that option at again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already For those of you that are already For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast premium Huberman Lab podcast premium Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. So, premium subscriber is for you. So, premium subscriber is for you. So, without further ado, let's get to without further ado, let's get to without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. The first answering your questions. The first answering your questions. The first question is about task switching. And question is about task switching. And question is about task switching. And the specific question is, the specific question is, the specific question is, is there a way to get better at task is there a way to get better at task is there a way to get better at task switching? Well, task switching is an incredibly Well, task switching is an incredibly Well, task switching is an incredibly interesting topic. It's something that interesting topic. It's something that interesting topic. It's something that plagues many people. That is, a lot of plagues many people. That is, a lot of plagues many people. That is, a lot of people have challenges with task people have challenges with task people have challenges with task switching. It's also a topic that people switching. It's also a topic that people switching. It's also a topic that people will often confuse with cognitive will often confuse with cognitive will often confuse with cognitive flexibility. So, all of us, well, unless it's been So, all of us, well, unless it's been So, all of us, well, unless it's been removed, have an area of our brain removed, have an area of our brain removed, have an area of our brain called the prefrontal cortex. The words called the prefrontal cortex. The words called the prefrontal cortex. The words prefrontal cortex actually refers to a prefrontal cortex actually refers to a prefrontal cortex actually refers to a fairly varied real estate within the fairly varied real estate within the fairly varied real estate within the human brain. So, it's not one area of human brain. So, it's not one area of human brain. So, it's not one area of the human brain. Prefrontal cortex the human brain. Prefrontal cortex the human brain. Prefrontal cortex actually includes a lot of different actually includes a lot of different actually includes a lot of different subdivisions that do different things in subdivisions that do different things in subdivisions that do different things in the context of cognition and directing the context of cognition and directing the context of cognition and directing action, withholding action, these kinds action, withholding action, these kinds action, withholding action, these kinds of things. But, one of the main of things. But, one of the main of things. But, one of the main functions of the prefrontal cortex is functions of the prefrontal cortex is functions of the prefrontal cortex is that, when it's working well, it allows that, when it's working well, it allows that, when it's working well, it allows us to direct our focus and our us to direct our focus and our us to direct our focus and our cognition, our thinking, cognition, our thinking, cognition, our thinking, in a context-dependent way. So, in a context-dependent way. So, in a context-dependent way. So, one of the simplest ways to describe one of the simplest ways to describe one of the simplest ways to describe this is that when you took math in high this is that when you took math in high this is that when you took math in high school, or if you're still taking math, school, or if you're still taking math, school, or if you're still taking math, your brain had to carry out certain your brain had to carry out certain your brain had to carry out certain types of cognitive operations that were types of cognitive operations that were types of cognitive operations that were very different than the types of very different than the types of very different than the types of cognitive operations that you need to cognitive operations that you need to cognitive operations that you need to carry out in your history class or your carry out in your history class or your carry out in your history class or your social studies class. social studies class. social studies class. But, there were some features of all But, there were some features of all But, there were some features of all three of those classes that were the three of those classes that were the three of those classes that were the same in the sense that, presumably, you same in the sense that, presumably, you same in the sense that, presumably, you had to sit in a chair for all of those had to sit in a chair for all of those had to sit in a chair for all of those classes. You followed a certain set of classes. You followed a certain set of classes. You followed a certain set of rules that pertain to all three of those rules that pertain to all three of those rules that pertain to all three of those different classes, even though they're different classes, even though they're different classes, even though they're different subjects. But, then there were different subjects. But, then there were different subjects. But, then there were certain rules that pertain just to certain rules that pertain just to certain rules that pertain just to mathematics. Certain rules that you mathematics. Certain rules that you mathematics. Certain rules that you followed because a particular teacher followed because a particular teacher followed because a particular teacher was strict, not because of the topic was strict, not because of the topic was strict, not because of the topic they were covering, as well as certain they were covering, as well as certain they were covering, as well as certain rules that maybe you did not pay rules that maybe you did not pay rules that maybe you did not pay attention to because a different teacher attention to because a different teacher attention to because a different teacher was a little more lax. For instance, was a little more lax. For instance, was a little more lax. For instance, maybe there was a teacher that let you maybe there was a teacher that let you maybe there was a teacher that let you put your feet up on the chair in front put your feet up on the chair in front put your feet up on the chair in front of you. Maybe another teacher forbid of you. Maybe another teacher forbid of you. Maybe another teacher forbid that at all costs. The point being that at all costs. The point being that at all costs. The point being that your prefrontal cortex is the area of your prefrontal cortex is the area of your prefrontal cortex is the area of your brain that, along with other areas your brain that, along with other areas your brain that, along with other areas of your brain, ensures that you engage of your brain, ensures that you engage of your brain, ensures that you engage in context-specific in context-specific in context-specific behavior, context-specific thinking, and behavior, context-specific thinking, and behavior, context-specific thinking, and context-specific understanding about what you should and understanding about what you should and understanding about what you should and should not do. Now, cognitive should not do. Now, cognitive should not do. Now, cognitive flexibility is similar in the sense that flexibility is similar in the sense that flexibility is similar in the sense that it describes your ability to switch the it describes your ability to switch the it describes your ability to switch the types of cognitive operations, as the types of cognitive operations, as the types of cognitive operations, as the name suggests, name suggests, name suggests, depending on what sorts of things you're depending on what sorts of things you're depending on what sorts of things you're trying to learn or understand. And it's trying to learn or understand. And it's trying to learn or understand. And it's a lot more extensive than that. In fact, a lot more extensive than that. In fact, a lot more extensive than that. In fact, we will probably do an entire episode we will probably do an entire episode we will probably do an entire episode all about both cognitive flexibility and all about both cognitive flexibility and all about both cognitive flexibility and perhaps even a separate episode on task perhaps even a separate episode on task perhaps even a separate episode on task switching. But, task switching is switching. But, task switching is switching. But, task switching is somewhat distinct from cognitive somewhat distinct from cognitive somewhat distinct from cognitive flexibility. First of all, task flexibility. First of all, task flexibility. First of all, task switching requires cognitive switching requires cognitive switching requires cognitive flexibility, but they are not the same flexibility, but they are not the same flexibility, but they are not the same thing. Now, when we talk about task switching, Now, when we talk about task switching, Now, when we talk about task switching, or rather when you see task switching in or rather when you see task switching in or rather when you see task switching in the scientific literature, the scientific literature, the scientific literature, most often it has to do with people most often it has to do with people most often it has to do with people performing one performing one performing one particular type of mental or physical particular type of mental or physical particular type of mental or physical operation. Let us say they are they're maneuvering Let us say they are they're maneuvering Let us say they are they're maneuvering things with their hands or other parts things with their hands or other parts things with their hands or other parts of their body. of their body. of their body. Or they are required to carry out one Or they are required to carry out one Or they are required to carry out one specific type of mental process. specific type of mental process. specific type of mental process. And then they are required either at And then they are required either at And then they are required either at random intervals or at specific random intervals or at specific random intervals or at specific intervals, maybe every 10 minutes or so, intervals, maybe every 10 minutes or so, intervals, maybe every 10 minutes or so, to switch their attention and to do a to switch their attention and to do a to switch their attention and to do a different task entirely. different task entirely. different task entirely. Now, in the laboratory experiment Now, in the laboratory experiment Now, in the laboratory experiment situation, this is most typically been situation, this is most typically been situation, this is most typically been carried out the following way. People carried out the following way. People carried out the following way. People are going to do one cognitive task. are going to do one cognitive task. are going to do one cognitive task. Maybe mathematics or they're going to Maybe mathematics or they're going to Maybe mathematics or they're going to count, for instance, count, for instance, count, for instance, from one up to from one up to from one up to infinity, as high as they can go in a infinity, as high as they can go in a infinity, as high as they can go in a given amount of time, in increments of, given amount of time, in increments of, given amount of time, in increments of, say, seven or increments of seven plus say, seven or increments of seven plus say, seven or increments of seven plus one then seven minus one. So, these can one then seven minus one. So, these can one then seven minus one. So, these can be made increasingly difficult. You get be made increasingly difficult. You get be made increasingly difficult. You get the idea. And then perhaps a tone is the idea. And then perhaps a tone is the idea. And then perhaps a tone is played or they'll get a signal from the played or they'll get a signal from the played or they'll get a signal from the experimenter and then they need to experimenter and then they need to experimenter and then they need to switch their task to doing something switch their task to doing something switch their task to doing something quite different, but also cognitive. quite different, but also cognitive. quite different, but also cognitive. That's the most typical arrangement. Or That's the most typical arrangement. Or That's the most typical arrangement. Or another typical arrangement in a task another typical arrangement in a task another typical arrangement in a task switching experiment is that the switching experiment is that the switching experiment is that the subject, the person in the task subject, the person in the task subject, the person in the task switching experiment, will be asked to switching experiment, will be asked to switching experiment, will be asked to do some sort of physical manipulation of do some sort of physical manipulation of do some sort of physical manipulation of objects, maybe placement of puzzle objects, maybe placement of puzzle objects, maybe placement of puzzle pieces into the correct configuration. pieces into the correct configuration. pieces into the correct configuration. Then, at some designated interval or Then, at some designated interval or Then, at some designated interval or intervals, they will have to switch to a intervals, they will have to switch to a intervals, they will have to switch to a different manual task. Fewer, not zero, different manual task. Fewer, not zero, different manual task. Fewer, not zero, but fewer experiments have examined task but fewer experiments have examined task but fewer experiments have examined task switching between physical switching between physical switching between physical and cognitive tasks. Okay? Now, there and cognitive tasks. Okay? Now, there and cognitive tasks. Okay? Now, there are these kind of outrageous examples are these kind of outrageous examples are these kind of outrageous examples that you can find on the internet. And that you can find on the internet. And that you can find on the internet. And by the way, I don't suggest that anyone by the way, I don't suggest that anyone by the way, I don't suggest that anyone go engage in these examples in real life go engage in these examples in real life go engage in these examples in real life of kind of extreme task switching. One of kind of extreme task switching. One of kind of extreme task switching. One of the most notable ones would be chess of the most notable ones would be chess of the most notable ones would be chess boxing. Believe it or not, this exists boxing. Believe it or not, this exists boxing. Believe it or not, this exists where uh two people will enter a ring where uh two people will enter a ring where uh two people will enter a ring and they will sit down at a table and they will sit down at a table and they will sit down at a table and they will play chess for a given period they will play chess for a given period they will play chess for a given period of time. So, they're entirely focused on of time. So, they're entirely focused on of time. So, they're entirely focused on playing chess. Then a buzzer will go playing chess. Then a buzzer will go playing chess. Then a buzzer will go off, the chess table will be cleared, off, the chess table will be cleared, off, the chess table will be cleared, the chairs will be cleared, and they the chairs will be cleared, and they the chairs will be cleared, and they will be expected to box, literally will be expected to box, literally will be expected to box, literally fight, for a round of, say, a minute to 3 for a round of, say, a minute to 3 for a round of, say, a minute to 3 minutes, and then go back to chess, then minutes, and then go back to chess, then minutes, and then go back to chess, then to boxing, so-called chess boxing. to boxing, so-called chess boxing. to boxing, so-called chess boxing. Again, I'm not suggesting people chess Again, I'm not suggesting people chess Again, I'm not suggesting people chess box, but I know that many people have box, but I know that many people have box, but I know that many people have challenges with task switching. And here challenges with task switching. And here challenges with task switching. And here I can raise my hand and say that I am I can raise my hand and say that I am I can raise my hand and say that I am one such person. I've always had a one such person. I've always had a one such person. I've always had a pretty good ability to drop into deep pretty good ability to drop into deep pretty good ability to drop into deep focus. After a period of time, you know, focus. After a period of time, you know, focus. After a period of time, you know, I, like everybody else, takes a little I, like everybody else, takes a little I, like everybody else, takes a little bit of time to get into a book chapter bit of time to get into a book chapter bit of time to get into a book chapter or to get into a mode of physical or to get into a mode of physical or to get into a mode of physical exercise. But once I'm doing something, exercise. But once I'm doing something, exercise. But once I'm doing something, I tend to be very, very focused on that, I tend to be very, very focused on that, I tend to be very, very focused on that, and I have a much greater challenge in and I have a much greater challenge in and I have a much greater challenge in switching out of that focus mode to switching out of that focus mode to switching out of that focus mode to doing the next thing, which is one of doing the next thing, which is one of doing the next thing, which is one of the reasons why oftentimes I run tardy the reasons why oftentimes I run tardy the reasons why oftentimes I run tardy because I'm still mentally thinking because I'm still mentally thinking because I'm still mentally thinking about or physically engaged in the thing about or physically engaged in the thing about or physically engaged in the thing that I was doing before. that I was doing before. that I was doing before. Uh this is something I'm constantly Uh this is something I'm constantly Uh this is something I'm constantly working on. And as a consequence, I've working on. And as a consequence, I've working on. And as a consequence, I've had to seek out and implement certain had to seek out and implement certain had to seek out and implement certain tools to improve my ability to task tools to improve my ability to task tools to improve my ability to task switch. So, I'm going to share a few of switch. So, I'm going to share a few of switch. So, I'm going to share a few of those tools with you now because I know those tools with you now because I know those tools with you now because I know a number of people probably struggle a number of people probably struggle a number of people probably struggle with the same thing. with the same thing. with the same thing. And as I mentioned earlier, I'm also going as I mentioned earlier, I'm also going as I mentioned earlier, I'm also going to do a full-length episode about task to do a full-length episode about task to do a full-length episode about task switching, both the underlying switching, both the underlying switching, both the underlying mechanisms of task switching, as well as mechanisms of task switching, as well as mechanisms of task switching, as well as a more extensive list of tools related a more extensive list of tools related a more extensive list of tools related to task switching as a full-length to task switching as a full-length to task switching as a full-length Huberman Lab podcast episode. So, how Huberman Lab podcast episode. So, how Huberman Lab podcast episode. So, how can we get better at task switching? can we get better at task switching? can we get better at task switching? Well, short of having somebody scruff Well, short of having somebody scruff Well, short of having somebody scruff you by the neck and force you to stop you by the neck and force you to stop you by the neck and force you to stop whatever activity you're doing and whatever activity you're doing and whatever activity you're doing and engage in the next activity that you're engage in the next activity that you're engage in the next activity that you're doing, one of the best things that we doing, one of the best things that we doing, one of the best things that we can do to support our ability to task can do to support our ability to task can do to support our ability to task switch that's nicely supported both at switch that's nicely supported both at switch that's nicely supported both at the mechanistic level and at the mechanistic level and at the mechanistic level and at the practical level within the published practical level within the published practical level within the published literature is to introduce short transition gaps is to introduce short transition gaps is to introduce short transition gaps between the activities that we're trying between the activities that we're trying between the activities that we're trying to switch between. This is something to switch between. This is something to switch between. This is something that in my opinion has not been that in my opinion has not been that in my opinion has not been discussed enough. In fact, when was the discussed enough. In fact, when was the discussed enough. In fact, when was the last time you heard about the last time you heard about the last time you heard about the requirement for introducing gaps between requirement for introducing gaps between requirement for introducing gaps between tasks if you want to switch between them tasks if you want to switch between them tasks if you want to switch between them more efficiently? And yet, as a more efficiently? And yet, as a more efficiently? And yet, as a consequence of this not being discussed consequence of this not being discussed consequence of this not being discussed very often, I think a lot of people have very often, I think a lot of people have very often, I think a lot of people have placed an undue burden on themselves. placed an undue burden on themselves. placed an undue burden on themselves. For instance, a lot of people think that For instance, a lot of people think that For instance, a lot of people think that when you sit down with a book and you're when you sit down with a book and you're when you sit down with a book and you're going to read that you should be able to going to read that you should be able to going to read that you should be able to immediately focus on the material that you're focus on the material that you're focus on the material that you're reading and not have your mind flitting reading and not have your mind flitting reading and not have your mind flitting about. During the first five, maybe even about. During the first five, maybe even about. During the first five, maybe even 10 minutes of reading a book chapter, 10 minutes of reading a book chapter, 10 minutes of reading a book chapter, unless you are absolutely unless you are absolutely unless you are absolutely enthralled from the first word or you enthralled from the first word or you enthralled from the first word or you are intensely curious are intensely curious are intensely curious what the material in that book chapter what the material in that book chapter what the material in that book chapter is, right? Maybe that book chapter is is, right? Maybe that book chapter is is, right? Maybe that book chapter is about you and what's going to happen to about you and what's going to happen to about you and what's going to happen to you next in your life. Maybe the news you next in your life. Maybe the news you next in your life. Maybe the news article is about something that you care article is about something that you care article is about something that you care oh so much about, but unless oh so much about, but unless oh so much about, but unless it's one of those specific instances it's one of those specific instances it's one of those specific instances it's going to be about five or 10 it's going to be about five or 10 it's going to be about five or 10 minutes before the neural circuits in minutes before the neural circuits in minutes before the neural circuits in your brain that are required to your brain that are required to your brain that are required to understand and digest and commit that understand and digest and commit that understand and digest and commit that material to memory are going to come material to memory are going to come material to memory are going to come online at the levels of activity that online at the levels of activity that online at the levels of activity that are going to be required for you to are going to be required for you to are going to be required for you to experience that as intense focus or even experience that as intense focus or even experience that as intense focus or even as mild focus because the activity of as mild focus because the activity of as mild focus because the activity of the brain is always going to be in a the brain is always going to be in a the brain is always going to be in a push-pull. This is extremely important push-pull. This is extremely important push-pull. This is extremely important for understanding task switching. When for understanding task switching. When for understanding task switching. When you go from one task, and maybe the task you go from one task, and maybe the task you go from one task, and maybe the task was simply to walk over to where the was simply to walk over to where the was simply to walk over to where the book is located, to focusing on the book is located, to focusing on the book is located, to focusing on the material within that book, you have to material within that book, you have to material within that book, you have to both engage activity within certain both engage activity within certain both engage activity within certain neural circuits, and you need to neural circuits, and you need to neural circuits, and you need to disengage the activity of other neural disengage the activity of other neural disengage the activity of other neural circuits. Now, sometimes this is circuits. Now, sometimes this is circuits. Now, sometimes this is referred to as inhibition of certain referred to as inhibition of certain referred to as inhibition of certain neural circuits, other times it's just neural circuits, other times it's just neural circuits, other times it's just going to be a dissipation of activity of going to be a dissipation of activity of going to be a dissipation of activity of those neural circuits. They're just those neural circuits. They're just those neural circuits. They're just going to quiet down, like a dimming of going to quiet down, like a dimming of going to quiet down, like a dimming of the lights in a particular room, while the lights in a particular room, while the lights in a particular room, while the activity of other neural circuits the activity of other neural circuits the activity of other neural circuits increases. Okay, so the first thing that increases. Okay, so the first thing that increases. Okay, so the first thing that you really need to understand if you really need to understand if you really need to understand if you want to get better at task switching is want to get better at task switching is want to get better at task switching is that you cannot and you should not that you cannot and you should not that you cannot and you should not expect yourself to immediately drop into expect yourself to immediately drop into expect yourself to immediately drop into a narrow trench of focus or a narrow a narrow trench of focus or a narrow a narrow trench of focus or a narrow trench of ability for anything that trench of ability for anything that trench of ability for anything that you're not already extremely skilled at you're not already extremely skilled at you're not already extremely skilled at or extremely interested in knowing. or extremely interested in knowing. or extremely interested in knowing. Okay? One of the reasons why this is Okay? One of the reasons why this is Okay? One of the reasons why this is often overlooked is that, often overlooked is that, often overlooked is that, for instance, if we receive a text for instance, if we receive a text for instance, if we receive a text message from somebody and we are very message from somebody and we are very message from somebody and we are very interested in what's contained in that interested in what's contained in that interested in what's contained in that text message, maybe even eagerly text message, maybe even eagerly text message, maybe even eagerly anticipating the dot dot, you know, anticipating the dot dot, you know, anticipating the dot dot, you know, in that little window where the text in that little window where the text in that little window where the text message is going to arrive, like here it message is going to arrive, like here it message is going to arrive, like here it comes, here it comes, here it comes. comes, here it comes, here it comes. comes, here it comes, here it comes. It's an example of where you are able to an example of where you are able to an example of where you are able to immediately pay attention and absorb immediately pay attention and absorb immediately pay attention and absorb information. For instance, if you're information. For instance, if you're information. For instance, if you're trying to meet somebody in a big city trying to meet somebody in a big city trying to meet somebody in a big city and you need to know exactly where to and you need to know exactly where to and you need to know exactly where to meet them, and you've arrived at the meet them, and you've arrived at the meet them, and you've arrived at the place where you thought you need to be, place where you thought you need to be, place where you thought you need to be, and then you can't find them, and you're and then you can't find them, and you're and then you can't find them, and you're waiting, where are you? Where waiting, where are you? Where waiting, where are you? Where are you? And, you know, you're going to are you? And, you know, you're going to are you? And, you know, you're going to commit that information to memory, and commit that information to memory, and commit that information to memory, and you're going to act on it. But, when you you're going to act on it. But, when you you're going to act on it. But, when you sit down to read a book of unknown sit down to read a book of unknown sit down to read a book of unknown content or where you have just a general content or where you have just a general content or where you have just a general sense of what the content is, or when sense of what the content is, or when sense of what the content is, or when you sit down to do something like work you sit down to do something like work you sit down to do something like work on a spreadsheet or your taxes or engage on a spreadsheet or your taxes or engage on a spreadsheet or your taxes or engage in a conversation with somebody, expect in a conversation with somebody, expect in a conversation with somebody, expect a 5-to-10-minute transition period. I a 5-to-10-minute transition period. I a 5-to-10-minute transition period. I can't emphasize this enough because I can't emphasize this enough because I can't emphasize this enough because I think a lot of people think a lot of people think a lot of people mistakenly think that they have issues mistakenly think that they have issues mistakenly think that they have issues with attention, and perhaps indeed they with attention, and perhaps indeed they with attention, and perhaps indeed they have clinically diagnosable attention have clinically diagnosable attention have clinically diagnosable attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or some other hyperactivity disorder or some other hyperactivity disorder or some other form of attention deficit disorder. form of attention deficit disorder. form of attention deficit disorder. Certainly can't rule that out based on Certainly can't rule that out based on Certainly can't rule that out based on this conversation alone, but a lot of this conversation alone, but a lot of this conversation alone, but a lot of people place this unfair burden on people place this unfair burden on people place this unfair burden on themselves to immediately be able to themselves to immediately be able to themselves to immediately be able to focus on a given task. And this is also focus on a given task. And this is also focus on a given task. And this is also true for physical tasks, right? If you true for physical tasks, right? If you true for physical tasks, right? If you go to go to go to the gym to work out or you're heading the gym to work out or you're heading the gym to work out or you're heading out on a run or cycling expedition, out on a run or cycling expedition, out on a run or cycling expedition, the idea that you would immediately be the idea that you would immediately be the idea that you would immediately be able to cycle at your peak performance able to cycle at your peak performance able to cycle at your peak performance or that you could perform sets and reps or that you could perform sets and reps or that you could perform sets and reps in the gym and as best as you possibly in the gym and as best as you possibly in the gym and as best as you possibly could without any warm-up, without any could without any warm-up, without any could without any warm-up, without any transition period, that you could forget transition period, that you could forget transition period, that you could forget about the difficult or maybe even great about the difficult or maybe even great about the difficult or maybe even great conversation that you were having on the conversation that you were having on the conversation that you were having on the way in, way in, way in, or that you could forget about other or that you could forget about other or that you could forget about other activities that you need to do in the activities that you need to do in the activities that you need to do in the rest of your day. I mean, that's just rest of your day. I mean, that's just rest of your day. I mean, that's just completely unfair and it doesn't match completely unfair and it doesn't match completely unfair and it doesn't match at all the way that your neural circuits at all the way that your neural circuits at all the way that your neural circuits work. So, you really need to match your work. So, you really need to match your work. So, you really need to match your expectation of your ability to focus on expectation of your ability to focus on expectation of your ability to focus on and perform a given task, whether or not and perform a given task, whether or not and perform a given task, whether or not it's cognitive or physical, to the it's cognitive or physical, to the it's cognitive or physical, to the actual underlying Okay, so that's the actual underlying Okay, so that's the actual underlying Okay, so that's the first point. The second point is that first point. The second point is that first point. The second point is that we know that if you want to switch from we know that if you want to switch from we know that if you want to switch from one task to another task, one task to another task, one task to another task, that you are making it more difficult to that you are making it more difficult to that you are making it more difficult to drop into full task engagement or rather drop into full task engagement or rather drop into full task engagement or rather engagement with engagement with engagement with task B task B task B following task A, if you try and go following task A, if you try and go following task A, if you try and go immediately from task A to task B. immediately from task A to task B. immediately from task A to task B. That even the introduction, I find this That even the introduction, I find this That even the introduction, I find this so cool, even the introduction of an so cool, even the introduction of an so cool, even the introduction of an arbitrary but very short transition arbitrary but very short transition arbitrary but very short transition period, I'll say 15 seconds, where you period, I'll say 15 seconds, where you period, I'll say 15 seconds, where you know that you're introducing 15 seconds know that you're introducing 15 seconds know that you're introducing 15 seconds of transition and you designate it as of transition and you designate it as of transition and you designate it as transition, will allow you to engage in transition, will allow you to engage in transition, will allow you to engage in a more efficient and more complete level a more efficient and more complete level a more efficient and more complete level of task execution of task execution of task execution on task B if you introduce even a brief on task B if you introduce even a brief on task B if you introduce even a brief transition period. transition period. transition period. Now, this I find fascinating because what this I find fascinating because what this I find fascinating because what this means is that there are top-down this means is that there are top-down this means is that there are top-down influences. There are literally things influences. There are literally things influences. There are literally things that we can tell ourselves based on an that we can tell ourselves based on an that we can tell ourselves based on an understanding of the underlying understanding of the underlying understanding of the underlying mechanisms that allow us to task switch mechanisms that allow us to task switch mechanisms that allow us to task switch better. And this certainly doesn't better. And this certainly doesn't better. And this certainly doesn't involve taking any kind of prescription involve taking any kind of prescription involve taking any kind of prescription drug or supplement or doing anything drug or supplement or doing anything drug or supplement or doing anything differently except as you go from differently except as you go from differently except as you go from task A to task B, task A to task B, task A to task B, knowing and designating that a knowing and designating that a knowing and designating that a transition period, even a very brief transition period, even a very brief transition period, even a very brief one, where you are not trying to perform task where you are not trying to perform task where you are not trying to perform task B, and that you designated this as a B, and that you designated this as a B, and that you designated this as a transition period. I'm not trying to transition period. I'm not trying to transition period. I'm not trying to focus on the next thing that I need to focus on the next thing that I need to focus on the next thing that I need to do. I might focus on it inadvertently, do. I might focus on it inadvertently, do. I might focus on it inadvertently, but I'm not but I'm not but I'm not deliberately trying to focus on it. deliberately trying to focus on it. deliberately trying to focus on it. Rather, I'm going to think about what I Rather, I'm going to think about what I Rather, I'm going to think about what I just did and the fact that I'm no longer just did and the fact that I'm no longer just did and the fact that I'm no longer doing that, kind of leaving it like a doing that, kind of leaving it like a doing that, kind of leaving it like a fog behind. All right, you're trying to fog behind. All right, you're trying to fog behind. All right, you're trying to move from this deep trench of attention, move from this deep trench of attention, move from this deep trench of attention, hopefully, on task A, or maybe you hopefully, on task A, or maybe you hopefully, on task A, or maybe you didn't achieve a deep trench of didn't achieve a deep trench of didn't achieve a deep trench of attention. And you're now done with task A, and And you're now done with task A, and And you're now done with task A, and you're not placing this unfair you're not placing this unfair you're not placing this unfair expectation on your neural circuits to expectation on your neural circuits to expectation on your neural circuits to just flip to task B, just flip to task B, just flip to task B, and you're also acknowledging that task and you're also acknowledging that task and you're also acknowledging that task B is going to take 5 to 10 minutes to B is going to take 5 to 10 minutes to B is going to take 5 to 10 minutes to drop into fully. We already talked about drop into fully. We already talked about drop into fully. We already talked about that, but you're going to shorten that 5 that, but you're going to shorten that 5 that, but you're going to shorten that 5 to 10 minutes by deliberately to 10 minutes by deliberately to 10 minutes by deliberately introducing a transition period. And introducing a transition period. And introducing a transition period. And what comes in that transition period and what comes in that transition period and what comes in that transition period and its duration is important. So, first its duration is important. So, first its duration is important. So, first let's deal with the duration. let's deal with the duration. let's deal with the duration. How long should the transition period How long should the transition period How long should the transition period be? Well, that is going to scale be? Well, that is going to scale be? Well, that is going to scale directly with how long you were in a directly with how long you were in a directly with how long you were in a deep trench of focus for task A. But deep trench of focus for task A. But deep trench of focus for task A. But let's assume task A was something that let's assume task A was something that let's assume task A was something that was kind of light for you. Maybe you're was kind of light for you. Maybe you're was kind of light for you. Maybe you're just handling some email, maybe you're just handling some email, maybe you're just handling some email, maybe you're talking to a coworker, maybe you were at talking to a coworker, maybe you were at talking to a coworker, maybe you were at a board meeting and it was kind of a board meeting and it was kind of a board meeting and it was kind of light, you know, the stuff was just light, you know, the stuff was just light, you know, the stuff was just okay, that you're used to this stuff. okay, that you're used to this stuff. okay, that you're used to this stuff. This is stuff that you do all the time. This is stuff that you do all the time. This is stuff that you do all the time. Now you're headed back to your desk or Now you're headed back to your desk or Now you're headed back to your desk or you're headed to your next class, or you're headed to your next class, or you're headed to your next class, or perhaps you did work out that morning perhaps you did work out that morning perhaps you did work out that morning and now you're going to head to and now you're going to head to and now you're going to head to your workplace of work, or maybe you're your workplace of work, or maybe you're your workplace of work, or maybe you're leaving work and you're going to engage leaving work and you're going to engage leaving work and you're going to engage with family, and with family, and with family, and you know you need to switch all these you know you need to switch all these you know you need to switch all these cognitive operations. You need to dump cognitive operations. You need to dump cognitive operations. You need to dump the stuff that you were just doing the stuff that you were just doing the stuff that you were just doing cognitively and you now need to do a cognitively and you now need to do a cognitively and you now need to do a bunch of other things. Context is bunch of other things. Context is bunch of other things. Context is switching. Task is switching. Well, just ask Task is switching. Well, just ask Task is switching. Well, just ask yourself how deeply was I entrenched in that how deeply was I entrenched in that how deeply was I entrenched in that other activity? Was my mind flitting to other activity? Was my mind flitting to other activity? Was my mind flitting to other things or if I was in a deep other things or if I was in a deep other things or if I was in a deep trench of trench of trench of attention for that given thing? Well, attention for that given thing? Well, attention for that given thing? Well, then you should give yourself slightly then you should give yourself slightly then you should give yourself slightly longer for this transition period. Maybe longer for this transition period. Maybe longer for this transition period. Maybe 5 or even 10 minutes if you have that 5 or even 10 minutes if you have that 5 or even 10 minutes if you have that time. But even if you give yourself a short as But even if you give yourself a short as But even if you give yourself a short as 60 to 90 seconds of transition and you 60 to 90 seconds of transition and you 60 to 90 seconds of transition and you just designate, excuse me, as just designate, excuse me, as just designate, excuse me, as transition, you're going to benefit in transition, you're going to benefit in transition, you're going to benefit in terms of your ability to do the next terms of your ability to do the next terms of your ability to do the next task. So, to be very clear, if you were task. So, to be very clear, if you were task. So, to be very clear, if you were in kind of a light task or something in kind of a light task or something in kind of a light task or something that didn't have much cognitive demand, that didn't have much cognitive demand, that didn't have much cognitive demand, well, then the transition period can be well, then the transition period can be well, then the transition period can be fairly short. It can be just a couple of fairly short. It can be just a couple of fairly short. It can be just a couple of minutes. Rather, if you were in a deep trench of Rather, if you were in a deep trench of Rather, if you were in a deep trench of attention, you're really engaged in that attention, you're really engaged in that attention, you're really engaged in that first task, first task, first task, I suggest giving yourself a couple of I suggest giving yourself a couple of I suggest giving yourself a couple of minutes or more, maybe as much as 5 to minutes or more, maybe as much as 5 to minutes or more, maybe as much as 5 to 10 minutes. But you might not have that 10 minutes. But you might not have that 10 minutes. But you might not have that much time, in which case give yourself much time, in which case give yourself much time, in which case give yourself any kind of transition, even if it's 10 any kind of transition, even if it's 10 any kind of transition, even if it's 10 seconds. Right? I certainly have had seconds. Right? I certainly have had seconds. Right? I certainly have had times in my life, in particular when I times in my life, in particular when I times in my life, in particular when I was a new assistant professor, meaning was a new assistant professor, meaning was a new assistant professor, meaning before I got tenure, where I remember before I got tenure, where I remember before I got tenure, where I remember sitting down to work on a grant, I'd get sitting down to work on a grant, I'd get sitting down to work on a grant, I'd get two lines out, someone would knock on two lines out, someone would knock on two lines out, someone would knock on the door. Hey, where are the whatever the door. Hey, where are the whatever the door. Hey, where are the whatever the 30 mil syringes? Where do we keep the 30 mil syringes? Where do we keep the 30 mil syringes? Where do we keep the buffers? Or you know, where's the buffers? Or you know, where's the buffers? Or you know, where's the you know, did we get this thing in the you know, did we get this thing in the you know, did we get this thing in the Okay, and then I'd have to shift my Okay, and then I'd have to shift my Okay, and then I'd have to shift my attention, I'd go back to writing and attention, I'd go back to writing and attention, I'd go back to writing and then I'd be, you know, distracted by then I'd be, you know, distracted by then I'd be, you know, distracted by something else again, which is not to something else again, which is not to something else again, which is not to say that people were distracting me say that people were distracting me say that people were distracting me unfairly. It was simply the case that at unfairly. It was simply the case that at unfairly. It was simply the case that at that time my life required being that time my life required being that time my life required being involved in a lot more things than it involved in a lot more things than it involved in a lot more things than it did as my career progressed, at least in did as my career progressed, at least in did as my career progressed, at least in the short term. the short term. the short term. So, the point being that if you are deeply the point being that if you are deeply the point being that if you are deeply engaged in an activity, give yourself a engaged in an activity, give yourself a engaged in an activity, give yourself a little bit longer in the transition little bit longer in the transition little bit longer in the transition period between them. If you are sort of period between them. If you are sort of period between them. If you are sort of superficially involved in activity, you superficially involved in activity, you superficially involved in activity, you need less of a transition period, but need less of a transition period, but need less of a transition period, but you need a transition period. What you need a transition period. What you need a transition period. What should come during that transition should come during that transition should come during that transition period? Well, period? Well, period? Well, the most important thing to arrive in the most important thing to arrive in the most important thing to arrive in that transition period is a relative that transition period is a relative that transition period is a relative lack of attention to anything new. This lack of attention to anything new. This lack of attention to anything new. This is what's so destructive about the is what's so destructive about the is what's so destructive about the phone, and keep in mind I am not one of phone, and keep in mind I am not one of phone, and keep in mind I am not one of these people that thinks that these people that thinks that these people that thinks that smartphones are terrible. In fact, I use smartphones are terrible. In fact, I use smartphones are terrible. In fact, I use mine plural very often all day plural very often all day plural very often all day often not necessarily during deep cognitive not necessarily during deep cognitive not necessarily during deep cognitive focus, but in between those bouts of focus, but in between those bouts of focus, but in between those bouts of focus I have to text message people. I focus I have to text message people. I focus I have to text message people. I do work on there. I'm on social media. do work on there. I'm on social media. do work on there. I'm on social media. So, certainly not demonizing the So, certainly not demonizing the So, certainly not demonizing the smartphone. However, smartphone. However, smartphone. However, if you finish a given activity, whether if you finish a given activity, whether if you finish a given activity, whether or not it's cognitive or physical or not it's cognitive or physical or not it's cognitive or physical activity, and you are headed to activity, and you are headed to activity, and you are headed to something else that requires you do a something else that requires you do a something else that requires you do a new task, and that task requires new task, and that task requires new task, and that task requires significant amounts of attention and significant amounts of attention and significant amounts of attention and focus, well, then you would do very well to well, then you would do very well to well, then you would do very well to allow yourself a period of anywhere from allow yourself a period of anywhere from allow yourself a period of anywhere from 2 minutes to maybe as long as 10 2 minutes to maybe as long as 10 2 minutes to maybe as long as 10 minutes. I know this is going to be very minutes. I know this is going to be very minutes. I know this is going to be very hard for people, but 2 minutes to as hard for people, but 2 minutes to as hard for people, but 2 minutes to as long as 10 minutes where you are not long as 10 minutes where you are not long as 10 minutes where you are not looking at your phone. You're not looking at your phone. You're not looking at your phone. You're not texting. You're not on social media. You're not You're not on social media. You're not You're not on social media. You're not foraging for anything. In fact, you're foraging for anything. In fact, you're foraging for anything. In fact, you're trying to limit the total amount of trying to limit the total amount of trying to limit the total amount of information that you're bringing into information that you're bringing into information that you're bringing into your nervous system. Now, you don't have your nervous system. Now, you don't have your nervous system. Now, you don't have to walk around with eyes closed and try to walk around with eyes closed and try to walk around with eyes closed and try not hear and not see. Let's be not hear and not see. Let's be not hear and not see. Let's be practical, folks. That's impossible to practical, folks. That's impossible to practical, folks. That's impossible to do anyway. Can't shut down your brain do anyway. Can't shut down your brain do anyway. Can't shut down your brain while awake. while awake. while awake. You can go into states of deeper You can go into states of deeper You can go into states of deeper relaxation. There's non-sleep deep rest, which we'll There's non-sleep deep rest, which we'll There's non-sleep deep rest, which we'll talk about in a little bit, but talk about in a little bit, but talk about in a little bit, but you can't shut off your brain you can't shut off your brain you can't shut off your brain deliberately. Okay, not in any healthy deliberately. Okay, not in any healthy deliberately. Okay, not in any healthy way, that is. way, that is. way, that is. But, by introducing these transition But, by introducing these transition But, by introducing these transition zones or transition periods, as we'll zones or transition periods, as we'll zones or transition periods, as we'll call them, of 2 to 10 minutes between call them, of 2 to 10 minutes between call them, of 2 to 10 minutes between different tasks, and making sure that different tasks, and making sure that different tasks, and making sure that within those transition periods within those transition periods within those transition periods you are not bringing in new information. you are not bringing in new information. you are not bringing in new information. Again, another context, and what Again, another context, and what Again, another context, and what are you really doing? Well, you're are you really doing? Well, you're are you really doing? Well, you're ensuring that you're not going from task ensuring that you're not going from task ensuring that you're not going from task A to task B to task C, right? What we're A to task B to task C, right? What we're A to task B to task C, right? What we're talking about here is trying to limit talking about here is trying to limit talking about here is trying to limit your task switching between task A and your task switching between task A and your task switching between task A and task B, and not introducing another task B, and not introducing another task B, and not introducing another task in between. And you might think that in between. And you might think that in between. And you might think that looking at your phone looking at your phone looking at your phone is not a task, right? It's so easy. It's is not a task, right? It's so easy. It's is not a task, right? It's so easy. It's so reflexive. But it is. It's bringing so reflexive. But it is. It's bringing so reflexive. But it is. It's bringing in a lot of new context, in a lot of new context, in a lot of new context, in particular pictures and movies, which in particular pictures and movies, which in particular pictures and movies, which are tremendous stimulus for the nervous are tremendous stimulus for the nervous are tremendous stimulus for the nervous system and anchoring your attention. system and anchoring your attention. system and anchoring your attention. It's bringing in new ideas, new thoughts It's bringing in new ideas, new thoughts It's bringing in new ideas, new thoughts that no matter how hard you try are that no matter how hard you try are that no matter how hard you try are going to going to going to intrude into your ability to perform intrude into your ability to perform intrude into your ability to perform task B. task B. task B. So, when people say, "How do I get So, when people say, "How do I get So, when people say, "How do I get better at task switching?" better at task switching?" better at task switching?" I immediately want to say, "Please don't I immediately want to say, "Please don't I immediately want to say, "Please don't introduce yet more tasks." Right? introduce yet more tasks." Right? introduce yet more tasks." Right? Switching from one task to another is Switching from one task to another is Switching from one task to another is hard enough already. Don't introduce hard enough already. Don't introduce hard enough already. Don't introduce another task in between. Now, some of another task in between. Now, some of another task in between. Now, some of you might take this to mean that you might take this to mean that you might take this to mean that you shouldn't have a conversation with a shouldn't have a conversation with a shouldn't have a conversation with a co-worker after a meeting while walking co-worker after a meeting while walking co-worker after a meeting while walking down the hall. I'm not saying that. I down the hall. I'm not saying that. I down the hall. I'm not saying that. I still encourage people to be social. I still encourage people to be social. I still encourage people to be social. I encourage people to engage in workplace encourage people to engage in workplace encourage people to engage in workplace environments. However, I will say, after environments. However, I will say, after environments. However, I will say, after many years of working in laboratories many years of working in laboratories many years of working in laboratories that at times were quite large, and you that at times were quite large, and you that at times were quite large, and you walk into the lab and there are a lot of walk into the lab and there are a lot of walk into the lab and there are a lot of different things going on. One of the different things going on. One of the different things going on. One of the things that you learn how to do if things that you learn how to do if things that you learn how to do if you're going to get good at your craft is to going to get good at your craft is to going to get good at your craft is to not pay attention to what's going on not pay attention to what's going on not pay attention to what's going on with everyone crowded around a computer with everyone crowded around a computer with everyone crowded around a computer looking at you like who's winning at the looking at you like who's winning at the looking at you like who's winning at the World Cup. I'm not trying to insult World Cup. I'm not trying to insult World Cup. I'm not trying to insult soccer players here. I enjoy soccer, soccer players here. I enjoy soccer, soccer players here. I enjoy soccer, both playing it and observing it, but both playing it and observing it, but both playing it and observing it, but one has to sort of scruff themselves a one has to sort of scruff themselves a one has to sort of scruff themselves a little bit in trying to limit their little bit in trying to limit their little bit in trying to limit their attention to a number of different attention to a number of different attention to a number of different things in the environment and really go things in the environment and really go things in the environment and really go from task A to task B in a really from task A to task B in a really from task A to task B in a really dedicated way. Short lists benefit dedicated way. Short lists benefit dedicated way. Short lists benefit certain people. I know a lot of people certain people. I know a lot of people certain people. I know a lot of people are list makers out there. They like to, are list makers out there. They like to, are list makers out there. They like to, you know, put two or three things or you know, put two or three things or you know, put two or three things or maybe 20 things that they're going to maybe 20 things that they're going to maybe 20 things that they're going to accomplish each day. One of the best accomplish each day. One of the best accomplish each day. One of the best tools that I ever learned, both for sake tools that I ever learned, both for sake tools that I ever learned, both for sake of task switching, but also for sake of task switching, but also for sake of task switching, but also for sake of just getting things done on a consistent just getting things done on a consistent just getting things done on a consistent basis, I picked up while I was a master basis, I picked up while I was a master basis, I picked up while I was a master student at Berkeley. A very accomplished student at Berkeley. A very accomplished student at Berkeley. A very accomplished professor at that time told me that he professor at that time told me that he professor at that time told me that he writes down every day three things that writes down every day three things that writes down every day three things that he's going to accomplish and only three he's going to accomplish and only three he's going to accomplish and only three things. Never more than three. Now, he things. Never more than three. Now, he things. Never more than three. Now, he also included other activities. In fact, also included other activities. In fact, also included other activities. In fact, he was um quite active in his physical he was um quite active in his physical he was um quite active in his physical life. So, he rode his bike to campus. He life. So, he rode his bike to campus. He life. So, he rode his bike to campus. He also was a runner. He also went to the also was a runner. He also went to the also was a runner. He also went to the gym. He did not include those on his gym. He did not include those on his gym. He did not include those on his list of three things, but he would write list of three things, but he would write list of three things, but he would write down no more than three critical things down no more than three critical things down no more than three critical things to do each day. So, he had three to do each day. So, he had three to do each day. So, he had three critical tasks. So, I've employed that critical tasks. So, I've employed that critical tasks. So, I've employed that method as well. I'll write down one method as well. I'll write down one method as well. I'll write down one sometimes two, most often three, but if sometimes two, most often three, but if sometimes two, most often three, but if I can, just one or two tasks that I need I can, just one or two tasks that I need I can, just one or two tasks that I need to complete each day. And everything to complete each day. And everything to complete each day. And everything else is considered part of the let's else is considered part of the let's else is considered part of the let's just say automaticity function of my just say automaticity function of my just say automaticity function of my day. Things that I already know how I day. Things that I already know how I day. Things that I already know how I do, they don't require a ton of do, they don't require a ton of do, they don't require a ton of cognitive focus, but I limit the things cognitive focus, but I limit the things cognitive focus, but I limit the things that require a lot of cognitive focus to that require a lot of cognitive focus to that require a lot of cognitive focus to three things per day. However, those three things per day. However, those three things per day. However, those three things per day can take up many, three things per day can take up many, three things per day can take up many, many hours each and certainly on the many hours each and certainly on the many hours each and certainly on the whole. Okay, now there are whole. Okay, now there are whole. Okay, now there are additional things that one can do to additional things that one can do to additional things that one can do to improve your ability to task switch. And improve your ability to task switch. And improve your ability to task switch. And one of the things that I found one of the things that I found one of the things that I found particularly beneficial is not a particularly beneficial is not a particularly beneficial is not a meditation, but rather is a perceptual meditation, but rather is a perceptual meditation, but rather is a perceptual exercise. And this is a perceptual exercise. And this is a perceptual exercise. And this is a perceptual exercise that I learned about when I was exercise that I learned about when I was exercise that I learned about when I was a graduate student, but in a totally a graduate student, but in a totally a graduate student, but in a totally different context. And it has to do with different context. And it has to do with different context. And it has to do with the way that your visual system the way that your visual system the way that your visual system and the parts of your brain that parse and the parts of your brain that parse and the parts of your brain that parse time are related to one another and influence are related to one another and influence are related to one another and influence one another. Now, the reason this tool one another. Now, the reason this tool one another. Now, the reason this tool makes sense for improving your ability makes sense for improving your ability makes sense for improving your ability to task switch is because to task switch is because to task switch is because turns out that where you focus your turns out that where you focus your turns out that where you focus your visual attention strongly influences the visual attention strongly influences the visual attention strongly influences the way that your brain parses time. way that your brain parses time. way that your brain parses time. So, I'll describe the tool first and So, I'll describe the tool first and So, I'll describe the tool first and then I'll get a little bit into the then I'll get a little bit into the then I'll get a little bit into the underlying mechanisms. But again, I'll underlying mechanisms. But again, I'll underlying mechanisms. But again, I'll get deep into the underlying mechanisms get deep into the underlying mechanisms get deep into the underlying mechanisms as well as the tool as well as well as the tool as well as well as the tool as well as additional tools in the future episode additional tools in the future episode additional tools in the future episode about task switching on the Huberman Lab about task switching on the Huberman Lab about task switching on the Huberman Lab podcast. So, if you were to, for instance, close your if you were to, for instance, close your if you were to, for instance, close your eyes and not look at anything in your and not look at anything in your and not look at anything in your external environment external environment external environment and just concentrate, for instance, on and just concentrate, for instance, on and just concentrate, for instance, on your breathing or the feeling on the your breathing or the feeling on the your breathing or the feeling on the surface of your skin. I know this is surface of your skin. I know this is surface of your skin. I know this is starting to sound like meditation, but starting to sound like meditation, but starting to sound like meditation, but trust me, it's not meditation. trust me, it's not meditation. trust me, it's not meditation. Your perception of time, that is how Your perception of time, that is how Your perception of time, that is how finely you are slicing time finely you are slicing time finely you are slicing time would be distinctly different would be distinctly different would be distinctly different than if you were to open your eyes and than if you were to open your eyes and than if you were to open your eyes and focus on a faraway location, say way off focus on a faraway location, say way off focus on a faraway location, say way off in the horizon in the horizon in the horizon and not focus on your bodily sensations. and not focus on your bodily sensations. and not focus on your bodily sensations. Similarly, if you were to focus your Similarly, if you were to focus your Similarly, if you were to focus your attention on some intermediate location, attention on some intermediate location, attention on some intermediate location, maybe let's say 20 ft away maybe let's say 20 ft away maybe let's say 20 ft away and simultaneously focus on your and simultaneously focus on your and simultaneously focus on your internal bodily sensations or the internal bodily sensations or the internal bodily sensations or the surface of your skin surface of your skin surface of your skin your perception of time, how quickly your perception of time, how quickly your perception of time, how quickly time was passing time was passing time was passing would also be different than if you would also be different than if you would also be different than if you closed your eyes or if you were looking closed your eyes or if you were looking closed your eyes or if you were looking at some distant location. So, the at some distant location. So, the at some distant location. So, the perceptual tool for task switching is a perceptual tool for task switching is a perceptual tool for task switching is a very simple one and it's one that very simple one and it's one that very simple one and it's one that frankly I do every morning and have for frankly I do every morning and have for frankly I do every morning and have for many years now many years now many years now and at least for me has really enhanced and at least for me has really enhanced and at least for me has really enhanced my ability to task switch. my ability to task switch. my ability to task switch. And that is And that is And that is to just take a couple of minutes and to just take a couple of minutes and to just take a couple of minutes and this really only takes about two or this really only takes about two or this really only takes about two or three minutes and typically what I will three minutes and typically what I will three minutes and typically what I will do is I'll start by closing my eyes. Oh, do is I'll start by closing my eyes. Oh, do is I'll start by closing my eyes. Oh, I should mention I typically do this in I should mention I typically do this in I should mention I typically do this in an environment where ideally I can see an environment where ideally I can see an environment where ideally I can see off into the distance, perhaps from a off into the distance, perhaps from a off into the distance, perhaps from a balcony if I'm balcony if I'm balcony if I'm in an apartment or a house, ideally in an apartment or a house, ideally in an apartment or a house, ideally outdoors, but if I'm indoors I'll still outdoors, but if I'm indoors I'll still outdoors, but if I'm indoors I'll still do this. I'll just look as far off into do this. I'll just look as far off into do this. I'll just look as far off into the distance as I can when that step is the distance as I can when that step is the distance as I can when that step is required. So, but I start off by closing required. So, but I start off by closing required. So, but I start off by closing my eyes and essentially not looking at my eyes and essentially not looking at my eyes and essentially not looking at anything but directing my brain's focus anything but directing my brain's focus anything but directing my brain's focus to either the surface of my body, just to either the surface of my body, just to either the surface of my body, just what it feels like, what it's in contact what it feels like, what it's in contact what it feels like, what it's in contact with or not in contact with, maybe my with or not in contact with, maybe my with or not in contact with, maybe my breathing. Then I'll open my eyes and I breathing. Then I'll open my eyes and I breathing. Then I'll open my eyes and I will focus on some location will focus on some location will focus on some location on my body, but my bodily surface, like on my body, but my bodily surface, like on my body, but my bodily surface, like my hand at some distance my hand at some distance my hand at some distance and I'll focus my attention there maybe and I'll focus my attention there maybe and I'll focus my attention there maybe for just 5 to 15 seconds. I should for just 5 to 15 seconds. I should for just 5 to 15 seconds. I should mention that the first mention that the first mention that the first station as I call them, where my eyes station as I call them, where my eyes station as I call them, where my eyes were closed and I was focusing on my were closed and I was focusing on my were closed and I was focusing on my bodily sensations, I also just do that bodily sensations, I also just do that bodily sensations, I also just do that for about 5 to 15 seconds and I don't for about 5 to 15 seconds and I don't for about 5 to 15 seconds and I don't count specifically. I'm just kind of count specifically. I'm just kind of count specifically. I'm just kind of rough roughly 5 to 15 seconds. Okay, so rough roughly 5 to 15 seconds. Okay, so rough roughly 5 to 15 seconds. Okay, so second station you're looking at surface second station you're looking at surface second station you're looking at surface of your hand of your hand of your hand and if you like you can also concentrate and if you like you can also concentrate and if you like you can also concentrate on your breathing. on your breathing. on your breathing. But typically people will just focus on But typically people will just focus on But typically people will just focus on some specific location on their hand. some specific location on their hand. some specific location on their hand. Then I'll typically lower my hand, then Then I'll typically lower my hand, then Then I'll typically lower my hand, then I'll look off into the distance, maybe 5 I'll look off into the distance, maybe 5 I'll look off into the distance, maybe 5 to 10 ft, doesn't really matter. Focus to 10 ft, doesn't really matter. Focus to 10 ft, doesn't really matter. Focus my visual attention there. Try and hold my visual attention there. Try and hold my visual attention there. Try and hold that focus for 5 to 15 seconds. Then that focus for 5 to 15 seconds. Then that focus for 5 to 15 seconds. Then I'll look further off in the distance, I'll look further off in the distance, I'll look further off in the distance, maybe further still off into the distance. further still off into the distance. further still off into the distance. Ultimately, what I try and do is look at Ultimately, what I try and do is look at Ultimately, what I try and do is look at a location as far off in the distance, a location as far off in the distance, a location as far off in the distance, into that distance, excuse me, as I into that distance, excuse me, as I into that distance, excuse me, as I possibly can. possibly can. possibly can. And I'm also trying to pay attention my And I'm also trying to pay attention my And I'm also trying to pay attention my breathing at the same time. Just as a breathing at the same time. Just as a breathing at the same time. Just as a way of calibrating my location way of calibrating my location way of calibrating my location to the location that I'm looking at and to the location that I'm looking at and to the location that I'm looking at and how great that is. Then typically I'll how great that is. Then typically I'll how great that is. Then typically I'll close my eyes and return my attention to close my eyes and return my attention to close my eyes and return my attention to my immediate environment and my immediate environment and my immediate environment and my breathing just in the location I'm in. breathing just in the location I'm in. breathing just in the location I'm in. Okay, so the entire thing only takes Okay, so the entire thing only takes Okay, so the entire thing only takes about 2 minutes. Again, starting with about 2 minutes. Again, starting with about 2 minutes. Again, starting with eyes closed, focusing on self 5 to 15 eyes closed, focusing on self 5 to 15 eyes closed, focusing on self 5 to 15 seconds, then eyes open, focusing on seconds, then eyes open, focusing on seconds, then eyes open, focusing on surface of one's body. surface of one's body. surface of one's body. That is focusing one's visual attention That is focusing one's visual attention That is focusing one's visual attention 5 to 15 seconds, maybe 10 ft away, then 5 to 15 seconds, maybe 10 ft away, then 5 to 15 seconds, maybe 10 ft away, then maybe 50 ft away. If you're in the maybe 50 ft away. If you're in the maybe 50 ft away. If you're in the metric system, okay, meters, folks, metric system, okay, meters, folks, metric system, okay, meters, folks, works just as well. These distances do works just as well. These distances do works just as well. These distances do not have to be precise. And then off to not have to be precise. And then off to not have to be precise. And then off to the horizon. the horizon. the horizon. And then back to one's immediate And then back to one's immediate And then back to one's immediate location by closing one's eyes. Now, location by closing one's eyes. Now, location by closing one's eyes. Now, what is happening when one does this what is happening when one does this what is happening when one does this perceptual exercise? And again, it's a perceptual exercise? And again, it's a perceptual exercise? And again, it's a perceptual exercise, it's a visual perceptual exercise, it's a visual perceptual exercise, it's a visual perceptual exercise. Well, what's perceptual exercise. Well, what's perceptual exercise. Well, what's happening is you are shifting your happening is you are shifting your happening is you are shifting your visual focus, obviously, but you're also visual focus, obviously, but you're also visual focus, obviously, but you're also shifting the way in which you find, shifting the way in which you find, shifting the way in which you find, slice, or thick slice time. Now, your slice, or thick slice time. Now, your slice, or thick slice time. Now, your ability to recognize consciously whether ability to recognize consciously whether ability to recognize consciously whether or not you're thin slicing or thick or not you're thin slicing or thick or not you're thin slicing or thick slicing time is much harder to get a slicing time is much harder to get a slicing time is much harder to get a grasp of grasp of grasp of than it is to get a grasp of whether or than it is to get a grasp of whether or than it is to get a grasp of whether or not you're looking at your hand or off not you're looking at your hand or off not you're looking at your hand or off in the distance. That's kind of obvious. in the distance. That's kind of obvious. in the distance. That's kind of obvious. But what we know for sure is that as you But what we know for sure is that as you But what we know for sure is that as you shift your attention from your immediate shift your attention from your immediate shift your attention from your immediate environment out to different designated environment out to different designated environment out to different designated locations in your environment and your locations in your environment and your locations in your environment and your time perception shifts accordingly, time perception shifts accordingly, time perception shifts accordingly, you're essentially training your brain you're essentially training your brain you're essentially training your brain to shift visual focus and the way in to shift visual focus and the way in to shift visual focus and the way in which you process in the time domain. which you process in the time domain. which you process in the time domain. And this is important in the context of And this is important in the context of And this is important in the context of task switching because so much of task switching because so much of task switching because so much of task switching is not just to understand, "Okay, I'm is not just to understand, "Okay, I'm is not just to understand, "Okay, I'm going from reading to running or from going from reading to running or from going from reading to running or from running to reading." running to reading." running to reading." And the different types of operations And the different types of operations And the different types of operations that are required in one case versus the that are required in one case versus the that are required in one case versus the other, but also a shift in the neural other, but also a shift in the neural other, but also a shift in the neural circuits that underlie your perception circuits that underlie your perception circuits that underlie your perception of time. And again, this is a topic that of time. And again, this is a topic that of time. And again, this is a topic that deserves a much more elaborate deserves a much more elaborate deserves a much more elaborate discussion, but so much of our ability discussion, but so much of our ability discussion, but so much of our ability to execute a task with high proficiency to execute a task with high proficiency to execute a task with high proficiency has to do with getting our thinking and has to do with getting our thinking and has to do with getting our thinking and our actions into the correct time our actions into the correct time our actions into the correct time domain. Now, when I say time domain, I domain. Now, when I say time domain, I domain. Now, when I say time domain, I know a number of people can get confused know a number of people can get confused know a number of people can get confused because time is time, right? People because time is time, right? People because time is time, right? People think, "How What do you mean by time think, "How What do you mean by time think, "How What do you mean by time domain? Space domain makes sense." Here, domain? Space domain makes sense." Here, domain? Space domain makes sense." Here, I'm not talking about outer space, I'm not talking about outer space, I'm not talking about outer space, whether or not you're looking in one whether or not you're looking in one whether or not you're looking in one location or another, location or another, location or another, close to your body or far away from your close to your body or far away from your close to your body or far away from your body are different or domains of space, body are different or domains of space, body are different or domains of space, but the time domain is a little trickier but the time domain is a little trickier but the time domain is a little trickier for most people to understand. So, just for most people to understand. So, just for most people to understand. So, just think of it this way. When you see a think of it this way. When you see a think of it this way. When you see a slow-motion movie, what you're seeing is slow-motion movie, what you're seeing is slow-motion movie, what you're seeing is a movie that was shot at a high frame a movie that was shot at a high frame a movie that was shot at a high frame rate, many frames per second. rate, many frames per second. rate, many frames per second. Okay, the typical smartphone shoots Okay, the typical smartphone shoots Okay, the typical smartphone shoots movies at about 60 frames per second, movies at about 60 frames per second, movies at about 60 frames per second, some older ones 30 frames per second. some older ones 30 frames per second. some older ones 30 frames per second. The slow-mo function The slow-mo function The slow-mo function on your on your on your smartphone is actually a high frame rate smartphone is actually a high frame rate smartphone is actually a high frame rate function. You took the same movie, but function. You took the same movie, but function. You took the same movie, but you took it at higher frame rate, so you took it at higher frame rate, so you took it at higher frame rate, so you got a lot more images, got a lot more images, got a lot more images, therefore, you can generate slow motion. therefore, you can generate slow motion. therefore, you can generate slow motion. So, with your visual system, when you So, with your visual system, when you So, with your visual system, when you focus very close in to your body or focus very close in to your body or focus very close in to your body or you're focused on bodily sensations in you're focused on bodily sensations in you're focused on bodily sensations in your immediate environment, your immediate environment, your immediate environment, you are fine-slicing in the time domain you are fine-slicing in the time domain you are fine-slicing in the time domain more so more so more so than when you are looking further off in than when you are looking further off in than when you are looking further off in the distance. the distance. the distance. Similarly, when you engage in one type Similarly, when you engage in one type Similarly, when you engage in one type of task like a board meeting or a Zoom of task like a board meeting or a Zoom of task like a board meeting or a Zoom meeting or a conversation with friends, meeting or a conversation with friends, meeting or a conversation with friends, you are in a very different set of you are in a very different set of you are in a very different set of neural circuit functions than when you neural circuit functions than when you neural circuit functions than when you sit down to read or learn math or lift sit down to read or learn math or lift sit down to read or learn math or lift weights or go to therapy or go for a weights or go to therapy or go for a weights or go to therapy or go for a walk with your dog, for instance. walk with your dog, for instance. walk with your dog, for instance. Now it should be clear why when you move Now it should be clear why when you move Now it should be clear why when you move from task A to task B, you want to A from task A to task B, you want to A from task A to task B, you want to A introduce a transition period. It can be very a transition period. It can be very a transition period. It can be very brief. Maybe you don't even have time brief. Maybe you don't even have time brief. Maybe you don't even have time for the 2-minute transition period. You for the 2-minute transition period. You for the 2-minute transition period. You just say, "Okay, I'm in a transition just say, "Okay, I'm in a transition just say, "Okay, I'm in a transition period between task A and task B. I'm period between task A and task B. I'm period between task A and task B. I'm moving from this thing to that thing. I moving from this thing to that thing. I moving from this thing to that thing. I just need like 10 seconds. I'm going to just need like 10 seconds. I'm going to just need like 10 seconds. I'm going to recognize. I'm going to count down 10 to recognize. I'm going to count down 10 to recognize. I'm going to count down 10 to 1 or 1 up to 10. Doesn't matter. This is 1 or 1 up to 10. Doesn't matter. This is 1 or 1 up to 10. Doesn't matter. This is transition time. But this is not a time transition time. But this is not a time transition time. But this is not a time to look at my phone or to be in lots of look at my phone or to be in lots of look at my phone or to be in lots of different time domains. Now you might different time domains. Now you might different time domains. Now you might say, "Well, does that mean I shouldn't look "Well, does that mean I shouldn't look "Well, does that mean I shouldn't look at the horizon while I'm walking from my at the horizon while I'm walking from my at the horizon while I'm walking from my meeting back to my desk?" No. No, no, meeting back to my desk?" No. No, no, meeting back to my desk?" No. No, no, no. That's not the way that your brain no. That's not the way that your brain no. That's not the way that your brain works. It doesn't anchor to things that works. It doesn't anchor to things that works. It doesn't anchor to things that just happen in your environment of just happen in your environment of just happen in your environment of particular interest. What I'm saying is particular interest. What I'm saying is particular interest. What I'm saying is set a transition period between tasks. set a transition period between tasks. set a transition period between tasks. Ideally two, maybe even as long as 10 Ideally two, maybe even as long as 10 Ideally two, maybe even as long as 10 minutes. I'm also saying that when you switch I'm also saying that when you switch I'm also saying that when you switch between tasks or when you initiate your between tasks or when you initiate your between tasks or when you initiate your first major task of the day, please first major task of the day, please first major task of the day, please expect do expect do expect do expect a period in which it's hard to get into a period in which it's hard to get into a period in which it's hard to get into the groove, so to speak. the groove, so to speak. the groove, so to speak. And in addition to that, And in addition to that, And in addition to that, I recommend having some sort of practice I recommend having some sort of practice I recommend having some sort of practice and I describe the practice that I've and I describe the practice that I've and I describe the practice that I've used for some period of time now, at used for some period of time now, at used for some period of time now, at least for me to great success, least for me to great success, least for me to great success, where you are deliberately shifting your where you are deliberately shifting your where you are deliberately shifting your visual attention between different visual attention between different visual attention between different locations close to you and far away. And locations close to you and far away. And locations close to you and far away. And you're doing that as a perceptual you're doing that as a perceptual you're doing that as a perceptual practice. Again, the whole thing only practice. Again, the whole thing only practice. Again, the whole thing only takes about 2 minutes, maybe 3 minutes. takes about 2 minutes, maybe 3 minutes. takes about 2 minutes, maybe 3 minutes. And you don't even need to do it every And you don't even need to do it every And you don't even need to do it every day. I happen to do it every day, but I day. I happen to do it every day, but I day. I happen to do it every day, but I miss the occasional day here and there. miss the occasional day here and there. miss the occasional day here and there. And even if you were to do this And even if you were to do this And even if you were to do this perceptual practice, perceptual practice, perceptual practice, you know, you know, you know, once a week or three times a week, I'm once a week or three times a week, I'm once a week or three times a week, I'm certain that you'll benefit because in certain that you'll benefit because in certain that you'll benefit because in doing that perceptual practice, there's doing that perceptual practice, there's doing that perceptual practice, there's also an immediate recognition of the also an immediate recognition of the also an immediate recognition of the sorts of shifts that your brain is sorts of shifts that your brain is sorts of shifts that your brain is required to engage in anytime you move required to engage in anytime you move required to engage in anytime you move from task A to task B or from task B to from task A to task B or from task B to from task A to task B or from task B to task C. task C. task C. And you start to And you start to And you start to see and feel, literally see and feel, see and feel, literally see and feel, see and feel, literally see and feel, the way that transition occurs and the way that transition occurs and the way that transition occurs and that it takes a little bit of time, but that it takes a little bit of time, but that it takes a little bit of time, but that you can accelerate that transition that you can accelerate that transition that you can accelerate that transition if you understand that, oh, when I'm if you understand that, oh, when I'm if you understand that, oh, when I'm looking here and engaging in this type looking here and engaging in this type looking here and engaging in this type of behavior or sets of tasks, of behavior or sets of tasks, of behavior or sets of tasks, and then I'm now going to be expected to and then I'm now going to be expected to and then I'm now going to be expected to do another task in a completely do another task in a completely do another task in a completely different type of environment, different type of environment, different type of environment, that the brain is going to be required that the brain is going to be required that the brain is going to be required to shift over the neural circuits that to shift over the neural circuits that to shift over the neural circuits that are active and less active in order to are active and less active in order to are active and less active in order to do that, but that you can accelerate do that, but that you can accelerate do that, but that you can accelerate that process by practicing it, using that process by practicing it, using that process by practicing it, using that perceptual tool that I described. that perceptual tool that I described. that perceptual tool that I described. So, there I covered some specific tools So, there I covered some specific tools So, there I covered some specific tools that one can use to enhance one's that one can use to enhance one's that one can use to enhance one's ability to task switch, touching on a ability to task switch, touching on a ability to task switch, touching on a bit of the underlying neurobiology and bit of the underlying neurobiology and bit of the underlying neurobiology and why transition periods are useful, if why transition periods are useful, if why transition periods are useful, if not required. If you think about it, not required. If you think about it, not required. If you think about it, there's always a transition period when there's always a transition period when there's always a transition period when task switching, but here you're taking task switching, but here you're taking task switching, but here you're taking conscious control over that transition conscious control over that transition conscious control over that transition period. There are additional tools for period. There are additional tools for period. There are additional tools for enhancing one's ability to task switch. enhancing one's ability to task switch. enhancing one's ability to task switch. They tend to be somewhat specific for They tend to be somewhat specific for They tend to be somewhat specific for the certain kinds of cognitive or the certain kinds of cognitive or the certain kinds of cognitive or physical tasks that one needs to do. The physical tasks that one needs to do. The physical tasks that one needs to do. The example of chess boxing that I gave example of chess boxing that I gave example of chess boxing that I gave earlier, great example of task switching earlier, great example of task switching earlier, great example of task switching at its extreme, terrible example of a at its extreme, terrible example of a at its extreme, terrible example of a practice, space-time bridging, very practice, space-time bridging, very practice, space-time bridging, very safe, I can't think of any way in which safe, I can't think of any way in which safe, I can't think of any way in which it might be dangerous, although please it might be dangerous, although please it might be dangerous, although please don't do it while driving or while don't do it while driving or while don't do it while driving or while operating any kind of other machinery, operating any kind of other machinery, operating any kind of other machinery, but by all accounts, very safe, zero but by all accounts, very safe, zero but by all accounts, very safe, zero cost, and we talked about some of the cost, and we talked about some of the cost, and we talked about some of the other tools for task switching as well. other tools for task switching as well. other tools for task switching as well. Thank you for joining for the beginning Thank you for joining for the beginning Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future the full episode and to hear future the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything episodes of these Ask Me Anything episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of sessions, plus to receive transcripts of sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast standard channel and premium Podcast standard channel and premium Podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please tools not released anywhere else, please tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. go to hubermanlab.com/premium. go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab Podcast Premium channel, Huberman Lab Podcast Premium channel, Huberman Lab Podcast Premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which of course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab Podcast. And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is the which I think we all agree is the which I think we all agree is the species that we are most interested in. species that we are most interested in. species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund And we are going to specifically fund And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing research that is aimed toward developing research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, further protocols for mental health, further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And physical health, and performance. And physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed those protocols will be distributed those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the through all channels, not just the through all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all premium channel, but through all premium channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab Podcast and other channels, Huberman Lab Podcast and other channels, Huberman Lab Podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to media channels. So the idea here is to media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning give you information to your burning give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're So this is a terrific way that they're So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further support research for science and support research for science and support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium channel, again, there's a Lab Premium channel, again, there's a Lab Premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions and you'll of course get your questions and you'll of course get your questions and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts some premium content such as transcripts some premium content such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and of the AMAs and various transcripts and of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab Podcast protocols of Huberman Lab Podcast protocols of Huberman Lab Podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, episodes not found elsewhere. And again, episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental you'll be supporting research for mental you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the performance. You can sign up for the performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to premium channel by going to premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank Thank your interest And as always, thank Thank your interest And as always, thank Thank your interest in science.