Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of ophthalmology at Stanford School of ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost consumer effort to bring zero-cost consumer effort to bring zero-cost consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor today is Theragun. Our first sponsor today is Theragun. Our first sponsor today is Theragun. Theragun is a handheld percussive Theragun is a handheld percussive Theragun is a handheld percussive therapy device that releases deep muscle therapy device that releases deep muscle therapy device that releases deep muscle tension. I was first introduced to Theragun in I was first introduced to Theragun in I was first introduced to Theragun in 2017 while on a laboratory expedition. 2017 while on a laboratory expedition. 2017 while on a laboratory expedition. We were in the middle of the Pacific We were in the middle of the Pacific We were in the middle of the Pacific Ocean filming great white sharks for my Ocean filming great white sharks for my Ocean filming great white sharks for my laboratory studies on fear using virtual laboratory studies on fear using virtual laboratory studies on fear using virtual reality. We were working very hard reality. We were working very hard reality. We were working very hard around the clock, and I and other people around the clock, and I and other people around the clock, and I and other people on the trip were picking up a lot of on the trip were picking up a lot of on the trip were picking up a lot of aches and pains and just kind of chronic aches and pains and just kind of chronic aches and pains and just kind of chronic soreness. Couple people had injuries soreness. Couple people had injuries soreness. Couple people had injuries that were flaring up because of all the that were flaring up because of all the that were flaring up because of all the hard work and lack of sleep. Someone had hard work and lack of sleep. Someone had hard work and lack of sleep. Someone had a Theragun, and pretty soon it was a Theragun, and pretty soon it was a Theragun, and pretty soon it was getting passed around. It became the getting passed around. It became the getting passed around. It became the most coveted device on board. Everyone most coveted device on board. Everyone most coveted device on board. Everyone was using it to work on these different was using it to work on these different was using it to work on these different sites of soreness, and I really fell in sites of soreness, and I really fell in sites of soreness, and I really fell in love with the thing, so much so that love with the thing, so much so that love with the thing, so much so that when I got back, I immediately purchased when I got back, I immediately purchased when I got back, I immediately purchased one, and I've used it almost daily ever one, and I've used it almost daily ever one, and I've used it almost daily ever since. I use it on muscles that are sore. I use I use it on muscles that are sore. I use I use it on muscles that are sore. I use it on areas that I'm really working on it on areas that I'm really working on it on areas that I'm really working on to release tension and improve tissue to release tension and improve tissue to release tension and improve tissue quality and so forth. quality and so forth. quality and so forth. The great thing about Theragun is it's The great thing about Theragun is it's The great thing about Theragun is it's really quiet, so you can use it while really quiet, so you can use it while really quiet, so you can use it while you're in a conversation or while you're in a conversation or while you're in a conversation or while you're watching a movie, and it doesn't disrupt watching a movie, and it doesn't disrupt watching a movie, and it doesn't disrupt those activities at all. those activities at all. those activities at all. If you want to try Theragun, If you want to try Theragun, If you want to try Theragun, you can try Theragun by going to you can try Theragun by going to you can try Theragun by going to theragun.com/huberman to get your Gen 4 Theragun. They start to get your Gen 4 Theragun. They start to get your Gen 4 Theragun. They start at $199, at $199, at $199, but if you think about it, a massage, but if you think about it, a massage, but if you think about it, a massage, which is an hour long or 90 minutes which is an hour long or 90 minutes which is an hour long or 90 minutes long, is typically in that range of long, is typically in that range of long, is typically in that range of cost. And this is something you can use cost. And this is something you can use cost. And this is something you can use every day whenever you want and even every day whenever you want and even every day whenever you want and even while enjoying other activities. So while enjoying other activities. So while enjoying other activities. So that's theragun.com/huberman. that's theragun.com/huberman. that's theragun.com/huberman. The second sponsor today's podcast is The second sponsor today's podcast is The second sponsor today's podcast is Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. help you reach your health goals. help you reach your health goals. The great thing about Inside Tracker is The great thing about Inside Tracker is The great thing about Inside Tracker is that it gives you data that you can make that it gives you data that you can make that it gives you data that you can make sense of. I've long been a believer in sense of. I've long been a believer in sense of. I've long been a believer in getting blood samples taken and more getting blood samples taken and more getting blood samples taken and more recently I've become a believer in recently I've become a believer in recently I've become a believer in getting DNA samples taken in order to getting DNA samples taken in order to getting DNA samples taken in order to understand what's going on at the level understand what's going on at the level understand what's going on at the level of hormones, metabolic factors, and of hormones, metabolic factors, and of hormones, metabolic factors, and other things that profoundly influence other things that profoundly influence other things that profoundly influence our immediate and long-term health. The our immediate and long-term health. The our immediate and long-term health. The problem always has been getting those problem always has been getting those problem always has been getting those samples taken and get making sense of samples taken and get making sense of samples taken and get making sense of those samples. Inside Tracker makes all those samples. Inside Tracker makes all those samples. Inside Tracker makes all of that really easy. They'll even come of that really easy. They'll even come of that really easy. They'll even come to your home to take the samples. Then to your home to take the samples. Then to your home to take the samples. Then you get the information back and while you get the information back and while you get the information back and while typically after getting information back typically after getting information back typically after getting information back there's these long list of numbers and there's these long list of numbers and there's these long list of numbers and nobody knows what to do with them, nobody knows what to do with them, nobody knows what to do with them, Inside Tracker makes it really easy to Inside Tracker makes it really easy to Inside Tracker makes it really easy to interpret what those numbers mean and it interpret what those numbers mean and it interpret what those numbers mean and it points to things in terms of lifestyle, points to things in terms of lifestyle, points to things in terms of lifestyle, exercise, nutrition, and so forth that exercise, nutrition, and so forth that exercise, nutrition, and so forth that can help you adjust some of the numbers can help you adjust some of the numbers can help you adjust some of the numbers that you might need to bring down or up that you might need to bring down or up that you might need to bring down or up to put into the appropriate normal to put into the appropriate normal to put into the appropriate normal range. So, I find this whole process to range. So, I find this whole process to range. So, I find this whole process to be immensely valuable for guiding my be immensely valuable for guiding my be immensely valuable for guiding my health choices and also just for giving health choices and also just for giving health choices and also just for giving me peace of mind about how my body and me peace of mind about how my body and me peace of mind about how my body and the rest of my health are doing the rest of my health are doing the rest of my health are doing internally, something you just can't internally, something you just can't internally, something you just can't know without a blood and DNA test. know without a blood and DNA test. know without a blood and DNA test. If you want to try Inside Tracker, you If you want to try Inside Tracker, you If you want to try Inside Tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman can go to insidetracker.com/huberman and you'll get 25% off any of their and you'll get 25% off any of their and you'll get 25% off any of their programs. You want to put Huberman at programs. You want to put Huberman at programs. You want to put Huberman at checkout. So, that's checkout. So, that's checkout. So, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans and put Huberman at checkout. The plans and put Huberman at checkout. The plans and put Huberman at checkout. The third sponsor of today's podcast is third sponsor of today's podcast is third sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I started using Athletic Greens drink. I started using Athletic Greens drink. I started using Athletic Greens in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're a in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're a in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of the podcast. sponsor of the podcast. sponsor of the podcast. The reason I started using Athletic The reason I started using Athletic The reason I started using Athletic Greens and the reason I still take it Greens and the reason I still take it Greens and the reason I still take it once or twice per day once or twice per day once or twice per day is that I find it very hard to know what is that I find it very hard to know what is that I find it very hard to know what vitamins and minerals I need to take. vitamins and minerals I need to take. vitamins and minerals I need to take. And by drinking Athletic Greens, I get And by drinking Athletic Greens, I get And by drinking Athletic Greens, I get it all in one easy-to-consume, it all in one easy-to-consume, it all in one easy-to-consume, great-tasting formula. I really do like great-tasting formula. I really do like great-tasting formula. I really do like the way it tastes. I mix mine with water the way it tastes. I mix mine with water the way it tastes. I mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice, and a little bit of lemon or lime juice, and a little bit of lemon or lime juice, and to me, it's delicious. and to me, it's delicious. and to me, it's delicious. The other thing about Athletic Greens The other thing about Athletic Greens The other thing about Athletic Greens that I really like are the probiotics. that I really like are the probiotics. that I really like are the probiotics. There's so much data out there now There's so much data out there now There's so much data out there now telling us, and I certainly believe telling us, and I certainly believe telling us, and I certainly believe based on the data that I've seen, that based on the data that I've seen, that based on the data that I've seen, that probiotics are really important for probiotics are really important for probiotics are really important for support of the gut microbiome, the support of the gut microbiome, the support of the gut microbiome, the gut-brain axis, the immune system, and gut-brain axis, the immune system, and gut-brain axis, the immune system, and many other aspects of our biology. So, many other aspects of our biology. So, many other aspects of our biology. So, with Athletic Greens, I get the with Athletic Greens, I get the with Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins, the minerals, and the vitamins, the minerals, and the vitamins, the minerals, and the probiotics that I need. If you want to probiotics that I need. If you want to probiotics that I need. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to try Athletic Greens, you can go to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, they'll also give And if you do that, they'll also give And if you do that, they'll also give you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3, we also know, is really Vitamin D3, we also know, is really Vitamin D3, we also know, is really important for things like immune system important for things like immune system important for things like immune system and metabolic support. So, that's and metabolic support. So, that's and metabolic support. So, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get Athletic Greens, the year's to get Athletic Greens, the year's to get Athletic Greens, the year's supply of vitamin D3K2, and they'll give supply of vitamin D3K2, and they'll give supply of vitamin D3K2, and they'll give you five free travel packs. you five free travel packs. you five free travel packs. Today, we're talking all about emotions. Today, we're talking all about emotions. Today, we're talking all about emotions. Emotions are central to our entire Emotions are central to our entire Emotions are central to our entire experience of life. Whether or not we're experience of life. Whether or not we're experience of life. Whether or not we're happy or sad or depressed or angry happy or sad or depressed or angry happy or sad or depressed or angry is our life experience. is our life experience. is our life experience. And yet, I think with all the importance And yet, I think with all the importance And yet, I think with all the importance that we've placed on emotions, very few that we've placed on emotions, very few that we've placed on emotions, very few people actually understand how emotions people actually understand how emotions people actually understand how emotions arise in our brain and body. And I arise in our brain and body. And I arise in our brain and body. And I mention brain and body because, as mention brain and body because, as mention brain and body because, as you'll see today, emotions really you'll see today, emotions really you'll see today, emotions really capture the brain-body relationship. We capture the brain-body relationship. We capture the brain-body relationship. We cannot say that emotions arise just from cannot say that emotions arise just from cannot say that emotions arise just from what happens in our head. It also what happens in our head. It also what happens in our head. It also involves events, biological events, involves events, biological events, involves events, biological events, chemical events within our body. chemical events within our body. chemical events within our body. The other thing about emotions is that The other thing about emotions is that The other thing about emotions is that there's no real agreement as to what's a there's no real agreement as to what's a there's no real agreement as to what's a good emotion or a bad emotion. good emotion or a bad emotion. good emotion or a bad emotion. Today, we're going to talk about the Today, we're going to talk about the Today, we're going to talk about the biology of the chemicals and pathways biology of the chemicals and pathways biology of the chemicals and pathways that give rise to emotions, and I'm that give rise to emotions, and I'm that give rise to emotions, and I'm going to equip you with several, if not going to equip you with several, if not going to equip you with several, if not many, tools that will allow you to many, tools that will allow you to many, tools that will allow you to regulate and change and steer your regulate and change and steer your regulate and change and steer your emotions should you want, but not using emotions should you want, but not using emotions should you want, but not using the typical advice. You know, you the typical advice. You know, you the typical advice. You know, you everyone's probably heard of this thing, everyone's probably heard of this thing, everyone's probably heard of this thing, "Oh, you know, if you're feeling "Oh, you know, if you're feeling "Oh, you know, if you're feeling depressed, just smile. You know, what depressed, just smile. You know, what depressed, just smile. You know, what you It's impossible to be depressed you It's impossible to be depressed you It's impossible to be depressed while smiling." Look, if that were true, while smiling." Look, if that were true, while smiling." Look, if that were true, we wouldn't have any depressed people we wouldn't have any depressed people we wouldn't have any depressed people because depressed people don't want to because depressed people don't want to because depressed people don't want to be depressed. And it is not the case be depressed. And it is not the case be depressed. And it is not the case that simply smiling will reverse that simply smiling will reverse that simply smiling will reverse depression or sadness. And it's simply depression or sadness. And it's simply depression or sadness. And it's simply not the case that smiling can inhibit not the case that smiling can inhibit not the case that smiling can inhibit sadness. It just doesn't work that way. sadness. It just doesn't work that way. sadness. It just doesn't work that way. However, it is the case that certain However, it is the case that certain However, it is the case that certain things that are happening in our body things that are happening in our body things that are happening in our body influence how our brain functions and influence how our brain functions and influence how our brain functions and the chemicals that are released. the chemicals that are released. the chemicals that are released. And today we're going to talk a lot And today we're going to talk a lot And today we're going to talk a lot about how the brain and body interact to about how the brain and body interact to about how the brain and body interact to create these things called emotions in create these things called emotions in create these things called emotions in the context of food and nutrition. the context of food and nutrition. the context of food and nutrition. And the reason we're doing that is not And the reason we're doing that is not And the reason we're doing that is not because I'm beating the drum about because I'm beating the drum about because I'm beating the drum about particular diet regimens or anything. In particular diet regimens or anything. In particular diet regimens or anything. In fact, I'm not going to do any of that. fact, I'm not going to do any of that. fact, I'm not going to do any of that. What I'm going to do is I'm going to What I'm going to do is I'm going to What I'm going to do is I'm going to review some of the most important review some of the most important review some of the most important scientific data that point to how scientific data that point to how scientific data that point to how ingesting certain nutrients, both ingesting certain nutrients, both ingesting certain nutrients, both macronutrients like proteins, fats, and macronutrients like proteins, fats, and macronutrients like proteins, fats, and carbohydrates, as well as carbohydrates, as well as carbohydrates, as well as micronutrients, can impact the chemicals micronutrients, can impact the chemicals micronutrients, can impact the chemicals in our brain that give rise to the in our brain that give rise to the in our brain that give rise to the feelings of being happy or sad or sleepy feelings of being happy or sad or sleepy feelings of being happy or sad or sleepy or alert when you want to be sleepy or alert when you want to be sleepy or alert when you want to be sleepy or sleepy when you want to be alert. So, sleepy when you want to be alert. So, sleepy when you want to be alert. So, this is sure to be a broad discussion, this is sure to be a broad discussion, this is sure to be a broad discussion, and yet we're going to get very specific and yet we're going to get very specific and yet we're going to get very specific about what emotions are, how they arise about what emotions are, how they arise about what emotions are, how they arise in the body, tools that one can use in the body, tools that one can use in the body, tools that one can use in order to better control their emotions. order to better control their emotions. order to better control their emotions. Tools that people can use to, believe it Tools that people can use to, believe it Tools that people can use to, believe it or not, feel happier or feel calmer. or not, feel happier or feel calmer. or not, feel happier or feel calmer. And that's because in the last 20 years And that's because in the last 20 years And that's because in the last 20 years or so, there's been an explosion of or so, there's been an explosion of or so, there's been an explosion of scientific studies exploring how the scientific studies exploring how the scientific studies exploring how the brain and body interact to support brain and body interact to support brain and body interact to support certain neurochemicals certain neurochemicals certain neurochemicals that give us these feelings of being that give us these feelings of being that give us these feelings of being alert and happy or depressed or certain alert and happy or depressed or certain alert and happy or depressed or certain that our life is going to be terrible or that our life is going to be terrible or that our life is going to be terrible or certain that our life is going to be certain that our life is going to be certain that our life is going to be great. So, as mysterious as all that great. So, as mysterious as all that great. So, as mysterious as all that might sound and confusing as all that might sound and confusing as all that might sound and confusing as all that might sound, we're going to make it very might sound, we're going to make it very might sound, we're going to make it very clear today and you're going to come clear today and you're going to come clear today and you're going to come away from this conversation with a lot away from this conversation with a lot away from this conversation with a lot of tools that you can act on of tools that you can act on of tools that you can act on immediately. And those tools are immediately. And those tools are immediately. And those tools are grounded in scientific data. We are grounded in scientific data. We are grounded in scientific data. We are going to provide links to several of the going to provide links to several of the going to provide links to several of the studies and I'm going to mention some studies and I'm going to mention some studies and I'm going to mention some several of those studies as we go along. several of those studies as we go along. several of those studies as we go along. But overall, the goal today is for you But overall, the goal today is for you But overall, the goal today is for you to understand how moods and emotions to understand how moods and emotions to understand how moods and emotions arise and the different pathways in your arise and the different pathways in your arise and the different pathways in your brain and body that allow them to happen brain and body that allow them to happen brain and body that allow them to happen and how you can use those pathways to and how you can use those pathways to and how you can use those pathways to change those emotions and the tools that change those emotions and the tools that change those emotions and the tools that you can rely on in very specific ways to you can rely on in very specific ways to you can rely on in very specific ways to shift from being, say, shift from being, say, shift from being, say, slightly depressed to feeling happier. slightly depressed to feeling happier. slightly depressed to feeling happier. There actually are ways to do that. Or There actually are ways to do that. Or There actually are ways to do that. Or from feeling too alert and anxious to from feeling too alert and anxious to from feeling too alert and anxious to feeling calmer. And these are tools that feeling calmer. And these are tools that feeling calmer. And these are tools that are distinct from the tools I've talked are distinct from the tools I've talked are distinct from the tools I've talked about in previous episodes. about in previous episodes. about in previous episodes. The discussion around emotions has a The discussion around emotions has a The discussion around emotions has a long and rich history going back to long and rich history going back to long and rich history going back to Darwin and even long before Darwin. Darwin and even long before Darwin. Darwin and even long before Darwin. You know, this is a conversation that You know, this is a conversation that You know, this is a conversation that philosophers and scientists have been philosophers and scientists have been philosophers and scientists have been having for hundreds, if not thousands, having for hundreds, if not thousands, having for hundreds, if not thousands, of years. of years. of years. You know, the You know, the You know, the idea that Darwin put forth and that the idea that Darwin put forth and that the idea that Darwin put forth and that was really attractive for about the last was really attractive for about the last was really attractive for about the last 100 years was that emotions are 100 years was that emotions are 100 years was that emotions are universal and that some of the facial universal and that some of the facial universal and that some of the facial expressions around emotion are expressions around emotion are expressions around emotion are universal. And other people have, you universal. And other people have, you universal. And other people have, you know, capitalized on that idea and to know, capitalized on that idea and to know, capitalized on that idea and to some extent it's true. I mean, I think some extent it's true. I mean, I think some extent it's true. I mean, I think that the two most robust examples of that the two most robust examples of that the two most robust examples of that would be when we see something that would be when we see something that would be when we see something or we smell something or we taste or we smell something or we taste or we smell something or we taste something that we like, there does tend something that we like, there does tend something that we like, there does tend to be a postural leaning in, we tend to be a postural leaning in, we tend to be a postural leaning in, we tend to inhale air at that time, we tend to inhale air at that time, we tend to inhale air at that time, we tend to bring in more of whatever chemical bring in more of whatever chemical bring in more of whatever chemical substance is there, so we tend to do substance is there, so we tend to do substance is there, so we tend to do these "Mmm"s and, you know, and kind of these "Mmm"s and, you know, and kind of these "Mmm"s and, you know, and kind of lean in closer to things that are lean in closer to things that are lean in closer to things that are attractive to us. attractive to us. attractive to us. And when we see and experience things And when we see and experience things And when we see and experience things that we don't like, that we don't like, that we don't like, sometimes it's a mild aversion, we just sometimes it's a mild aversion, we just sometimes it's a mild aversion, we just kind of lean back or look away. Other kind of lean back or look away. Other kind of lean back or look away. Other times, it's an intense aversion of times, it's an intense aversion of times, it's an intense aversion of disgust and we tend to cringe our face, disgust and we tend to cringe our face, disgust and we tend to cringe our face, we tend to avoid inhaling any of the we tend to avoid inhaling any of the we tend to avoid inhaling any of the chemicals. This probably has roots in chemicals. This probably has roots in chemicals. This probably has roots in ancient biological mechanisms ancient biological mechanisms ancient biological mechanisms that are to prevent us from ingesting that are to prevent us from ingesting that are to prevent us from ingesting things that are bad for us, chemical things that are bad for us, chemical things that are bad for us, chemical compounds and taste that might be compounds and taste that might be compounds and taste that might be poisonous. So, much of the foundation of poisonous. So, much of the foundation of poisonous. So, much of the foundation of any discussion about emotion has to any discussion about emotion has to any discussion about emotion has to center around this kind of push-pull of center around this kind of push-pull of center around this kind of push-pull of attraction to things or aversion from attraction to things or aversion from attraction to things or aversion from things. Now, that's a very basic way of thinking Now, that's a very basic way of thinking Now, that's a very basic way of thinking about emotions, but if you think about emotions, but if you think about emotions, but if you think about it, it works for a lot of different it, it works for a lot of different it, it works for a lot of different circumstances. And in the brain, circumstances. And in the brain, circumstances. And in the brain, everywhere from the deep circuits of the everywhere from the deep circuits of the everywhere from the deep circuits of the brain to the more kind of what we call brain to the more kind of what we call brain to the more kind of what we call higher-order evolved centers of the higher-order evolved centers of the higher-order evolved centers of the brain, we have this push-pull thing. brain, we have this push-pull thing. brain, we have this push-pull thing. We're either I In previous episode, I We're either I In previous episode, I We're either I In previous episode, I talked about go, the circuits that allow talked about go, the circuits that allow talked about go, the circuits that allow you to emphasize action. And then you to emphasize action. And then you to emphasize action. And then no-go circuits, the circuits in the no-go circuits, the circuits in the no-go circuits, the circuits in the basal ganglia that allow you to basal ganglia that allow you to basal ganglia that allow you to deemphasize action and prevent action. deemphasize action and prevent action. deemphasize action and prevent action. We talked about how that's a push-pull. We talked about how that's a push-pull. We talked about how that's a push-pull. So, aversion and attraction is a So, aversion and attraction is a So, aversion and attraction is a push-pull, too. Delight or happiness or push-pull, too. Delight or happiness or push-pull, too. Delight or happiness or excitement are attractions to certain excitement are attractions to certain excitement are attractions to certain things and ideas, songs, people, places, things and ideas, songs, people, places, things and ideas, songs, people, places, foods. Aversion is a leaning out. It's a Aversion is a leaning out. It's a Aversion is a leaning out. It's a disgust. It's an avoidance. disgust. It's an avoidance. disgust. It's an avoidance. And so, we can break down the discussion And so, we can break down the discussion And so, we can break down the discussion about emotions into these simpler about emotions into these simpler about emotions into these simpler versions of themselves. But at versions of themselves. But at versions of themselves. But at the core of that, of attraction or the core of that, of attraction or the core of that, of attraction or aversion, is an important theme that you aversion, is an important theme that you aversion, is an important theme that you might realize already, but most people might realize already, but most people might realize already, but most people tend to overlook, which is that there's tend to overlook, which is that there's tend to overlook, which is that there's an action there. You're either moving an action there. You're either moving an action there. You're either moving forward or you're moving away from forward or you're moving away from forward or you're moving away from something. And anytime you're talking something. And anytime you're talking something. And anytime you're talking about action in the nervous system, about action in the nervous system, about action in the nervous system, you're talking about motor behaviors. you're talking about motor behaviors. you're talking about motor behaviors. You're talking about literally the You're talking about literally the You're talking about literally the contraction of muscles to move you contraction of muscles to move you contraction of muscles to move you toward or away from things. And anytime toward or away from things. And anytime toward or away from things. And anytime you're talking about nerve to muscle and you're talking about nerve to muscle and you're talking about nerve to muscle and action, you're talking about the brain and the you're talking about the brain and the you're talking about the brain and the body. Because the brain can't move body. Because the brain can't move body. Because the brain can't move itself. The brain has a body so that itself. The brain has a body so that itself. The brain has a body so that the organism can move. And the body has the organism can move. And the body has the organism can move. And the body has a brain so that the organism, you, can a brain so that the organism, you, can a brain so that the organism, you, can move toward or away from things that you move toward or away from things that you move toward or away from things that you deem to be good or bad for you. Now, deem to be good or bad for you. Now, deem to be good or bad for you. Now, some of these things that we're some of these things that we're some of these things that we're attracted to and some of them that we attracted to and some of them that we attracted to and some of them that we avoid are what we call innate or avoid are what we call innate or avoid are what we call innate or hardwired. You know, when we hardwired. You know, when we hardwired. You know, when we taste a bitter compounds, I'm not saying taste a bitter compounds, I'm not saying taste a bitter compounds, I'm not saying about bitter like a you like a little about bitter like a you like a little about bitter like a you like a little bit of bitters in your drink or bit of bitters in your drink or bit of bitters in your drink or something like that, but really bitter something like that, but really bitter something like that, but really bitter compounds, we tend to avoid those compounds, we tend to avoid those compounds, we tend to avoid those because they're associated with poisons. because they're associated with poisons. because they're associated with poisons. When we taste things that are sweet or When we taste things that are sweet or When we taste things that are sweet or that are savory, we tend to lean that are savory, we tend to lean that are savory, we tend to lean pursue more of those. We tend to lean pursue more of those. We tend to lean pursue more of those. We tend to lean toward those, so to speak. toward those, so to speak. toward those, so to speak. And we tend to not avoid them. So, there And we tend to not avoid them. So, there And we tend to not avoid them. So, there are circuits in the brain for a for are circuits in the brain for a for are circuits in the brain for a for aversion and for attraction toward aversion and for attraction toward aversion and for attraction toward things. And the body is governing a lot things. And the body is governing a lot things. And the body is governing a lot of that. And so, immediately in this of that. And so, immediately in this of that. And so, immediately in this conversation, I want to raise an conversation, I want to raise an conversation, I want to raise an important point, which is about a nerve important point, which is about a nerve important point, which is about a nerve pathway that many, many people have pathway that many, many people have pathway that many, many people have heard of, that gets discussed all the heard of, that gets discussed all the heard of, that gets discussed all the time, and that is one of the most kind time, and that is one of the most kind time, and that is one of the most kind of oversold for the wrong reasons and of oversold for the wrong reasons and of oversold for the wrong reasons and undersold, unfortunately, for its real undersold, unfortunately, for its real undersold, unfortunately, for its real power, which is the vagus nerve. power, which is the vagus nerve. power, which is the vagus nerve. So, the vagus nerve is one, not the only, the vagus nerve is one, not the only, the vagus nerve is one, not the only, but one way in which our brain and body but one way in which our brain and body but one way in which our brain and body are connected and regulates our are connected and regulates our are connected and regulates our emotional states. emotional states. emotional states. Now, many of you have probably heard Now, many of you have probably heard Now, many of you have probably heard about polyvagal theory. I'm going to about polyvagal theory. I'm going to about polyvagal theory. I'm going to talk about this today. Polyvagal theory talk about this today. Polyvagal theory talk about this today. Polyvagal theory was um popularized by Stephen Porges. And um popularized by Stephen Porges. And um popularized by Stephen Porges. And it's an interesting theory. Certain it's an interesting theory. Certain it's an interesting theory. Certain aspects of it, frankly, hold up to the aspects of it, frankly, hold up to the aspects of it, frankly, hold up to the science. Some of it doesn't. And I'm science. Some of it doesn't. And I'm science. Some of it doesn't. And I'm going to discuss all of that today. going to discuss all of that today. going to discuss all of that today. A lot of the vagus and the excitement A lot of the vagus and the excitement A lot of the vagus and the excitement about the vagus, v a g u s, is because about the vagus, v a g u s, is because about the vagus, v a g u s, is because it somehow got into the mind of the it somehow got into the mind of the it somehow got into the mind of the public that the vagus is involved in public that the vagus is involved in public that the vagus is involved in calming us down. calming us down. calming us down. So, what is the vagus nerve? Okay. So, what is the vagus nerve? Okay. So, what is the vagus nerve? Okay. We're going to make this really simple We're going to make this really simple We're going to make this really simple particular for those that are just particular for those that are just particular for those that are just listening. You can just imagine this for listening. You can just imagine this for listening. You can just imagine this for those of you that are watching. I'll those of you that are watching. I'll those of you that are watching. I'll point to the various areas, but point to the various areas, but point to the various areas, but basically, vagus is the 10th cranial nerve, which vagus is the 10th cranial nerve, which vagus is the 10th cranial nerve, which basically means that the neurons the basically means that the neurons the basically means that the neurons the kind of the control center of each kind of the control center of each kind of the control center of each of those neurons in the vagus lives just of those neurons in the vagus lives just of those neurons in the vagus lives just kind of near the neck, right? kind of near the neck, right? kind of near the neck, right? And a branch of the vagus goes into the And a branch of the vagus goes into the And a branch of the vagus goes into the brain. They send a little wire into the brain. They send a little wire into the brain. They send a little wire into the brain. The other branch goes into the brain. The other branch goes into the brain. The other branch goes into the periphery, but not just the gut. It goes periphery, but not just the gut. It goes periphery, but not just the gut. It goes into the stomach, the intestines, the into the stomach, the intestines, the into the stomach, the intestines, the heart, the lungs, and the immune system. heart, the lungs, and the immune system. heart, the lungs, and the immune system. So, the this vagus nerve is incredible So, the this vagus nerve is incredible So, the this vagus nerve is incredible because it's taking information from the because it's taking information from the because it's taking information from the body and it has two directions. The body and it has two directions. The body and it has two directions. The first is what we call sensory. So, it's first is what we call sensory. So, it's first is what we call sensory. So, it's sensing things that are happening in the sensing things that are happening in the sensing things that are happening in the gut, in the lungs, everything. For gut, in the lungs, everything. For gut, in the lungs, everything. For example, in the lungs when our lungs are example, in the lungs when our lungs are example, in the lungs when our lungs are distended, the vagus nerve senses that and sends the vagus nerve senses that and sends the vagus nerve senses that and sends that information up into the brain. It that information up into the brain. It that information up into the brain. It also can sense things in the gut like also can sense things in the gut like also can sense things in the gut like how distended or empty your stomach how distended or empty your stomach how distended or empty your stomach happens to be. It can sense heart rate. happens to be. It can sense heart rate. happens to be. It can sense heart rate. It can sense your immune system, whether It can sense your immune system, whether It can sense your immune system, whether or not you have bacteria or things or not you have bacteria or things or not you have bacteria or things invading you in your body. So, it sends invading you in your body. So, it sends invading you in your body. So, it sends that information up to the brain. So, that information up to the brain. So, that information up to the brain. So, it's a two-way street and sensory it's a two-way street and sensory it's a two-way street and sensory information is going up to the brain. information is going up to the brain. information is going up to the brain. That's all vagus. So, it's like a super That's all vagus. So, it's like a super That's all vagus. So, it's like a super highway. Sensory information going one highway. Sensory information going one highway. Sensory information going one way and in the other direction is motor way and in the other direction is motor way and in the other direction is motor control. So, the vagus is not just for control. So, the vagus is not just for control. So, the vagus is not just for sensing things, it's actually for sensing things, it's actually for sensing things, it's actually for controlling things. It's got a sensory controlling things. It's got a sensory controlling things. It's got a sensory pathway and a motor pathway. pathway and a motor pathway. pathway and a motor pathway. So, that's the first thing I think So, that's the first thing I think So, that's the first thing I think everyone should know about the vagus. In everyone should know about the vagus. In everyone should know about the vagus. In fact, it's so important that I feel like this it's so important that I feel like this it's so important that I feel like this is as important as people knowing that is as important as people knowing that is as important as people knowing that walking involves flexors and extensors. walking involves flexors and extensors. walking involves flexors and extensors. And if you don't think that's important, And if you don't think that's important, And if you don't think that's important, it's as important as walking frankly it's as important as walking frankly it's as important as walking frankly because the vagus is the way in which because the vagus is the way in which because the vagus is the way in which you can govern the brain-body connection you can govern the brain-body connection you can govern the brain-body connection and in which you can steer various and in which you can steer various and in which you can steer various aspects of your mood and well-being, but aspects of your mood and well-being, but aspects of your mood and well-being, but most people just don't understand how to most people just don't understand how to most people just don't understand how to use it. So, first you got to understand use it. So, first you got to understand use it. So, first you got to understand what it is. So, you've got sensory what it is. So, you've got sensory what it is. So, you've got sensory information coming from all these information coming from all these information coming from all these different organs of the body up to the different organs of the body up to the different organs of the body up to the brain. You got motor information going brain. You got motor information going brain. You got motor information going from the brain back to the body. And so, from the brain back to the body. And so, from the brain back to the body. And so, you've got this super highway within you've got this super highway within you've got this super highway within you. Now, what actually regulates the you. Now, what actually regulates the you. Now, what actually regulates the vagus? Often times, you'll hear things vagus? Often times, you'll hear things vagus? Often times, you'll hear things like, "Oh, you know, this particular like, "Oh, you know, this particular like, "Oh, you know, this particular behavior, you know, rubbing it your face behavior, you know, rubbing it your face behavior, you know, rubbing it your face at a particular location, or breathing at a particular location, or breathing at a particular location, or breathing in a particular way, or uh you know, a in a particular way, or uh you know, a in a particular way, or uh you know, a warm bath or something stimulates the warm bath or something stimulates the warm bath or something stimulates the vagus." Well, right now I want everyone vagus." Well, right now I want everyone vagus." Well, right now I want everyone to know that {quote} {unquote} to know that {quote} {unquote} to know that {quote} {unquote} stimulating the vagus, broadly speaking, stimulating the vagus, broadly speaking, stimulating the vagus, broadly speaking, is a terrible way to think about the is a terrible way to think about the is a terrible way to think about the vagus. Because did you know what? If you vagus. Because did you know what? If you vagus. Because did you know what? If you have a contaminant inside your body, the have a contaminant inside your body, the have a contaminant inside your body, the vagus senses that and projects that vagus senses that and projects that vagus senses that and projects that information to your brain, and you start information to your brain, and you start information to your brain, and you start to generate a fever. You start to try to generate a fever. You start to try to generate a fever. You start to try and kill that contaminant in your body. and kill that contaminant in your body. and kill that contaminant in your body. So, I don't know that you want to So, I don't know that you want to So, I don't know that you want to stimulate the vagus just as a general stimulate the vagus just as a general stimulate the vagus just as a general theme. Today, we're going to get theme. Today, we're going to get theme. Today, we're going to get specific about how you can activate specific about how you can activate specific about how you can activate particular circuits, certain pathways particular circuits, certain pathways particular circuits, certain pathways from certain organs to the brain in from certain organs to the brain in from certain organs to the brain in order to feel better or relieve certain order to feel better or relieve certain order to feel better or relieve certain conditions. But, you certainly don't conditions. But, you certainly don't conditions. But, you certainly don't want to just stimulate the vagus. Now, want to just stimulate the vagus. Now, want to just stimulate the vagus. Now, excitement about the vagus in part is excitement about the vagus in part is excitement about the vagus in part is because of what um quite honestly was a because of what um quite honestly was a because of what um quite honestly was a fairly pioneering theory about the fairly pioneering theory about the fairly pioneering theory about the vagus, which is this polyvagal theory. vagus, which is this polyvagal theory. vagus, which is this polyvagal theory. So, polyvagal, the word poly means many, So, polyvagal, the word poly means many, So, polyvagal, the word poly means many, is cool because it acknowledges that the is cool because it acknowledges that the is cool because it acknowledges that the vagus has a lot of different branches. vagus has a lot of different branches. vagus has a lot of different branches. It's not just one thing. And so, I It's not just one thing. And so, I It's not just one thing. And so, I really like that. I like the naming, really like that. I like the naming, really like that. I like the naming, polyvagal. The idea that Porges put polyvagal. The idea that Porges put polyvagal. The idea that Porges put forward was that there's a dorsal vagus, forward was that there's a dorsal vagus, forward was that there's a dorsal vagus, which is kind of on runs the back of the which is kind of on runs the back of the which is kind of on runs the back of the spinal cord, which is involved in spinal cord, which is involved in spinal cord, which is involved in alertness and activation and kind of alertness and activation and kind of alertness and activation and kind of fight or flight type stuff. And that fight or flight type stuff. And that fight or flight type stuff. And that there's a ventral pathway. there's a ventral pathway. there's a ventral pathway. And that that's involved in more kind of And that that's involved in more kind of And that that's involved in more kind of empathic behaviors. empathic behaviors. empathic behaviors. That is not quite in agreement with the That is not quite in agreement with the That is not quite in agreement with the modern anatomy, but you know, he was modern anatomy, but you know, he was modern anatomy, but you know, he was doing the best with what he had at the doing the best with what he had at the doing the best with what he had at the time, so okay. time, so okay. time, so okay. The problem I have with the polyvagal The problem I have with the polyvagal The problem I have with the polyvagal theory is the way that it's discussed. theory is the way that it's discussed. theory is the way that it's discussed. People will often say, "Oh, you know, if People will often say, "Oh, you know, if People will often say, "Oh, you know, if your dorsal vagus is your dorsal vagus is your dorsal vagus is um too active, then you tend to be um too active, then you tend to be um too active, then you tend to be someone who's a little too keyed up." someone who's a little too keyed up." someone who's a little too keyed up." And people who are kind of in a state of And people who are kind of in a state of And people who are kind of in a state of freeze or kind of flaccid and kind freeze or kind of flaccid and kind freeze or kind of flaccid and kind of, you know, like just not really um of, you know, like just not really um of, you know, like just not really um active and in and they're just active and in and they're just active and in and they're just lethargic, well, then that pathway is lethargic, well, then that pathway is lethargic, well, then that pathway is hypoactive. It should be more active. hypoactive. It should be more active. hypoactive. It should be more active. So, there are a lot of theories about So, there are a lot of theories about So, there are a lot of theories about how psychology maps onto the vagus that how psychology maps onto the vagus that how psychology maps onto the vagus that as far as I know, don't map to any real as far as I know, don't map to any real as far as I know, don't map to any real physiology. Now, the other problem with this kind of the other problem with this kind of the other problem with this kind of the way that the polyvagal theory is way that the polyvagal theory is way that the polyvagal theory is discussed, probably not by the real discussed, probably not by the real discussed, probably not by the real experts, but by a lot of people, is that experts, but by a lot of people, is that experts, but by a lot of people, is that people start to diagnose different people start to diagnose different people start to diagnose different psychological and physical psychological and physical psychological and physical manifestations through the vagus. They would say things through the vagus. They would say things through the vagus. They would say things like, "Oh, you know, this person is like, "Oh, you know, this person is like, "Oh, you know, this person is hyperflexible at the joints, and hyperflexible at the joints, and hyperflexible at the joints, and therefore their dorsal vagus isn't therefore their dorsal vagus isn't therefore their dorsal vagus isn't active enough." or something like that. active enough." or something like that. active enough." or something like that. And it's really kind of gone way outside And it's really kind of gone way outside And it's really kind of gone way outside the lane lines. So, today we're going to the lane lines. So, today we're going to the lane lines. So, today we're going to clean up a lot of that. Let's make it clean up a lot of that. Let's make it clean up a lot of that. Let's make it really simple about how the vagus really simple about how the vagus really simple about how the vagus actually works, at least as we actually works, at least as we actually works, at least as we understand it understand it understand it today in 2021. First of all, as I today in 2021. First of all, as I today in 2021. First of all, as I mentioned, you have sensory information. mentioned, you have sensory information. mentioned, you have sensory information. The same way that you detect light with The same way that you detect light with The same way that you detect light with your eyes or you hear sounds with your eyes or you hear sounds with your eyes or you hear sounds with your ears, you have sensors in your gut that ears, you have sensors in your gut that ears, you have sensors in your gut that sense how full or empty your gut is. It sense how full or empty your gut is. It sense how full or empty your gut is. It can also sense how acidic your gut is. can also sense how acidic your gut is. can also sense how acidic your gut is. It can sense various things within your It can sense various things within your It can sense various things within your gut. Your heart is doing the same. It's gut. Your heart is doing the same. It's gut. Your heart is doing the same. It's informing the brain how fast your heart informing the brain how fast your heart informing the brain how fast your heart is beating, how full your lungs are is beating, how full your lungs are is beating, how full your lungs are is being communicated, and then the status being communicated, and then the status being communicated, and then the status of your immune system. So, of your immune system. So, of your immune system. So, the way to think about the vagus is the way to think about the vagus is the way to think about the vagus is the same way I would think about the eyes. same way I would think about the eyes. same way I would think about the eyes. The eyes are looking at colors, they're The eyes are looking at colors, they're The eyes are looking at colors, they're looking at motion, they're looking how looking at motion, they're looking how looking at motion, they're looking how bright it is, and each one of those bright it is, and each one of those bright it is, and each one of those things, those features, is telling the things, those features, is telling the things, those features, is telling the brain something different, so the brain something different, so the brain something different, so the brain can decide when to be awake or asleep, can decide when to be awake or asleep, can decide when to be awake or asleep, whether or not it's looking at somebody whether or not it's looking at somebody whether or not it's looking at somebody uh attractive or unattractive. The vagus uh attractive or unattractive. The vagus uh attractive or unattractive. The vagus nerve is also analyzing many features nerve is also analyzing many features nerve is also analyzing many features within the body and informing the brain within the body and informing the brain within the body and informing the brain of how to feel about that and what to of how to feel about that and what to of how to feel about that and what to do. So, a really good example that I do. So, a really good example that I do. So, a really good example that I think is an exciting one is as it think is an exciting one is as it think is an exciting one is as it relates to sugar. So, we all know that relates to sugar. So, we all know that relates to sugar. So, we all know that sweet things generally taste good. I'm sweet things generally taste good. I'm sweet things generally taste good. I'm not particularly a fan of very sweet not particularly a fan of very sweet not particularly a fan of very sweet things. You know, I'd much rather have things. You know, I'd much rather have things. You know, I'd much rather have um you know, cheese or pizza or you know, cheese or pizza or you know, cheese or pizza or hamburger or steak. I like savory fatty hamburger or steak. I like savory fatty hamburger or steak. I like savory fatty foods. But, I do like sweet foods and foods. But, I do like sweet foods and foods. But, I do like sweet foods and most people find sweet foods to be most people find sweet foods to be most people find sweet foods to be attractive. They want them. attractive. They want them. attractive. They want them. They might or they might not be able to They might or they might not be able to They might or they might not be able to regulate their behavior around them, but regulate their behavior around them, but regulate their behavior around them, but they want them. And what's really they want them. And what's really they want them. And what's really interesting is that for hundreds of interesting is that for hundreds of interesting is that for hundreds of years people have thought that that's years people have thought that that's years people have thought that that's because of the way that sweet to because of the way that sweet to because of the way that sweet to sweet foods taste. So, that makes sense, sweet foods taste. So, that makes sense, sweet foods taste. So, that makes sense, right? You eat something, it tastes right? You eat something, it tastes right? You eat something, it tastes sweet, you want more of it. Well, it sweet, you want more of it. Well, it sweet, you want more of it. Well, it turns out that it's much more turns out that it's much more turns out that it's much more interesting than that. When you eat interesting than that. When you eat interesting than that. When you eat something sweet, something sweet, something sweet, within your stomach, you have cells, within your stomach, you have cells, within your stomach, you have cells, neurons, that sense the presence of neurons, that sense the presence of neurons, that sense the presence of sugary foods independent of their taste sugary foods independent of their taste sugary foods independent of their taste and signal to the brain. So, those and signal to the brain. So, those and signal to the brain. So, those sensors, those neurons, send information sensors, those neurons, send information sensors, those neurons, send information up the vagus to your brain, goes through up the vagus to your brain, goes through up the vagus to your brain, goes through a series of stations, and then you a series of stations, and then you a series of stations, and then you release dopamine, this molecule that release dopamine, this molecule that release dopamine, this molecule that makes you want more of whatever it is makes you want more of whatever it is makes you want more of whatever it is that you just ingested. In fact, this that you just ingested. In fact, this that you just ingested. In fact, this pathway is so powerful that they've done pathway is so powerful that they've done pathway is so powerful that they've done experiments where they completely numb experiments where they completely numb experiments where they completely numb all the taste and feeling in somebody's all the taste and feeling in somebody's all the taste and feeling in somebody's mouth. They're blindfolded, so they don't know They're blindfolded, so they don't know They're blindfolded, so they don't know what they're eating, and they're eating what they're eating, and they're eating what they're eating, and they're eating a food that's either sugary or not a food that's either sugary or not a food that's either sugary or not sugary. And what they find is that even sugary. And what they find is that even sugary. And what they find is that even though people can't taste the sugary though people can't taste the sugary though people can't taste the sugary food, they crave more of the food that food, they crave more of the food that food, they crave more of the food that contains sugar because of the sensors in contains sugar because of the sensors in contains sugar because of the sensors in the gut that sense sugar. So, to put the gut that sense sugar. So, to put the gut that sense sugar. So, to put this differently, you actually have this differently, you actually have this differently, you actually have sensors within your body that make you sensors within your body that make you sensors within your body that make you crave sugar independent of the sweet crave sugar independent of the sweet crave sugar independent of the sweet taste of those things. Now, that's taste of those things. Now, that's taste of those things. Now, that's incredible. And what it does and what it incredible. And what it does and what it incredible. And what it does and what it tells us is that we have circuits in our tells us is that we have circuits in our tells us is that we have circuits in our body that are driving us towards certain body that are driving us towards certain body that are driving us towards certain behaviors and making us feel good even behaviors and making us feel good even behaviors and making us feel good even though we can't perceive them. Now, for though we can't perceive them. Now, for though we can't perceive them. Now, for those of you that are really interested those of you that are really interested those of you that are really interested in gut intuition and kind of gut in gut intuition and kind of gut in gut intuition and kind of gut feelings, this is a gut feeling. Except feelings, this is a gut feeling. Except feelings, this is a gut feeling. Except this is a chemical gut feeling. This is this is a chemical gut feeling. This is this is a chemical gut feeling. This is a particular set of neurons detecting a particular set of neurons detecting a particular set of neurons detecting that something in your body has a that something in your body has a that something in your body has a particular feature, in this case the particular feature, in this case the particular feature, in this case the presence of sugars, and sending presence of sugars, and sending presence of sugars, and sending information to the brain to essentially information to the brain to essentially information to the brain to essentially to control your behavior. And I find to control your behavior. And I find to control your behavior. And I find this remarkable because what it means is this remarkable because what it means is this remarkable because what it means is that what we call attractive isn't that what we call attractive isn't that what we call attractive isn't always coming from our thoughts about always coming from our thoughts about always coming from our thoughts about that or our feelings or even our that or our feelings or even our that or our feelings or even our perception. We are drawn to particular perception. We are drawn to particular perception. We are drawn to particular foods and we're drawn to perhaps also to foods and we're drawn to perhaps also to foods and we're drawn to perhaps also to particular people, places, and other particular people, places, and other particular people, places, and other things because of information that's things because of information that's things because of information that's coming from our body. We're going to coming from our body. We're going to coming from our body. We're going to talk about one what one can do with this talk about one what one can do with this talk about one what one can do with this information. I know many people are information. I know many people are information. I know many people are thoughtful or concerned about sugars thoughtful or concerned about sugars thoughtful or concerned about sugars these days thinking, you know, we all these days thinking, you know, we all these days thinking, you know, we all ingest too much sugar. There's sugar ingest too much sugar. There's sugar ingest too much sugar. There's sugar snuck into all the things we eat. And snuck into all the things we eat. And snuck into all the things we eat. And indeed that's true. I mean, this should indeed that's true. I mean, this should indeed that's true. I mean, this should completely reframe the way that we think completely reframe the way that we think completely reframe the way that we think about the sort of so-called hidden about the sort of so-called hidden about the sort of so-called hidden sugars in foods. What this means is that sugars in foods. What this means is that sugars in foods. What this means is that even if a food is very savory like a even if a food is very savory like a even if a food is very savory like a piece of pizza or a or a piece of bread piece of pizza or a or a piece of bread piece of pizza or a or a piece of bread or even like a salad dressing, if there's even like a salad dressing, if there's even like a salad dressing, if there's sugar snuck into that sugar snuck into that sugar snuck into that and you can't taste it, you will still and you can't taste it, you will still and you can't taste it, you will still crave more of that thing without knowing crave more of that thing without knowing crave more of that thing without knowing that you crave it because it has sugar. that you crave it because it has sugar. that you crave it because it has sugar. In other words, you might find yourself In other words, you might find yourself In other words, you might find yourself wanting certain foods and not knowing wanting certain foods and not knowing wanting certain foods and not knowing why you want those foods. So, I find why you want those foods. So, I find why you want those foods. So, I find this to be a fascinating aspect of our this to be a fascinating aspect of our this to be a fascinating aspect of our biology. And yes, it relates to mood and biology. And yes, it relates to mood and biology. And yes, it relates to mood and emotion. And we'll talk about how that emotion. And we'll talk about how that emotion. And we'll talk about how that is in a moment. So, let's just back up a is in a moment. So, let's just back up a is in a moment. So, let's just back up a bit and ask the question, why do we eat bit and ask the question, why do we eat bit and ask the question, why do we eat certain things and why do certain foods certain things and why do certain foods certain things and why do certain foods make us feel good and other foods make us feel good and other foods make us feel good and other foods actually make us feel anxious. I think actually make us feel anxious. I think actually make us feel anxious. I think some people may be familiar with this, some people may be familiar with this, some people may be familiar with this, other people might not, but other people might not, but other people might not, but most people don't realize that as you most people don't realize that as you most people don't realize that as you approach eating, there's an anxiety approach eating, there's an anxiety approach eating, there's an anxiety associated with that. It's an alertness. associated with that. It's an alertness. associated with that. It's an alertness. Remember in the previous discussions, or Remember in the previous discussions, or Remember in the previous discussions, or even if you don't and you haven't seen even if you don't and you haven't seen even if you don't and you haven't seen those, all of your moods and feelings of all of your moods and feelings of all of your moods and feelings of well-being are anchored on this well-being are anchored on this well-being are anchored on this continuum of alertness versus calmness. continuum of alertness versus calmness. continuum of alertness versus calmness. And we hear so often about rest and And we hear so often about rest and And we hear so often about rest and digest, you know, that oh, after we eat, digest, you know, that oh, after we eat, digest, you know, that oh, after we eat, we feel really nice and full, hopefully we feel really nice and full, hopefully we feel really nice and full, hopefully comfortably full and not too full. comfortably full and not too full. comfortably full and not too full. And we're relaxing and we feel And we're relaxing and we feel And we're relaxing and we feel uh satiated. It's associated with uh satiated. It's associated with uh satiated. It's associated with serotonin, this molecule of satiation. serotonin, this molecule of satiation. serotonin, this molecule of satiation. That's all true. That's all true. That's all true. But what most people don't know is that But what most people don't know is that But what most people don't know is that there's an area of the hypothalamus, so there's an area of the hypothalamus, so there's an area of the hypothalamus, so deep in the brain, kind of in the middle deep in the brain, kind of in the middle deep in the brain, kind of in the middle deep portion of the brain, called the deep portion of the brain, called the deep portion of the brain, called the lateral hypothalamus. lateral hypothalamus. lateral hypothalamus. And the lateral hypothalamus is really And the lateral hypothalamus is really And the lateral hypothalamus is really interesting because it controls interesting because it controls interesting because it controls feeding, but it inhibits feeding. It feeding, but it inhibits feeding. It feeding, but it inhibits feeding. It stops us from feeding. stops us from feeding. stops us from feeding. And there's another area in the brain. And there's another area in the brain. And there's another area in the brain. If you want names, I'll give them to If you want names, I'll give them to If you want names, I'll give them to you. If you don't want names, just you. If you don't want names, just you. If you don't want names, just ignore them, delete them from your from ignore them, delete them from your from ignore them, delete them from your from your memory and awareness, called the your memory and awareness, called the your memory and awareness, called the locus ceruleus. Now, the locus ceruleus locus ceruleus. Now, the locus ceruleus locus ceruleus. Now, the locus ceruleus sits back further in the brainstem and sits back further in the brainstem and sits back further in the brainstem and it releases norepinephrine, which is it releases norepinephrine, which is it releases norepinephrine, which is essentially adrenaline. It makes us feel essentially adrenaline. It makes us feel essentially adrenaline. It makes us feel alert. Now, locus ceruleus has a lot of Now, locus ceruleus has a lot of Now, locus ceruleus has a lot of different functions in the brain, but different functions in the brain, but different functions in the brain, but when we are going to eat, let's say we when we are going to eat, let's say we when we are going to eat, let's say we walk into a restaurant, we sit down, or walk into a restaurant, we sit down, or walk into a restaurant, we sit down, or we're preparing a meal, we're preparing a meal, we're preparing a meal, locus ceruleus is known to release locus ceruleus is known to release locus ceruleus is known to release noradrenaline in the brain. It's noradrenaline in the brain. It's noradrenaline in the brain. It's creating a kind of alertness. This has creating a kind of alertness. This has creating a kind of alertness. This has ancient utility, but it's creating this ancient utility, but it's creating this ancient utility, but it's creating this alertness and for many people they alertness and for many people they alertness and for many people they experience that experience that experience that as they approach food as stress, as they approach food as stress, as they approach food as stress, as anxiety. But what's interesting is that anxiety. But what's interesting is that anxiety. But what's interesting is that as we approach food, locus ceruleus as we approach food, locus ceruleus as we approach food, locus ceruleus is releasing all these molecules that is releasing all these molecules that is releasing all these molecules that make us feel more anxious and alert. make us feel more anxious and alert. make us feel more anxious and alert. Sometimes it's felt as excitement and Sometimes it's felt as excitement and Sometimes it's felt as excitement and that has probably to do with how we feel that has probably to do with how we feel that has probably to do with how we feel about food generally. Are we happy with about food generally. Are we happy with about food generally. Are we happy with our relationship to food? Are we trying our relationship to food? Are we trying our relationship to food? Are we trying to restrict our relationship to food? to restrict our relationship to food? to restrict our relationship to food? Are people coming over for dinner? All Are people coming over for dinner? All Are people coming over for dinner? All that will play in, of course. But, that will play in, of course. But, that will play in, of course. But, there's a certain stress and anxiety on there's a certain stress and anxiety on there's a certain stress and anxiety on approach to food. And as we approach to food. And as we approach to food. And as we approach food, and we feel that anxiety, locus food, and we feel that anxiety, locus food, and we feel that anxiety, locus ceruleus activates the lateral ceruleus activates the lateral ceruleus activates the lateral hypothalamus in a way that inhibits hypothalamus in a way that inhibits hypothalamus in a way that inhibits feeding, that makes us not want to eat. feeding, that makes us not want to eat. feeding, that makes us not want to eat. So, a lot of people who have kind of So, a lot of people who have kind of So, a lot of people who have kind of pre-meal anxiety or anxiety around food, pre-meal anxiety or anxiety around food, pre-meal anxiety or anxiety around food, and they can't seem to just calm down and they can't seem to just calm down and they can't seem to just calm down and have a good meal to access that and have a good meal to access that and have a good meal to access that later rest and digest, later rest and digest, later rest and digest, a lot of that is because of this a lot of that is because of this a lot of that is because of this heightened stress upon approach to food. heightened stress upon approach to food. heightened stress upon approach to food. And a lot of the tools that are out And a lot of the tools that are out And a lot of the tools that are out there, both for eating disorders and for there, both for eating disorders and for there, both for eating disorders and for just kind of the general public who just kind of the general public who just kind of the general public who isn't suffering from eating disorders, isn't suffering from eating disorders, isn't suffering from eating disorders, things like things like things like mindfulness around meals, you know, they mindfulness around meals, you know, they mindfulness around meals, you know, they always tell you, you know, you should always tell you, you know, you should always tell you, you know, you should never eat when stressed. I'm sorry, but never eat when stressed. I'm sorry, but never eat when stressed. I'm sorry, but my life is not organized in a way that I my life is not organized in a way that I my life is not organized in a way that I can't do that. I would never eat, right? can't do that. I would never eat, right? can't do that. I would never eat, right? Because I eat when I'm awake, and I'm I Because I eat when I'm awake, and I'm I Because I eat when I'm awake, and I'm I don't know if I'm stressed, but I don't know if I'm stressed, but I don't know if I'm stressed, but I don't think I am, but I tend to, you I don't think I am, but I tend to, you I don't think I am, but I tend to, you know, run around a lot during the day. I know, run around a lot during the day. I know, run around a lot during the day. I don't generally take time to do two or don't generally take time to do two or don't generally take time to do two or three deep breaths before I eat. I three deep breaths before I eat. I three deep breaths before I eat. I generally will just keep will eat. generally will just keep will eat. generally will just keep will eat. That can be healthy or unhealthy, That can be healthy or unhealthy, That can be healthy or unhealthy, depending on the quality of your depending on the quality of your depending on the quality of your digestion. I think using digestion as a digestion. I think using digestion as a digestion. I think using digestion as a guide is good. But, a lot of people guide is good. But, a lot of people guide is good. But, a lot of people aren't aware that aren't aware that aren't aware that the this interaction between locus the this interaction between locus the this interaction between locus ceruleus and lateral hypothalamus is a ceruleus and lateral hypothalamus is a ceruleus and lateral hypothalamus is a basic mechanism where we are supposed to basic mechanism where we are supposed to basic mechanism where we are supposed to get a little bit alert and anxious get a little bit alert and anxious get a little bit alert and anxious around meal time. And then, as we eat, around meal time. And then, as we eat, around meal time. And then, as we eat, the mechanisms for calming and satiation the mechanisms for calming and satiation the mechanisms for calming and satiation are supposed to kick in. And those are supposed to kick in. And those are supposed to kick in. And those mechanisms involve, as I mentioned mechanisms involve, as I mentioned mechanisms involve, as I mentioned earlier, two things. One is how things earlier, two things. One is how things earlier, two things. One is how things taste. Digestion starts in the mouth, taste. Digestion starts in the mouth, taste. Digestion starts in the mouth, of course. We'll taste our food. of course. We'll taste our food. of course. We'll taste our food. Everyone tells us we should chew our Everyone tells us we should chew our Everyone tells us we should chew our food more. Yes, that can improve food more. Yes, that can improve food more. Yes, that can improve digestion. We're not supposed to drink digestion. We're not supposed to drink digestion. We're not supposed to drink too many fluids as we eat. That's true, too many fluids as we eat. That's true, too many fluids as we eat. That's true, too. But, a lot of how we feel while we too. But, a lot of how we feel while we too. But, a lot of how we feel while we eat and after we eat is because of this eat and after we eat is because of this eat and after we eat is because of this vagus sensing of what's in our gut. It's vagus sensing of what's in our gut. It's vagus sensing of what's in our gut. It's sending information all the time. Is sending information all the time. Is sending information all the time. Is there sugar? there sugar? there sugar? Are there fats? Are there contaminants? Are there fats? Are there contaminants? Are there fats? Are there contaminants? There are a lot of information, these There are a lot of information, these There are a lot of information, these so-called parallel pathways that are so-called parallel pathways that are so-called parallel pathways that are going up into our brain that regulate going up into our brain that regulate going up into our brain that regulate whether or not we want to eat more of whether or not we want to eat more of whether or not we want to eat more of something or not. And there are something or not. And there are something or not. And there are accelerators, things that make us want accelerators, things that make us want accelerators, things that make us want to eat more, like sugar and fats, to eat more, like sugar and fats, to eat more, like sugar and fats, because those are nutrient dense and because those are nutrient dense and because those are nutrient dense and they helps generally, at least in the they helps generally, at least in the they helps generally, at least in the short term, support the survival of short term, support the survival of short term, support the survival of animals. But, also amino acids. And this is very But, also amino acids. And this is very But, also amino acids. And this is very important. There are a lot of data, There are a lot of data, There are a lot of data, but much of what but much of what but much of what comes from the data on what people eat comes from the data on what people eat comes from the data on what people eat and how much they eat is from a and how much they eat is from a and how much they eat is from a subconscious detection of how many amino subconscious detection of how many amino subconscious detection of how many amino acids and what the array, meaning the acids and what the array, meaning the acids and what the array, meaning the constellation of amino acids, is in a constellation of amino acids, is in a constellation of amino acids, is in a given food. And it's fair to say that given food. And it's fair to say that given food. And it's fair to say that the sum total of these studies point in the sum total of these studies point in the sum total of these studies point in a direction where people will basically a direction where people will basically a direction where people will basically eat not until their stomach is full, eat not until their stomach is full, eat not until their stomach is full, but until but until but until the brain perceives that they have the brain perceives that they have the brain perceives that they have adequate intake of amino acids. adequate intake of amino acids. adequate intake of amino acids. Now, this is a conversation that comes Now, this is a conversation that comes Now, this is a conversation that comes up in the context of, you know, the meat up in the context of, you know, the meat up in the context of, you know, the meat only, the keto, the kind of zone diet, only, the keto, the kind of zone diet, only, the keto, the kind of zone diet, the Mediterranean diet, the vegan diet. the Mediterranean diet, the vegan diet. the Mediterranean diet, the vegan diet. I'm largely going to ignore the kind of I'm largely going to ignore the kind of I'm largely going to ignore the kind of strict camps today. I will talk a little strict camps today. I will talk a little strict camps today. I will talk a little bit about it, because I think each one bit about it, because I think each one bit about it, because I think each one of them actually taps into something of them actually taps into something of them actually taps into something important about this brain-body important about this brain-body important about this brain-body relationship that the other ones don't. relationship that the other ones don't. relationship that the other ones don't. But, I don't want to get into a But, I don't want to get into a But, I don't want to get into a discussion about the ethical the ethics discussion about the ethical the ethics discussion about the ethical the ethics of different foods, of animal-based or of different foods, of animal-based or of different foods, of animal-based or non-animal-based, cuz that's not the non-animal-based, cuz that's not the non-animal-based, cuz that's not the topic today. It's really about nutrient topic today. It's really about nutrient topic today. It's really about nutrient sensing and amino acid sensing. So, sensing and amino acid sensing. So, sensing and amino acid sensing. So, we generally will eat until our gut we generally will eat until our gut we generally will eat until our gut tells our brain that we have adequate tells our brain that we have adequate tells our brain that we have adequate amounts of these amino acids. Amino amounts of these amino acids. Amino amounts of these amino acids. Amino acids, of course, are important because acids, of course, are important because acids, of course, are important because they are the building blocks of, sure, they are the building blocks of, sure, they are the building blocks of, sure, muscle and the other things in our body muscle and the other things in our body muscle and the other things in our body that need repair, that need repair, that need repair, but what most people don't realize is but what most people don't realize is but what most people don't realize is that amino acids that amino acids that amino acids are what the neurochemicals in the brain are what the neurochemicals in the brain are what the neurochemicals in the brain are made from. are made from. are made from. Now, this is vitally important, okay? Now, this is vitally important, okay? Now, this is vitally important, okay? So, we've heard dopamine is this So, we've heard dopamine is this So, we've heard dopamine is this molecule that makes you feel good. molecule that makes you feel good. molecule that makes you feel good. Actually, dopamine is a molecule that Actually, dopamine is a molecule that Actually, dopamine is a molecule that makes you feel good, it's released makes you feel good, it's released makes you feel good, it's released within the brain, within the brain, within the brain, and it does feel very good when you have and it does feel very good when you have and it does feel very good when you have dopamine release. Dopamine release is dopamine release. Dopamine release is dopamine release. Dopamine release is caused by surprise, excitement, events caused by surprise, excitement, events caused by surprise, excitement, events that you're looking forward to and that you're looking forward to and that you're looking forward to and that turn out well. turn out well. turn out well. It is inhibited by events you're looking It is inhibited by events you're looking It is inhibited by events you're looking forward to that don't work out. When forward to that don't work out. When forward to that don't work out. When someone says they're going to call that someone says they're going to call that someone says they're going to call that you're really, really excited to talk to you're really, really excited to talk to you're really, really excited to talk to and then they don't, or you thought a and then they don't, or you thought a and then they don't, or you thought a movie was going to be really great and movie was going to be really great and movie was going to be really great and it's not, or you expect a meal to be it's not, or you expect a meal to be it's not, or you expect a meal to be really delicious and it's kind of eh. really delicious and it's kind of eh. really delicious and it's kind of eh. And we actually there's a name for that, And we actually there's a name for that, And we actually there's a name for that, it's called reward prediction error. So, it's called reward prediction error. So, it's called reward prediction error. So, if and you can actually use this in the if and you can actually use this in the if and you can actually use this in the context of meals and plans in a way context of meals and plans in a way context of meals and plans in a way that's very useful with yourself and that's very useful with yourself and that's very useful with yourself and people you know. people you know. people you know. Essentially, if you expect something to Essentially, if you expect something to Essentially, if you expect something to be really terrific, be really terrific, be really terrific, it really does place a higher it really does place a higher it really does place a higher expectation at the chemical level. So, expectation at the chemical level. So, expectation at the chemical level. So, if you don't get as much dopamine as if you don't get as much dopamine as if you don't get as much dopamine as you're expecting from something, so you you're expecting from something, so you you're expecting from something, so you hear about a really great restaurant you hear about a really great restaurant you hear about a really great restaurant or a place that has a really In my case, or a place that has a really In my case, or a place that has a really In my case, I have I have I have um I wouldn't call it an addiction, I um I wouldn't call it an addiction, I um I wouldn't call it an addiction, I would call it more of an affliction for would call it more of an affliction for would call it more of an affliction for croissants. The best vegetable, of croissants. The best vegetable, of croissants. The best vegetable, of course, is the croissant, and I get course, is the croissant, and I get course, is the croissant, and I get really excited about the fact that really excited about the fact that really excited about the fact that someone will tell me, "Oh, there's this someone will tell me, "Oh, there's this someone will tell me, "Oh, there's this place and they have incredible place and they have incredible place and they have incredible croissants. You got to go there." So, I croissants. You got to go there." So, I croissants. You got to go there." So, I get really excited and I'll go, and just get really excited and I'll go, and just get really excited and I'll go, and just them telling me that it's going to be them telling me that it's going to be them telling me that it's going to be really terrific raises an expectation, a really terrific raises an expectation, a really terrific raises an expectation, a dopamine expectation, and unless those dopamine expectation, and unless those dopamine expectation, and unless those croissants are amazing, chances are I'm croissants are amazing, chances are I'm croissants are amazing, chances are I'm going to experience them as less good, going to experience them as less good, going to experience them as less good, less satisfying, I will truly release less satisfying, I will truly release less satisfying, I will truly release less dopamine less dopamine less dopamine than I would had they just said, "Oh than I would had they just said, "Oh than I would had they just said, "Oh yeah, I think that there are croissants yeah, I think that there are croissants yeah, I think that there are croissants down the street." Or if I just tried one down the street." Or if I just tried one down the street." Or if I just tried one at random. And that's because of this at random. And that's because of this at random. And that's because of this reward prediction error. Your reward prediction error. Your reward prediction error. Your expectation of something releases expectation of something releases expectation of something releases dopamine and the actual event releases dopamine and the actual event releases dopamine and the actual event releases dopamine. And if the event related dopamine. And if the event related dopamine. And if the event related dopamine does not exceed the expectation dopamine does not exceed the expectation dopamine does not exceed the expectation or at least match it, or at least match it, or at least match it, there's a much higher tendency that you there's a much higher tendency that you there's a much higher tendency that you won't pursue that thing again. So, won't pursue that thing again. So, won't pursue that thing again. So, dopamine is really powerful and it's not dopamine is really powerful and it's not dopamine is really powerful and it's not just the molecule of reward, it is the just the molecule of reward, it is the just the molecule of reward, it is the molecule of desire. It's the molecule of molecule of desire. It's the molecule of molecule of desire. It's the molecule of wanting, not just the molecule of wanting, not just the molecule of wanting, not just the molecule of having. And a book, since people often having. And a book, since people often having. And a book, since people often ask for book recommendations, I don't ask for book recommendations, I don't ask for book recommendations, I don't know the author personally, but I love know the author personally, but I love know the author personally, but I love the book. It's called The Molecule of the book. It's called The Molecule of the book. It's called The Molecule of More. It's a terrific book. I wish I'd More. It's a terrific book. I wish I'd More. It's a terrific book. I wish I'd written it, frankly. Um, but if you want written it, frankly. Um, but if you want written it, frankly. Um, but if you want to learn more about dopamine, reward to learn more about dopamine, reward to learn more about dopamine, reward prediction error, and how dopamine prediction error, and how dopamine prediction error, and how dopamine regulates various aspects of your regulates various aspects of your regulates various aspects of your emotional and motivational life, it's a emotional and motivational life, it's a emotional and motivational life, it's a terrific read. terrific read. terrific read. Dopamine is what's going to lead us to Dopamine is what's going to lead us to Dopamine is what's going to lead us to want to eat more of something or to not want to eat more of something or to not want to eat more of something or to not want more of something. Because dopamine want more of something. Because dopamine want more of something. Because dopamine really is about craving. It's about really is about craving. It's about really is about craving. It's about motivation and it's about desire. And as motivation and it's about desire. And as motivation and it's about desire. And as I mentioned, these amino acid sensors in I mentioned, these amino acid sensors in I mentioned, these amino acid sensors in our gut are detecting how many amino our gut are detecting how many amino our gut are detecting how many amino acids, but they're also detecting which acids, but they're also detecting which acids, but they're also detecting which amino acids. And there's a particular amino acids. And there's a particular amino acids. And there's a particular amino acid called L-tyrosine, which amino acid called L-tyrosine, which amino acid called L-tyrosine, which comes from food. You can look up online comes from food. You can look up online comes from food. You can look up online which foods contain L-tyrosine. It is in which foods contain L-tyrosine. It is in which foods contain L-tyrosine. It is in meats, it is in nuts, it is also in some meats, it is in nuts, it is also in some meats, it is in nuts, it is also in some plant-based foods. plant-based foods. plant-based foods. L-tyrosine is the precursor to a couple other is the precursor to a couple other is the precursor to a couple other molecules, like L-dopa, etc., that make molecules, like L-dopa, etc., that make molecules, like L-dopa, etc., that make dopamine. And so, there's a dopamine. And so, there's a dopamine. And so, there's a misconception out there that most of the misconception out there that most of the misconception out there that most of the serotonin is in our gut and most of the serotonin is in our gut and most of the serotonin is in our gut and most of the dopamine is in our gut and therefore our dopamine is in our gut and therefore our dopamine is in our gut and therefore our mood is in our gut. That's not quite the mood is in our gut. That's not quite the mood is in our gut. That's not quite the way it works, okay? We'll talk about way it works, okay? We'll talk about way it works, okay? We'll talk about serotonin in a moment, but dopamine is serotonin in a moment, but dopamine is serotonin in a moment, but dopamine is synthesized from the amino acids that synthesized from the amino acids that synthesized from the amino acids that you eat. However, the dopamine neurons you eat. However, the dopamine neurons you eat. However, the dopamine neurons that give rise to these feelings of good that give rise to these feelings of good that give rise to these feelings of good or wanting more or desire and or wanting more or desire and or wanting more or desire and motivation, those reside in the brain. motivation, those reside in the brain. motivation, those reside in the brain. So, we don't want to get too confused. So, we don't want to get too confused. So, we don't want to get too confused. We want to respect and honor the power We want to respect and honor the power We want to respect and honor the power of the gut and this vagal pathway, but of the gut and this vagal pathway, but of the gut and this vagal pathway, but it's really neurons within your brain it's really neurons within your brain it's really neurons within your brain that drive the pursuit and that drive the pursuit and that drive the pursuit and decision-making. So, what does this decision-making. So, what does this decision-making. So, what does this mean? Well, some people make too little mean? Well, some people make too little mean? Well, some people make too little dopamine. Some people make so little dopamine that Some people make so little dopamine that Some people make so little dopamine that they need prescription dopamine. They they need prescription dopamine. They they need prescription dopamine. They need L-Dopa. People with Parkinson's need L-Dopa. People with Parkinson's need L-Dopa. People with Parkinson's take L-Dopa and other compounds to take L-Dopa and other compounds to take L-Dopa and other compounds to increase dopamine because Parkinson's increase dopamine because Parkinson's increase dopamine because Parkinson's is associated with is associated with is associated with deficits in movement. It starts as a deficits in movement. It starts as a deficits in movement. It starts as a tremor. Actually starts as some other things Actually starts as some other things Actually starts as some other things that are interesting we'll talk about in that are interesting we'll talk about in that are interesting we'll talk about in a moment, but Parkinson's a moment, but Parkinson's a moment, but Parkinson's is a is a is a depression. It's a blunting of depression. It's a blunting of depression. It's a blunting of motivation and mood and affect. And it's motivation and mood and affect. And it's motivation and mood and affect. And it's a tremor and then eventually in severe a tremor and then eventually in severe a tremor and then eventually in severe conditions it's challenges in speaking conditions it's challenges in speaking conditions it's challenges in speaking and walking. So, that some famous and walking. So, that some famous and walking. So, that some famous examples would be, you know, Muhammad examples would be, you know, Muhammad examples would be, you know, Muhammad Ali, Michael J. Fox, um Ali, Michael J. Fox, um Ali, Michael J. Fox, um the great boxing trainer Freddie Roach. the great boxing trainer Freddie Roach. the great boxing trainer Freddie Roach. Like these people have Parkinson's and Like these people have Parkinson's and Like these people have Parkinson's and they at least later in their life had they at least later in their life had they at least later in their life had challenges speaking. Now, it's not just challenges speaking. Now, it's not just challenges speaking. Now, it's not just fighters that develop Parkinson's. fighters that develop Parkinson's. fighters that develop Parkinson's. Um as far as I know, uh Michael J. Fox Um as far as I know, uh Michael J. Fox Um as far as I know, uh Michael J. Fox wasn't um wasn't a fighter. People can wasn't um wasn't a fighter. People can wasn't um wasn't a fighter. People can develop Parkinson's and Parkinson's is a develop Parkinson's and Parkinson's is a develop Parkinson's and Parkinson's is a depletion of dopamine neurons in the depletion of dopamine neurons in the depletion of dopamine neurons in the brain. And it's not just movement brain. And it's not just movement brain. And it's not just movement challenges, it's challenges with mood. challenges, it's challenges with mood. challenges, it's challenges with mood. Now, hopefully most of you, all of you, Now, hopefully most of you, all of you, Now, hopefully most of you, all of you, uh don't have Parkinson's, but it's uh don't have Parkinson's, but it's uh don't have Parkinson's, but it's clear that dietary L-Tyrosine supports clear that dietary L-Tyrosine supports clear that dietary L-Tyrosine supports the healthy production of the healthy production of the healthy production of things like dopamine. And as well as things like dopamine. And as well as things like dopamine. And as well as other factors within the brain. Now, other factors within the brain. Now, other factors within the brain. Now, some people immediately ask, "Well, some people immediately ask, "Well, some people immediately ask, "Well, should I supplement L-Tyrosine?" So, should I supplement L-Tyrosine?" So, should I supplement L-Tyrosine?" So, let's just talk about that because let's just talk about that because let's just talk about that because that's going to come up. Um full that's going to come up. Um full that's going to come up. Um full disclosure, I sometimes take L-Tyrosine. disclosure, I sometimes take L-Tyrosine. disclosure, I sometimes take L-Tyrosine. I'm not taking it right now, but I take I'm not taking it right now, but I take I'm not taking it right now, but I take it only occasionally. You can buy this it only occasionally. You can buy this it only occasionally. You can buy this in capsule form. It does increase kind in capsule form. It does increase kind in capsule form. It does increase kind of um mood and elevation and alertness. of um mood and elevation and alertness. of um mood and elevation and alertness. It is over-the-counter. You have to It is over-the-counter. You have to It is over-the-counter. You have to check with your doctor. I'm not check with your doctor. I'm not check with your doctor. I'm not responsible for your health care and I'm responsible for your health care and I'm responsible for your health care and I'm not a doctor. Whether or not safe for not a doctor. Whether or not safe for not a doctor. Whether or not safe for you. People with pre-existing hyper you. People with pre-existing hyper you. People with pre-existing hyper dopaminergic conditions like mania dopaminergic conditions like mania dopaminergic conditions like mania should probably not take L-tyrosine. The should probably not take L-tyrosine. The should probably not take L-tyrosine. The other thing about taking L-tyrosine is other thing about taking L-tyrosine is other thing about taking L-tyrosine is there is a crash. Okay, it's not a there is a crash. Okay, it's not a there is a crash. Okay, it's not a massive crash if you take it at massive crash if you take it at massive crash if you take it at appropriate doses and it's right for appropriate doses and it's right for appropriate doses and it's right for you, but it can produce a crash and a you, but it can produce a crash and a you, but it can produce a crash and a lethargy and a kind of brain fog after lethargy and a kind of brain fog after lethargy and a kind of brain fog after the next day or so. And so the next day or so. And so the next day or so. And so L-tyrosine, however, can be ingested L-tyrosine, however, can be ingested L-tyrosine, however, can be ingested through foods or through supplementation through foods or through supplementation through foods or through supplementation to increase dopamine levels. That's well to increase dopamine levels. That's well to increase dopamine levels. That's well known. Taking chronically, however, it known. Taking chronically, however, it known. Taking chronically, however, it can disrupt those dopamine pathways. can disrupt those dopamine pathways. can disrupt those dopamine pathways. Now, there are other drugs that will Now, there are other drugs that will Now, there are other drugs that will increase L-tyrosine and dopamine as well, but L-tyrosine and dopamine as well, but L-tyrosine and dopamine as well, but those are severe enough that they those are severe enough that they those are severe enough that they generally tend to have addictive generally tend to have addictive generally tend to have addictive properties. So, things like properties. So, things like properties. So, things like methamphetamine, and things like cocaine methamphetamine, and things like cocaine methamphetamine, and things like cocaine are terrible because they really ramp up are terrible because they really ramp up are terrible because they really ramp up the dopamine system so much that people the dopamine system so much that people the dopamine system so much that people really can't achieve dopamine release really can't achieve dopamine release really can't achieve dopamine release through any other mechanisms. But, food through any other mechanisms. But, food through any other mechanisms. But, food and the ingestion of L-tyrosine has a and the ingestion of L-tyrosine has a and the ingestion of L-tyrosine has a profound effect on our levels of profound effect on our levels of profound effect on our levels of dopamine. It takes a little while, but that really It takes a little while, but that really It takes a little while, but that really will impact level of mood. Certain will impact level of mood. Certain will impact level of mood. Certain antidepressants fall into the category antidepressants fall into the category antidepressants fall into the category of dopaminergic antidepressants. One of dopaminergic antidepressants. One of dopaminergic antidepressants. One of the most famous ones, of course, is the most famous ones, of course, is the most famous ones, of course, is Wellbutrin. Wellbutrin was developed because a lot Wellbutrin was developed because a lot Wellbutrin was developed because a lot of the other antidepressants tend to of the other antidepressants tend to of the other antidepressants tend to make people feel kind of lethargic or make people feel kind of lethargic or make people feel kind of lethargic or they had side effect profiles that they had side effect profiles that they had side effect profiles that people didn't like. So, they developed people didn't like. So, they developed people didn't like. So, they developed this thing that uh that the generic name this thing that uh that the generic name this thing that uh that the generic name is different, but it's generally called is different, but it's generally called is different, but it's generally called Wellbutrin. Wellbutrin activates Wellbutrin. Wellbutrin activates Wellbutrin. Wellbutrin activates dopamine and epinephrine, which is a dopamine and epinephrine, which is a dopamine and epinephrine, which is a substrate of dopamine, and both of substrate of dopamine, and both of substrate of dopamine, and both of those are involved in motivation and those are involved in motivation and those are involved in motivation and alertness and effort. So, you might say, alertness and effort. So, you might say, alertness and effort. So, you might say, "Wow, this sounds like a great drug." "Wow, this sounds like a great drug." "Wow, this sounds like a great drug." However, this drug, the side effect profile tends this drug, the side effect profile tends this drug, the side effect profile tends to be the things that are associated to be the things that are associated to be the things that are associated with elevated mood and alertness. So, with elevated mood and alertness. So, with elevated mood and alertness. So, this isn't like taking some L-tyrosine. this isn't like taking some L-tyrosine. this isn't like taking some L-tyrosine. This isn't like eating some This isn't like eating some This isn't like eating some tyrosine-rich foods. This is really a tyrosine-rich foods. This is really a tyrosine-rich foods. This is really a much greater release of dopamine and much greater release of dopamine and much greater release of dopamine and epinephrine, and it increases things epinephrine, and it increases things epinephrine, and it increases things like anxiety, sweating, the pupils like anxiety, sweating, the pupils like anxiety, sweating, the pupils dilate. It has certain effects on in dilate. It has certain effects on in dilate. It has certain effects on in particular people with epilepsy. It's particular people with epilepsy. It's particular people with epilepsy. It's been used somewhat successfully for been used somewhat successfully for been used somewhat successfully for smoking cessation, but again, it's not smoking cessation, but again, it's not smoking cessation, but again, it's not for everybody, and I'm not here to for everybody, and I'm not here to for everybody, and I'm not here to encourage the use of these things. encourage the use of these things. encourage the use of these things. I'm just describing the biology and the I'm just describing the biology and the I'm just describing the biology and the rationale for why these drugs were rationale for why these drugs were rationale for why these drugs were developed. So, let's back up a second. Let's just kind let's back up a second. Let's just kind let's back up a second. Let's just kind of take stock of where we're at. We have of take stock of where we're at. We have of take stock of where we're at. We have a brain-body connection. There are many a brain-body connection. There are many a brain-body connection. There are many of them, but one of the main ones is the of them, but one of the main ones is the of them, but one of the main ones is the vagus nerve. The vagus collects vagus nerve. The vagus collects vagus nerve. The vagus collects information about a lot of things, information about a lot of things, information about a lot of things, breathing, heart rate, breathing, heart rate, breathing, heart rate, stuff that's happening in the gut, etc. stuff that's happening in the gut, etc. stuff that's happening in the gut, etc. And gut, by the way, includes the And gut, by the way, includes the And gut, by the way, includes the stomach and the intestines. Sends that stomach and the intestines. Sends that stomach and the intestines. Sends that information up to the brain. The brain information up to the brain. The brain information up to the brain. The brain is using that information to decide one is using that information to decide one is using that information to decide one of two things, move toward something or of two things, move toward something or of two things, move toward something or move away. Can also pause, but move away. Can also pause, but move away. Can also pause, but essentially pausing is not moving essentially pausing is not moving essentially pausing is not moving toward. So, that's the dopamine pathway, and foods that's the dopamine pathway, and foods that's the dopamine pathway, and foods rich in L-tyrosine generally give us an rich in L-tyrosine generally give us an rich in L-tyrosine generally give us an elevated mood and make us want to do elevated mood and make us want to do elevated mood and make us want to do more of whatever it is that we happen to more of whatever it is that we happen to more of whatever it is that we happen to be doing, as well as other things. be doing, as well as other things. be doing, as well as other things. Motivation generalizes to other things. Motivation generalizes to other things. Motivation generalizes to other things. It's not unique to just ingesting foods. It's not unique to just ingesting foods. It's not unique to just ingesting foods. But foods that give us a big pulse of But foods that give us a big pulse of But foods that give us a big pulse of dopamine will make us crave more of that dopamine will make us crave more of that dopamine will make us crave more of that food. It will make us crave more of the food. It will make us crave more of the food. It will make us crave more of the activity that led to the ingestion of activity that led to the ingestion of activity that led to the ingestion of that food. And as I mentioned earlier, a that food. And as I mentioned earlier, a that food. And as I mentioned earlier, a lot of that is happening at a lot of that is happening at a lot of that is happening at a subconscious level that you're not even subconscious level that you're not even subconscious level that you're not even aware of. And this is why I think the aware of. And this is why I think the aware of. And this is why I think the concern about hidden sugars and concern about hidden sugars and concern about hidden sugars and over-ingestion of sugars is serious over-ingestion of sugars is serious over-ingestion of sugars is serious because it's not just that the sugars because it's not just that the sugars because it's not just that the sugars are impacting our blood glucose in are impacting our blood glucose in are impacting our blood glucose in negative ways, although often it is. negative ways, although often it is. negative ways, although often it is. It's not just the obesity crisis that's It's not just the obesity crisis that's It's not just the obesity crisis that's happening. It's also the fact that it's happening. It's also the fact that it's happening. It's also the fact that it's disrupting our dopamine systems. Now, disrupting our dopamine systems. Now, disrupting our dopamine systems. Now, that doesn't mean all sugar is bad. Some that doesn't mean all sugar is bad. Some that doesn't mean all sugar is bad. Some people have a quite healthy relationship people have a quite healthy relationship people have a quite healthy relationship to sugar. But I think most people are to sugar. But I think most people are to sugar. But I think most people are just not aware that sugar isn't just not aware that sugar isn't just not aware that sugar isn't just operating at the level of taste. It's operating at the level of taste. It's operating at the level of taste. It's operating at the level of operating at the level of operating at the level of neurochemicals, and it's doing it neurochemicals, and it's doing it neurochemicals, and it's doing it subconsciously. So, I'd like to talk subconsciously. So, I'd like to talk subconsciously. So, I'd like to talk about some of the other pathways between about some of the other pathways between about some of the other pathways between brain and body that regulate our moods brain and body that regulate our moods brain and body that regulate our moods and emotions, but also are actionable. and emotions, but also are actionable. and emotions, but also are actionable. So, the other neuromodulator that's So, the other neuromodulator that's So, the other neuromodulator that's really interesting in the context of the really interesting in the context of the really interesting in the context of the vagus is serotonin. vagus is serotonin. vagus is serotonin. Serotonin, just to remind you, is a Serotonin, just to remind you, is a Serotonin, just to remind you, is a neuromodulator, therefore it creates a neuromodulator, therefore it creates a neuromodulator, therefore it creates a bias in which neural circuits, which bias in which neural circuits, which bias in which neural circuits, which neurons in the brain and body are going neurons in the brain and body are going neurons in the brain and body are going to be active, and it makes it less to be active, and it makes it less to be active, and it makes it less likely that other ones are going to be likely that other ones are going to be likely that other ones are going to be active. I think it's fair to say, without ever I think it's fair to say, without ever I think it's fair to say, without ever having measured it, that my bulldog having measured it, that my bulldog having measured it, that my bulldog Costello uh must just his brain and body Costello uh must just his brain and body Costello uh must just his brain and body must be swimming in serotonin because must be swimming in serotonin because must be swimming in serotonin because he's very calm, and he eats a lot, but he's very calm, and he eats a lot, but he's very calm, and he eats a lot, but he generally feels pretty sated. He's he generally feels pretty sated. He's he generally feels pretty sated. He's kind of an animal that's obsessed with kind of an animal that's obsessed with kind of an animal that's obsessed with comforts. He's a bit of a hedonist. And comforts. He's a bit of a hedonist. And comforts. He's a bit of a hedonist. And serotonin, when it's elevated, tends to serotonin, when it's elevated, tends to serotonin, when it's elevated, tends to make us feel really comfortable and kind make us feel really comfortable and kind make us feel really comfortable and kind of blissed out wherever we are. of blissed out wherever we are. of blissed out wherever we are. And that contrasts with dopamine and that contrasts with dopamine and that contrasts with dopamine and epinephrine, which mainly put us in epinephrine, which mainly put us in epinephrine, which mainly put us in pursuit of things. Motivation is pursuit of things. Motivation is pursuit of things. Motivation is pursuit. Serotonin is more about feeling really Serotonin is more about feeling really Serotonin is more about feeling really comfy where we are. comfy where we are. comfy where we are. The conversation around the brain-body The conversation around the brain-body The conversation around the brain-body relationship and mood and serotonin for relationship and mood and serotonin for relationship and mood and serotonin for many years was, "Well, you eat a big many years was, "Well, you eat a big many years was, "Well, you eat a big meal, the gut is distended, you've got meal, the gut is distended, you've got meal, the gut is distended, you've got all the nutrients you need, you rest and all the nutrients you need, you rest and all the nutrients you need, you rest and digest, and serotonin is released." digest, and serotonin is released." digest, and serotonin is released." That's sort of true, but there's a lot That's sort of true, but there's a lot That's sort of true, but there's a lot more going on and a lot more that's more going on and a lot more that's more going on and a lot more that's interesting and actionable that's going interesting and actionable that's going interesting and actionable that's going on. First of all, some of you, but on. First of all, some of you, but on. First of all, some of you, but perhaps not all, have heard that more perhaps not all, have heard that more perhaps not all, have heard that more than 90% of the serotonin that we make than 90% of the serotonin that we make than 90% of the serotonin that we make is in our gut. And indeed, we have a lot is in our gut. And indeed, we have a lot is in our gut. And indeed, we have a lot of serotonin in our gut. We have neurons of serotonin in our gut. We have neurons of serotonin in our gut. We have neurons in our gut, they make serotonin. We have in our gut, they make serotonin. We have in our gut, they make serotonin. We have neurons in our brain, they make neurons in our brain, they make neurons in our brain, they make serotonin. But here's the deal. But here's the deal. But here's the deal. Most of the serotonin that impacts our Most of the serotonin that impacts our Most of the serotonin that impacts our mood and our mental state is not in our mood and our mental state is not in our mood and our mental state is not in our gut. Most of it is in the neurons of the gut. Most of it is in the neurons of the gut. Most of it is in the neurons of the brain in an area called the raphe brain in an area called the raphe brain in an area called the raphe nucleus of the brain. There are a few nucleus of the brain. There are a few nucleus of the brain. There are a few other locations, too. And those are the other locations, too. And those are the other locations, too. And those are the neurons that control whether or not we neurons that control whether or not we neurons that control whether or not we feel satiated or not, whether or not we feel satiated or not, whether or not we feel satiated or not, whether or not we feel happy and calm. feel happy and calm. feel happy and calm. You can't have a discussion about You can't have a discussion about You can't have a discussion about serotonin without having a discussion serotonin without having a discussion serotonin without having a discussion about antidepressants because about antidepressants because about antidepressants because during the late '80s and early '90s, during the late '80s and early '90s, during the late '80s and early '90s, there was this explosion in the number there was this explosion in the number there was this explosion in the number of prescription drugs that were of prescription drugs that were of prescription drugs that were released. Things like first one and most released. Things like first one and most released. Things like first one and most famous one is Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil, famous one is Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil, famous one is Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil, a number of other ones that are a number of other ones that are a number of other ones that are so-called SSRI, selective serotonin so-called SSRI, selective serotonin so-called SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. reuptake inhibitors. reuptake inhibitors. That's a long acronym, but basically That's a long acronym, but basically That's a long acronym, but basically those drugs work by preventing those drugs work by preventing those drugs work by preventing the gobbling up of the gobbling up of the gobbling up of serotonin or reuptake of serotonin into serotonin or reuptake of serotonin into serotonin or reuptake of serotonin into neurons after it's been released, which neurons after it's been released, which neurons after it's been released, which leads to more serotonin overall, which leads to more serotonin overall, which leads to more serotonin overall, which means to elevate serotonin. And indeed, means to elevate serotonin. And indeed, means to elevate serotonin. And indeed, those drugs were and can be very useful those drugs were and can be very useful those drugs were and can be very useful for certain people to feel better in for certain people to feel better in for certain people to feel better in cases of depression and some other cases of depression and some other cases of depression and some other clinical disorders, as well. So, I clinical disorders, as well. So, I clinical disorders, as well. So, I really don't want to uh dismiss them as really don't want to uh dismiss them as really don't want to uh dismiss them as useless or dangerous for everybody. They useless or dangerous for everybody. They useless or dangerous for everybody. They can be quite useful for many people. can be quite useful for many people. can be quite useful for many people. Not everyone responds well to them, as Not everyone responds well to them, as Not everyone responds well to them, as I'm sure you've all heard. And their I'm sure you've all heard. And their I'm sure you've all heard. And their side effect profile side effect profile side effect profile has effects like blunting affect. It can has effects like blunting affect. It can has effects like blunting affect. It can make people feel kind of flat, kind of make people feel kind of flat, kind of make people feel kind of flat, kind of meh. It can um reduce appetite for food. meh. It can um reduce appetite for food. meh. It can um reduce appetite for food. It can reduce appetite for sex. It can It can reduce appetite for sex. It can It can reduce appetite for sex. It can do all sorts of things. do all sorts of things. do all sorts of things. Or it can work really well. Sometimes Or it can work really well. Sometimes Or it can work really well. Sometimes it's a dose-related issue, etc. it's a dose-related issue, etc. it's a dose-related issue, etc. Serotonin is fascinating, however, Serotonin is fascinating, however, Serotonin is fascinating, however, because how well those neurons in the raphe work how well those neurons in the raphe work how well those neurons in the raphe work is impacted by some events within the is impacted by some events within the is impacted by some events within the gut, although gut, although gut, although you might be surprised to find out what you might be surprised to find out what you might be surprised to find out what those events are. So, let's go a little those events are. So, let's go a little those events are. So, let's go a little bit deeper into the gut. And again, the bit deeper into the gut. And again, the bit deeper into the gut. And again, the gut includes the stomach and then the gut includes the stomach and then the gut includes the stomach and then the small intestine and the large intestine. small intestine and the large intestine. small intestine and the large intestine. And ask like, what is going on with And ask like, what is going on with And ask like, what is going on with serotonin in the gut? How is it serotonin in the gut? How is it serotonin in the gut? How is it impacting serotonin in the brain? impacting serotonin in the brain? impacting serotonin in the brain? And let's think about this in the And let's think about this in the And let's think about this in the context of how some of us might want to context of how some of us might want to context of how some of us might want to increase or decrease our serotonin increase or decrease our serotonin increase or decrease our serotonin levels. So, levels. So, levels. So, as far as I know, as far as I know, as far as I know, there aren't any really good there aren't any really good there aren't any really good at-home blood tests for things like at-home blood tests for things like at-home blood tests for things like serotonin and dopamine. There's some serotonin and dopamine. There's some serotonin and dopamine. There's some commercial products out there, but to commercial products out there, but to commercial products out there, but to me, just to me, I'm not particularly me, just to me, I'm not particularly me, just to me, I'm not particularly impressed. You know, it's not the same impressed. You know, it's not the same impressed. You know, it's not the same as getting your hormones uh levels as getting your hormones uh levels as getting your hormones uh levels measured or your metabolic factors measured or your metabolic factors measured or your metabolic factors measured. That's can be done and can be measured. That's can be done and can be measured. That's can be done and can be done rigorously. done rigorously. done rigorously. There are tests out there. There are There are tests out there. There are There are tests out there. There are even some um believe it or not, there's even some um believe it or not, there's even some um believe it or not, there's some questionnaires, you know, that and some questionnaires, you know, that and some questionnaires, you know, that and I think it actually last year it made I think it actually last year it made I think it actually last year it made some of the bigger newspapers, you know, some of the bigger newspapers, you know, some of the bigger newspapers, you know, are you more of a dopamine or a are you more of a dopamine or a are you more of a dopamine or a serotonin? Are you a this or a that? I serotonin? Are you a this or a that? I serotonin? Are you a this or a that? I find that stuff to be a little silly, find that stuff to be a little silly, find that stuff to be a little silly, although I do appreciate and like the although I do appreciate and like the although I do appreciate and like the fact that people are thinking about and fact that people are thinking about and fact that people are thinking about and talking about neuromodulators. talking about neuromodulators. talking about neuromodulators. There aren't really great ways to There aren't really great ways to There aren't really great ways to measure these things outside the clinic. measure these things outside the clinic. measure these things outside the clinic. There's some great clinical tools that There's some great clinical tools that There's some great clinical tools that you can get inside of a hospital or from you can get inside of a hospital or from you can get inside of a hospital or from a proper endocrinologist or neurologist, a proper endocrinologist or neurologist, a proper endocrinologist or neurologist, but no great at-home tools. So, maybe but no great at-home tools. So, maybe but no great at-home tools. So, maybe that's a call to arms for some of you that's a call to arms for some of you that's a call to arms for some of you entrepreneurial folks out there to create these tests um folks out there to create these tests um folks out there to create these tests um accurate tests, please, that could be accurate tests, please, that could be accurate tests, please, that could be done at home. done at home. done at home. But, you know, some people feel like But, you know, some people feel like But, you know, some people feel like they're too anxious or they're always in they're too anxious or they're always in they're too anxious or they're always in a motivated state and they're trying to a motivated state and they're trying to a motivated state and they're trying to adjust their serotonin. Many people adjust their serotonin. Many people adjust their serotonin. Many people adjust their serotonin by just eating adjust their serotonin by just eating adjust their serotonin by just eating more food. And carbohydrate-rich foods more food. And carbohydrate-rich foods more food. And carbohydrate-rich foods will increase serotonin. will increase serotonin. will increase serotonin. I've talked about this on a previous I've talked about this on a previous I've talked about this on a previous podcast, but I personally am a big fan, podcast, but I personally am a big fan, podcast, but I personally am a big fan, at least for me as I usually fast and at least for me as I usually fast and at least for me as I usually fast and exercise in the early part of the day, I exercise in the early part of the day, I exercise in the early part of the day, I eat a relatively high-protein and eat a relatively high-protein and eat a relatively high-protein and moderate-fat, zero-carb, or low-carb uh moderate-fat, zero-carb, or low-carb uh moderate-fat, zero-carb, or low-carb uh meal at lunch and in the afternoon to meal at lunch and in the afternoon to meal at lunch and in the afternoon to stay alert because those foods tend to stay alert because those foods tend to stay alert because those foods tend to favor dopamine production, acetylcholine favor dopamine production, acetylcholine favor dopamine production, acetylcholine production, epinephrine production, and production, epinephrine production, and production, epinephrine production, and alertness. My mood is generally pretty good most of My mood is generally pretty good most of My mood is generally pretty good most of the time. And then, as evening comes the time. And then, as evening comes the time. And then, as evening comes around and I'm concerned about sleep and around and I'm concerned about sleep and around and I'm concerned about sleep and a good night's sleep. Uh not concerned a good night's sleep. Uh not concerned a good night's sleep. Uh not concerned in an anxious way, but I want to get a in an anxious way, but I want to get a in an anxious way, but I want to get a good night's sleep. I will ingest foods good night's sleep. I will ingest foods good night's sleep. I will ingest foods that promote serotonin release because that promote serotonin release because that promote serotonin release because they contain a lot of tryptophan. So, if they contain a lot of tryptophan. So, if they contain a lot of tryptophan. So, if I do eat meat, it would be like a white I do eat meat, it would be like a white I do eat meat, it would be like a white meat, turkey meat. I don't tend to I've meat, turkey meat. I don't tend to I've meat, turkey meat. I don't tend to I've never liked turkey. I don't mind the never liked turkey. I don't mind the never liked turkey. I don't mind the animal, but I don't like ingesting the animal, but I don't like ingesting the animal, but I don't like ingesting the meat. Um but starchy carbohydrates will meat. Um but starchy carbohydrates will meat. Um but starchy carbohydrates will increase serotonin. Some people also increase serotonin. Some people also increase serotonin. Some people also will take serotonin. They You can now will take serotonin. They You can now will take serotonin. They You can now buy 5-HTP supplements. buy 5-HTP supplements. buy 5-HTP supplements. This is a little bit tricky. This is a little bit tricky. This is a little bit tricky. 5-HTP supplements can, of course, 5-HTP supplements can, of course, 5-HTP supplements can, of course, increase 5-HTP. It is 5-HTP or increase 5-HTP. It is 5-HTP or increase 5-HTP. It is 5-HTP or serotonin. But that sometimes can create problems But that sometimes can create problems But that sometimes can create problems in endogenous or self-made production of in endogenous or self-made production of in endogenous or self-made production of serotonin. So, I'm never a fan of taking serotonin. So, I'm never a fan of taking serotonin. So, I'm never a fan of taking things very close to the chemical you're things very close to the chemical you're things very close to the chemical you're trying to increase for very long periods trying to increase for very long periods trying to increase for very long periods of time. Maybe for occasional use. I of time. Maybe for occasional use. I of time. Maybe for occasional use. I have the problem that if I take have the problem that if I take have the problem that if I take serotonin supplements, 5-HTP, I fall serotonin supplements, 5-HTP, I fall serotonin supplements, 5-HTP, I fall asleep, the sleep I have is very asleep, the sleep I have is very asleep, the sleep I have is very intense, and I wake up 2 or 3 hours intense, and I wake up 2 or 3 hours intense, and I wake up 2 or 3 hours later. And we know, based on sleep later. And we know, based on sleep later. And we know, based on sleep studies with good measurements in the studies with good measurements in the studies with good measurements in the lab, that serotonin release tends to be lab, that serotonin release tends to be lab, that serotonin release tends to be in the later part of the night. And so, in the later part of the night. And so, in the later part of the night. And so, by taking it early in the night, it by taking it early in the night, it by taking it early in the night, it really can disrupt the pattern of sleep really can disrupt the pattern of sleep really can disrupt the pattern of sleep and the depth of sleep. Nonetheless, and the depth of sleep. Nonetheless, and the depth of sleep. Nonetheless, some people are interested in taking some people are interested in taking some people are interested in taking serotonin to get some of the more serotonin to get some of the more serotonin to get some of the more blissed out effects. blissed out effects. blissed out effects. You can achieve that with foods, as I You can achieve that with foods, as I You can achieve that with foods, as I mentioned, that are carbohydrate rich. mentioned, that are carbohydrate rich. mentioned, that are carbohydrate rich. So, as you're seeing, this isn't really So, as you're seeing, this isn't really So, as you're seeing, this isn't really a discussion about nutrition per se. a discussion about nutrition per se. a discussion about nutrition per se. This is a discussion about food, which This is a discussion about food, which This is a discussion about food, which contains amino acids, amino acids being contains amino acids, amino acids being contains amino acids, amino acids being the precursors to neuromodulators, and the precursors to neuromodulators, and the precursors to neuromodulators, and neuromodulators having a profound effect neuromodulators having a profound effect neuromodulators having a profound effect on your overall state of alertness or on your overall state of alertness or on your overall state of alertness or calmness, happiness, sadness, and calmness, happiness, sadness, and calmness, happiness, sadness, and well-being. So, there are a number of well-being. So, there are a number of well-being. So, there are a number of things that one um can take, as I things that one um can take, as I things that one um can take, as I mentioned, one of them being 5-HTP mentioned, one of them being 5-HTP mentioned, one of them being 5-HTP itself. Now, I'm not recommending people itself. Now, I'm not recommending people itself. Now, I'm not recommending people take anything, but if you're interested take anything, but if you're interested take anything, but if you're interested in what this does, and you want to in what this does, and you want to in what this does, and you want to explore this, of course, you'd want explore this, of course, you'd want explore this, of course, you'd want permission from your doctor. You can go permission from your doctor. You can go permission from your doctor. You can go to this free website. I love this to this free website. I love this to this free website. I love this resource. They don't pay me to say that, resource. They don't pay me to say that, resource. They don't pay me to say that, but I just love this resource. I but I just love this resource. I but I just love this resource. I followed it for a long time, called followed it for a long time, called followed it for a long time, called examine.com. Thank you, folks at examine.com for Thank you, folks at examine.com for Thank you, folks at examine.com for putting this free resource out on the putting this free resource out on the putting this free resource out on the web that has links through what they web that has links through what they web that has links through what they call the human effect matrix. So, it's call the human effect matrix. So, it's call the human effect matrix. So, it's links to all the PubMed studies for links to all the PubMed studies for links to all the PubMed studies for particular effects of particular effects of particular effects of particular compounds that one can buy and ingest. compounds that one can buy and ingest. compounds that one can buy and ingest. Incredible, as well as important health Incredible, as well as important health Incredible, as well as important health warnings. So, I'm not going to read warnings. So, I'm not going to read warnings. So, I'm not going to read through everything, but if you were to through everything, but if you were to through everything, but if you were to go to examine.com as I have now, and you go to examine.com as I have now, and you go to examine.com as I have now, and you put in 5-HTP, they're only looking at put in 5-HTP, they're only looking at put in 5-HTP, they're only looking at things that have strong evidence, PubMed things that have strong evidence, PubMed things that have strong evidence, PubMed articles. Articles that are in the PubMed Articles that are in the PubMed Articles that are in the PubMed archives. So, for instance, I didn't archives. So, for instance, I didn't archives. So, for instance, I didn't know this, but 5-HTP produces a notable know this, but 5-HTP produces a notable know this, but 5-HTP produces a notable decrease in appetite. Three studies. And decrease in appetite. Three studies. And decrease in appetite. Three studies. And this appetite suppression makes sense, this appetite suppression makes sense, this appetite suppression makes sense, of course, because we ingest foods to of course, because we ingest foods to of course, because we ingest foods to get serotonin, get serotonin, get serotonin, and if we have enough serotonin, then and if we have enough serotonin, then and if we have enough serotonin, then there's no reason to ingest more foods. there's no reason to ingest more foods. there's no reason to ingest more foods. It tends to have a blunting of appetite. It tends to have a blunting of appetite. It tends to have a blunting of appetite. It probably does that also through other It probably does that also through other It probably does that also through other mechanisms. So, I'm not saying you mechanisms. So, I'm not saying you mechanisms. So, I'm not saying you should do this, but if someone's trying should do this, but if someone's trying should do this, but if someone's trying to blunt their appetite, to blunt their appetite, to blunt their appetite, could be a interesting route. Although, could be a interesting route. Although, could be a interesting route. Although, I don't recommend chronic use. I don't recommend chronic use. I don't recommend chronic use. Not surprisingly, it has a There's a Not surprisingly, it has a There's a Not surprisingly, it has a There's a decrease in body weight as a decrease in body weight as a decrease in body weight as a consequence, an increase in cortisol. consequence, an increase in cortisol. consequence, an increase in cortisol. So, that's kind of important to note So, that's kind of important to note So, that's kind of important to note that when you Typically in biology, if that when you Typically in biology, if that when you Typically in biology, if you pull on one string really hard, you pull on one string really hard, you pull on one string really hard, another one moves. It's a little bit another one moves. It's a little bit another one moves. It's a little bit like a puppet, and there's more than like a puppet, and there's more than like a puppet, and there's more than one string on the puppet. So, it does one string on the puppet. So, it does one string on the puppet. So, it does seem to increase cortisol, though they seem to increase cortisol, though they seem to increase cortisol, though they report it as a minor effect. Again, report it as a minor effect. Again, report it as a minor effect. Again, links to all those studies are there, links to all those studies are there, links to all those studies are there, which is why I'm not listing them out in which is why I'm not listing them out in which is why I'm not listing them out in our caption notes. You can go and get our caption notes. You can go and get our caption notes. You can go and get them at examine.com, put in serotonin, them at examine.com, put in serotonin, them at examine.com, put in serotonin, and you'll find that. and you'll find that. and you'll find that. So, I find it fascinating that nowadays, So, I find it fascinating that nowadays, So, I find it fascinating that nowadays, there are things that are somewhere there are things that are somewhere there are things that are somewhere between doing nothing, between doing nothing, between doing nothing, getting serotonin from tryptophan in getting serotonin from tryptophan in getting serotonin from tryptophan in foods, and prescription drugs. There's foods, and prescription drugs. There's foods, and prescription drugs. There's this other category of supplements that this other category of supplements that this other category of supplements that are really interesting for modulating are really interesting for modulating are really interesting for modulating these chemicals in the body. And I these chemicals in the body. And I these chemicals in the body. And I should mention before I move on, because should mention before I move on, because should mention before I move on, because I mentioned L-tyrosine, I neglected to I mentioned L-tyrosine, I neglected to I mentioned L-tyrosine, I neglected to mention earlier in our discussion about mention earlier in our discussion about mention earlier in our discussion about dopamine, I if you're interested in the dopamine, I if you're interested in the dopamine, I if you're interested in the dopamine pathway, go to examine.com, put dopamine pathway, go to examine.com, put dopamine pathway, go to examine.com, put in Mucuna pruriens. It's m u c u n a Mucuna pruriens. It's m u c u n a Mucuna pruriens. It's m u c u n a p separate word p r u r i e n s. p separate word p r u r i e n s. p separate word p r u r i e n s. It is a velvet bean that grows from It is a velvet bean that grows from It is a velvet bean that grows from vines and is very itchy to touch due to vines and is very itchy to touch due to vines and is very itchy to touch due to serotonin on its surface. Amazing, this serotonin on its surface. Amazing, this serotonin on its surface. Amazing, this bean has serotonin on its surface. And bean has serotonin on its surface. And bean has serotonin on its surface. And indeed, serotonin at if you were to put indeed, serotonin at if you were to put indeed, serotonin at if you were to put it on your skin would cause some it on your skin would cause some it on your skin would cause some irritation of the skin. Amazing. Inside irritation of the skin. Amazing. Inside irritation of the skin. Amazing. Inside the bean the bean the bean is L-dopa. Mucuna pruriens is not just is L-dopa. Mucuna pruriens is not just is L-dopa. Mucuna pruriens is not just something that promotes dopamine release something that promotes dopamine release something that promotes dopamine release because of some weird mystical ancient because of some weird mystical ancient because of some weird mystical ancient thing or whatever or sorcery, it is thing or whatever or sorcery, it is thing or whatever or sorcery, it is chemically L-dopa, the precursor to chemically L-dopa, the precursor to chemically L-dopa, the precursor to dopamine. It contains some other molecules as well It contains some other molecules as well It contains some other molecules as well and low levels of other psychoactives. and low levels of other psychoactives. and low levels of other psychoactives. This stuff is available over the This stuff is available over the This stuff is available over the counter. Incredible. I personally find counter. Incredible. I personally find counter. Incredible. I personally find it incredible. it incredible. it incredible. Its effects are really interesting. I'm Its effects are really interesting. I'm Its effects are really interesting. I'm not going to read them all off, but I not going to read them all off, but I not going to read them all off, but I mention these effects not because I'm mention these effects not because I'm mention these effects not because I'm encouraging you to take it, but because encouraging you to take it, but because encouraging you to take it, but because you get a window into what dopamine you get a window into what dopamine you get a window into what dopamine acute dopamine increase does in the acute dopamine increase does in the acute dopamine increase does in the non-Parkinsonian context. non-Parkinsonian context. non-Parkinsonian context. And you can start to think about foods And you can start to think about foods And you can start to think about foods that are rich in L-tyrosine as biasing that are rich in L-tyrosine as biasing that are rich in L-tyrosine as biasing certain effects or not others. So, when certain effects or not others. So, when certain effects or not others. So, when you hear food is medicine, food isn't you hear food is medicine, food isn't you hear food is medicine, food isn't really medicine, food is food, but food really medicine, food is food, but food really medicine, food is food, but food has these chemical effects as well. So, has these chemical effects as well. So, has these chemical effects as well. So, first one listed uh is three studies first one listed uh is three studies first one listed uh is three studies with a very high with a very high with a very high uh rigor that overall have a minor effect on of all overall have a minor effect on of all overall have a minor effect on of all things sperm quality. So, it appears things sperm quality. So, it appears things sperm quality. So, it appears that sperm motility itself, I'm assuming that sperm motility itself, I'm assuming that sperm motility itself, I'm assuming when they say sperm quality, I don't when they say sperm quality, I don't when they say sperm quality, I don't know what features of sperm of quality know what features of sperm of quality know what features of sperm of quality they looked at with sperm, that's not a they looked at with sperm, that's not a they looked at with sperm, that's not a discussion I want to have, but I'm discussion I want to have, but I'm discussion I want to have, but I'm assuming it's motility because assuming it's motility because assuming it's motility because I know enough about reproductive biology I know enough about reproductive biology I know enough about reproductive biology to You that um sperm ability to swim to You that um sperm ability to swim to You that um sperm ability to swim depends on some proteins that are depends on some proteins that are depends on some proteins that are present in the front of the sperm etc. present in the front of the sperm etc. present in the front of the sperm etc. Things like pentraxins and sperm Things like pentraxins and sperm Things like pentraxins and sperm motility generally associated with sperm quality. generally associated with sperm quality. generally associated with sperm quality. Sperm that don't move are generally not Sperm that don't move are generally not Sperm that don't move are generally not very useful sperm. very useful sperm. very useful sperm. Um symptoms of Parkinson's disease are Um symptoms of Parkinson's disease are Um symptoms of Parkinson's disease are notably degraded with mucuna are notably degraded with mucuna are notably degraded with mucuna pruriens. So fascinating, that's not pruriens. So fascinating, that's not pruriens. So fascinating, that's not surprising. And there are a lot of other surprising. And there are a lot of other surprising. And there are a lot of other effects here. Feelings of subjective effects here. Feelings of subjective effects here. Feelings of subjective well-being, testosterone, reductions in well-being, testosterone, reductions in well-being, testosterone, reductions in prolactin. Not surprising, prolactin is prolactin. Not surprising, prolactin is prolactin. Not surprising, prolactin is a hormone that's involved in milk a hormone that's involved in milk a hormone that's involved in milk letdown. It's in letdown. It's in letdown. It's in lactating mothers. It's involved in lactating mothers. It's involved in lactating mothers. It's involved in feelings of peace and feelings of peace and feelings of peace and generally is antagonistic to sexual generally is antagonistic to sexual generally is antagonistic to sexual desire in both men and female. desire in both men and female. desire in both men and female. So it's really interesting that So it's really interesting that So it's really interesting that things like mucuna pruriens which are things like mucuna pruriens which are things like mucuna pruriens which are L-dopa reduce prolactin, increase sperm L-dopa reduce prolactin, increase sperm L-dopa reduce prolactin, increase sperm motility, increase testosterone, motility, increase testosterone, motility, increase testosterone, subjective well-being. So you're subjective well-being. So you're subjective well-being. So you're starting to see a theme, right? Dopamine starting to see a theme, right? Dopamine starting to see a theme, right? Dopamine really makes us motivated, feel in really makes us motivated, feel in really makes us motivated, feel in pursuit, makes us feel good. Serotonin pursuit, makes us feel good. Serotonin pursuit, makes us feel good. Serotonin makes us feel more relaxed and calm. makes us feel more relaxed and calm. makes us feel more relaxed and calm. Now, this whole month is about emotions. Now, this whole month is about emotions. Now, this whole month is about emotions. So you might be thinking, well, wait, So you might be thinking, well, wait, So you might be thinking, well, wait, where are we going with all this as it where are we going with all this as it where are we going with all this as it relates to emotions? But in the last relates to emotions? But in the last relates to emotions? But in the last episode I said something I'm going to repeat it I said something I'm going to repeat it I said something I'm going to repeat it now briefly, which is that much of what now briefly, which is that much of what now briefly, which is that much of what we talk about as good emotions or bad we talk about as good emotions or bad we talk about as good emotions or bad emotions, there's a context to that. emotions, there's a context to that. emotions, there's a context to that. There's a social context. You can't There's a social context. You can't There's a social context. You can't really say an emotion is good or bad. really say an emotion is good or bad. really say an emotion is good or bad. Grieving at a funeral is healthy, okay? Grieving at a funeral is healthy, okay? Grieving at a funeral is healthy, okay? Being happy at a funeral, presume Being happy at a funeral, presume Being happy at a funeral, presume assuming you loved the person that died, assuming you loved the person that died, assuming you loved the person that died, is most people probably wouldn't think is most people probably wouldn't think is most people probably wouldn't think that was healthy. So we can't really say that was healthy. So we can't really say that was healthy. So we can't really say that certain that certain that certain you know, emotions like sadness or you know, emotions like sadness or you know, emotions like sadness or happiness are healthy. It's context is happiness are healthy. It's context is happiness are healthy. It's context is important. Cultural context is important. Cultural context is important. Cultural context is important. Many of you have asked for important. Many of you have asked for important. Many of you have asked for book recommendations. This is an book recommendations. This is an book recommendations. This is an opportunity to raise opportunity to raise opportunity to raise mention of another book. mention of another book. mention of another book. Again, I don't have any financial Again, I don't have any financial Again, I don't have any financial affiliation or anything, but if you want affiliation or anything, but if you want affiliation or anything, but if you want to read more about emotions and how the to read more about emotions and how the to read more about emotions and how the context and cultural things impact our context and cultural things impact our context and cultural things impact our emotions, I'm a huge fan of Lisa Feldman emotions, I'm a huge fan of Lisa Feldman emotions, I'm a huge fan of Lisa Feldman Barrett. I learned about her from the Barrett. I learned about her from the Barrett. I learned about her from the Lex Friedman podcast. Lex Friedman podcast. Lex Friedman podcast. Um I've had discussions with her on my Um I've had discussions with her on my Um I've had discussions with her on my Instagram live. She's at Northeastern Instagram live. She's at Northeastern Instagram live. She's at Northeastern University, a world expert in emotions. University, a world expert in emotions. University, a world expert in emotions. Her first book is How Emotions Are Made. Her first book is How Emotions Are Made. Her first book is How Emotions Are Made. This is not a book she sent me. I paid This is not a book she sent me. I paid This is not a book she sent me. I paid for this with my own money for this with my own money for this with my own money uh years ago, bought it, read it, loved uh years ago, bought it, read it, loved uh years ago, bought it, read it, loved it long before I met Lisa. I'm just it long before I met Lisa. I'm just it long before I met Lisa. I'm just delighted that we've gotten each other a delighted that we've gotten each other a delighted that we've gotten each other a little bit. It's a really interesting little bit. It's a really interesting little bit. It's a really interesting read into the psychology of emotions and read into the psychology of emotions and read into the psychology of emotions and some of the subjectivity of emotions. some of the subjectivity of emotions. some of the subjectivity of emotions. So, whereas I'm talking about mainly the So, whereas I'm talking about mainly the So, whereas I'm talking about mainly the biology of emotions, this gets a little biology of emotions, this gets a little biology of emotions, this gets a little bit more into the psychology although bit more into the psychology although bit more into the psychology although the biology as well. the biology as well. the biology as well. And Lisa's just terrific. She's also And Lisa's just terrific. She's also And Lisa's just terrific. She's also putting a lot of information out into putting a lot of information out into putting a lot of information out into the world about emotions. So, if you the world about emotions. So, if you the world about emotions. So, if you want to learn more about that, um check want to learn more about that, um check want to learn more about that, um check out her work. Again, it's Lisa Feldman out her work. Again, it's Lisa Feldman out her work. Again, it's Lisa Feldman Barrett and that book is How Emotions Barrett and that book is How Emotions Barrett and that book is How Emotions Are Made. Hopefully, she'll continue to Are Made. Hopefully, she'll continue to Are Made. Hopefully, she'll continue to write many more big books. write many more big books. write many more big books. So, now you understand the relationship, I now you understand the relationship, I now you understand the relationship, I hope, between foods and dopamine, foods hope, between foods and dopamine, foods hope, between foods and dopamine, foods and serotonin. And that they're both and serotonin. And that they're both and serotonin. And that they're both being communicated to the brain via the being communicated to the brain via the being communicated to the brain via the vagus, right? We ingest these foods. We vagus, right? We ingest these foods. We vagus, right? We ingest these foods. We These supplements are things people These supplements are things people These supplements are things people take. They don't put them directly into the They don't put them directly into the They don't put them directly into the brain. They put them in our gut. So, brain. They put them in our gut. So, brain. They put them in our gut. So, yes, there's a gut-brain connection, but yes, there's a gut-brain connection, but yes, there's a gut-brain connection, but it's not about the serotonin in the gut it's not about the serotonin in the gut it's not about the serotonin in the gut that makes you feel calm and placid. that makes you feel calm and placid. that makes you feel calm and placid. It's not about the dopamine in the gut. It's not about the dopamine in the gut. It's not about the dopamine in the gut. It's just been oversold that way because It's just been oversold that way because It's just been oversold that way because I think there's something really I think there's something really I think there's something really attractive, and I understand, about the attractive, and I understand, about the attractive, and I understand, about the idea that idea that idea that because certain things about our because certain things about our because certain things about our experience of life and our emotions is experience of life and our emotions is experience of life and our emotions is happening in our body that maybe we have happening in our body that maybe we have happening in our body that maybe we have a little more control, right? Because a little more control, right? Because a little more control, right? Because this thing is a hard container. We can't this thing is a hard container. We can't this thing is a hard container. We can't just stuff some dopamine in there. I just stuff some dopamine in there. I just stuff some dopamine in there. I can't just, you know, I could probably can't just, you know, I could probably can't just, you know, I could probably take a mucuna pruriens bean and stuff it take a mucuna pruriens bean and stuff it take a mucuna pruriens bean and stuff it in my ear. Please don't do that. It'd in my ear. Please don't do that. It'd in my ear. Please don't do that. It'd make my ear itchy cuz of the serotonin make my ear itchy cuz of the serotonin make my ear itchy cuz of the serotonin on the outside. But you can't get stuff on the outside. But you can't get stuff on the outside. But you can't get stuff in there. What you have to do is ingest in there. What you have to do is ingest in there. What you have to do is ingest things that are metabolized in certain things that are metabolized in certain things that are metabolized in certain ways that communicate to the brain. Or ways that communicate to the brain. Or ways that communicate to the brain. Or so maybe they pass into the brain so maybe they pass into the brain so maybe they pass into the brain themselves across what's called the themselves across what's called the themselves across what's called the blood brain barrier. I'll talk blood brain barrier. I'll talk blood brain barrier. I'll talk about the blood brain barrier in a about the blood brain barrier in a about the blood brain barrier in a minute. It's actually called the BBB, so minute. It's actually called the BBB, so minute. It's actually called the BBB, so it ends up sounding like baby, BBB. it ends up sounding like baby, BBB. it ends up sounding like baby, BBB. Um I guess that's like baby. I guess that's like baby. I guess that's like baby. Anyway, ba- B a B B, but there also Anyway, ba- B a B B, but there also Anyway, ba- B a B B, but there also nerves in the gut that are sensing the nerves in the gut that are sensing the nerves in the gut that are sensing the nutrient contents of food and then nutrient contents of food and then nutrient contents of food and then saying, "Oh, you should feel better and saying, "Oh, you should feel better and saying, "Oh, you should feel better and want more. Oh, that's want more. Oh, that's want more. Oh, that's got a lot of uh bitterness and acid got a lot of uh bitterness and acid got a lot of uh bitterness and acid taste to it. You should want less of taste to it. You should want less of taste to it. You should want less of that." Okay? So, as I transition out of that." Okay? So, as I transition out of that." Okay? So, as I transition out of the discussion about dopamine and the discussion about dopamine and the discussion about dopamine and serotonin in the gut, hopefully you've serotonin in the gut, hopefully you've serotonin in the gut, hopefully you've got some actionable items there under got some actionable items there under got some actionable items there under your belt, pun intended, where you can your belt, pun intended, where you can your belt, pun intended, where you can understand how certain foods and certain understand how certain foods and certain understand how certain foods and certain nutrients, and you can look these up, nutrients, and you can look these up, nutrients, and you can look these up, might impact your mood. If you're might impact your mood. If you're might impact your mood. If you're somebody who's really anxious and really somebody who's really anxious and really somebody who's really anxious and really wired, well, then the dopamine wired, well, then the dopamine wired, well, then the dopamine adrenaline pathway epinephrine pathway adrenaline pathway epinephrine pathway adrenaline pathway epinephrine pathway is probably not one that you want to is probably not one that you want to is probably not one that you want to lean on any harder. lean on any harder. lean on any harder. If you tend to be someone who's pretty If you tend to be someone who's pretty If you tend to be someone who's pretty passive and you're having trouble with passive and you're having trouble with passive and you're having trouble with motivation, well, then think about motivation, well, then think about motivation, well, then think about ramping up the dopamine pathway. Uh ramping up the dopamine pathway. Uh ramping up the dopamine pathway. Uh through I always think behaviors and through I always think behaviors and through I always think behaviors and proper food choices are the best way to proper food choices are the best way to proper food choices are the best way to start and um behaviors include things start and um behaviors include things start and um behaviors include things like exercise, et cetera. But, one of like exercise, et cetera. But, one of like exercise, et cetera. But, one of the problems with the discussion around the problems with the discussion around the problems with the discussion around mood and exercise or mood and meditation mood and exercise or mood and meditation mood and exercise or mood and meditation is that it's so subjective. It's like I is that it's so subjective. It's like I is that it's so subjective. It's like I love certain forms of exercise and not love certain forms of exercise and not love certain forms of exercise and not others. Certain ones are aversive to me. others. Certain ones are aversive to me. others. Certain ones are aversive to me. Certain ones are attractive to me. And Certain ones are attractive to me. And Certain ones are attractive to me. And it's never really clear. No one's ever it's never really clear. No one's ever it's never really clear. No one's ever told me, "Okay, you have to do, you told me, "Okay, you have to do, you told me, "Okay, you have to do, you know, 10 minutes on the bike at X number know, 10 minutes on the bike at X number know, 10 minutes on the bike at X number of RPM at so-and-so or on the skier in of RPM at so-and-so or on the skier in of RPM at so-and-so or on the skier in order to get your dopamine up." But, we order to get your dopamine up." But, we order to get your dopamine up." But, we can actually say, "If you ingest more can actually say, "If you ingest more can actually say, "If you ingest more L-tyrosine, there's a high probability L-tyrosine, there's a high probability L-tyrosine, there's a high probability that you're going to make more that you're going to make more that you're going to make more dopamine." And I'm talking about dopamine." And I'm talking about dopamine." And I'm talking about ingesting it through food or through ingesting it through food or through ingesting it through food or through supplementation, if you like. Mucuna supplementation, if you like. Mucuna supplementation, if you like. Mucuna pruriens I've tried, I should just pruriens I've tried, I should just pruriens I've tried, I should just mention, it was too dopaminergic for me. mention, it was too dopaminergic for me. mention, it was too dopaminergic for me. I really, really jazzed up and then I really, really jazzed up and then I really, really jazzed up and then severe crash for me the next day. severe crash for me the next day. severe crash for me the next day. Um but, that's I think because I tend to Um but, that's I think because I tend to Um but, that's I think because I tend to ride pretty high on the kind of ride pretty high on the kind of ride pretty high on the kind of alertness and motivation scale. I'm alertness and motivation scale. I'm alertness and motivation scale. I'm always being told always being told always being told by Costello and other people in the by Costello and other people in the by Costello and other people in the podcast studio to slow my speech down. podcast studio to slow my speech down. podcast studio to slow my speech down. This is me uncaffeinated, and I could This is me uncaffeinated, and I could This is me uncaffeinated, and I could probably afford a little more serotonin probably afford a little more serotonin probably afford a little more serotonin in my life. So, whereas Costello, he in my life. So, whereas Costello, he in my life. So, whereas Costello, he could afford Well, he could afford to could afford Well, he could afford to could afford Well, he could afford to wake up every couple days and just wake up every couple days and just wake up every couple days and just say hello to us. This dog sleeps more say hello to us. This dog sleeps more say hello to us. This dog sleeps more than any other creature. It's than any other creature. It's than any other creature. It's remarkable. So, there are things that we can do, and So, there are things that we can do, and So, there are things that we can do, and they're actionable, and they are In some they're actionable, and they are In some they're actionable, and they are In some ways, they're quantitative because you ways, they're quantitative because you ways, they're quantitative because you can regulate dosages, and you can regulate dosages, and you can regulate dosages, and you can regulate amounts, and you can regulate amounts, and you can regulate amounts, and you can regulate timing. And everyone has to play with timing. And everyone has to play with timing. And everyone has to play with these things and figure out what's right these things and figure out what's right these things and figure out what's right for them in terms of feeding, and for them in terms of feeding, and for them in terms of feeding, and everyone has to explore and understand everyone has to explore and understand everyone has to explore and understand what's safe and right for them. But And what's safe and right for them. But And what's safe and right for them. But And of course, exercise is still very of course, exercise is still very of course, exercise is still very important. I talked about social important. I talked about social important. I talked about social connection in the last episode, super connection in the last episode, super connection in the last episode, super important for activation of serotonin. important for activation of serotonin. important for activation of serotonin. But when it comes to this But when it comes to this But when it comes to this gut-brain-body-brain relationship, what gut-brain-body-brain relationship, what gut-brain-body-brain relationship, what we eat really matters in terms of the we eat really matters in terms of the we eat really matters in terms of the neurochemicals that we make. neurochemicals that we make. neurochemicals that we make. So, let's talk a little bit more about So, let's talk a little bit more about So, let's talk a little bit more about things that we ingest in our body and things that we ingest in our body and things that we ingest in our body and then allow our body to inform our brain then allow our body to inform our brain then allow our body to inform our brain to shift our mood. And this is something to shift our mood. And this is something to shift our mood. And this is something I've been doing for years, and I I've been doing for years, and I I've been doing for years, and I just want to say I've found to be a just want to say I've found to be a just want to say I've found to be a complete game-changer. There's excellent complete game-changer. There's excellent complete game-changer. There's excellent science to support it. And I think most science to support it. And I think most science to support it. And I think most people are familiar with it in a people are familiar with it in a people are familiar with it in a different context, but I don't think different context, but I don't think different context, but I don't think most people know this simple fact, which most people know this simple fact, which most people know this simple fact, which is that is that is that the omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acid ratio the omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acid ratio the omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acid ratio has a profound effect on depression. has a profound effect on depression. has a profound effect on depression. It has a profound effect on mood. It has a profound effect on mood. It has a profound effect on mood. So much so that So much so that So much so that in a double-blind, placebo-controlled in a double-blind, placebo-controlled in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study that I will provide the link to. study that I will provide the link to. study that I will provide the link to. This is a study first published in 2008, This is a study first published in 2008, This is a study first published in 2008, but there have been many others as well. First of all, in an experiment done in First of all, in an experiment done in First of all, in an experiment done in animals, they found there's a model of animals, they found there's a model of animals, they found there's a model of learned helplessness in animals. It's learned helplessness in animals. It's learned helplessness in animals. It's not very kind to the animals, but they not very kind to the animals, but they not very kind to the animals, but they put rats or mice in a jar, they let them put rats or mice in a jar, they let them put rats or mice in a jar, they let them swim, and they'll swim to try and they'll swim to try and they'll swim to try and save their life, and eventually they save their life, and eventually they save their life, and eventually they give up. It's a learned helplessness. give up. It's a learned helplessness. give up. It's a learned helplessness. They don't let them drown, they take They don't let them drown, they take They don't let them drown, they take them out. them out. them out. Adjusting the omega-3 omega-6 ratio so Adjusting the omega-3 omega-6 ratio so Adjusting the omega-3 omega-6 ratio so that the omega-3s are higher that the omega-3s are higher that the omega-3s are higher led to less learned helplessness, led to less learned helplessness, led to less learned helplessness, meaning these animals would swim longer. meaning these animals would swim longer. meaning these animals would swim longer. Okay, now that's an animal, that's a Okay, now that's an animal, that's a Okay, now that's an animal, that's a rat, not a particularly kind study. rat, not a particularly kind study. rat, not a particularly kind study. But that same study was essentially done But that same study was essentially done But that same study was essentially done in humans, although they didn't have in humans, although they didn't have in humans, although they didn't have them swim to the point of near drowning. them swim to the point of near drowning. them swim to the point of near drowning. What they did is they What they did is they What they did is they took people who were clinically took people who were clinically took people who were clinically depressed, major depression. Okay, major depressed, major depression. Okay, major depressed, major depression. Okay, major depression is severe maladaptive state, depression is severe maladaptive state, depression is severe maladaptive state, meaning it inhibits job, relationships, meaning it inhibits job, relationships, meaning it inhibits job, relationships, appetite, all sorts of negative health appetite, all sorts of negative health appetite, all sorts of negative health effects. And they did a comparison And they did a comparison And they did a comparison of 1,000 mg a day of EPA. So, EPA is one of 1,000 mg a day of EPA. So, EPA is one of 1,000 mg a day of EPA. So, EPA is one of the elements with that contains high of the elements with that contains high of the elements with that contains high levels of omega-3s, that's in things levels of omega-3s, that's in things levels of omega-3s, that's in things like fish oil. I'll talk about other like fish oil. I'll talk about other like fish oil. I'll talk about other sources in a little bit, but it wasn't sources in a little bit, but it wasn't sources in a little bit, but it wasn't 1,000 mg of fish oil, it was 1,000 mg of 1,000 mg of fish oil, it was 1,000 mg of 1,000 mg of fish oil, it was 1,000 mg of EPA. Compared that to 20 mg of fluoxetine, Compared that to 20 mg of fluoxetine, Compared that to 20 mg of fluoxetine, which is Prozac, okay, really increases which is Prozac, okay, really increases which is Prozac, okay, really increases serotonin. And in this study of 60 individuals, And in this study of 60 individuals, And in this study of 60 individuals, again, I'll provide the links to the again, I'll provide the links to the again, I'll provide the links to the study. They found that they were equally They found that they were equally They found that they were equally effective in reducing depressive effective in reducing depressive effective in reducing depressive symptoms. So, imagine that. symptoms. So, imagine that. symptoms. So, imagine that. A food-based compound that you can't make food-based compound that you can't make food-based compound that you can't make without, right? This is not a situation without, right? This is not a situation without, right? This is not a situation where you can make your own omega-3s, where you can make your own omega-3s, where you can make your own omega-3s, you have to get them from food sources you have to get them from food sources you have to get them from food sources or from supplementation, was as or from supplementation, was as or from supplementation, was as effective as 20 mg of fluoxetine over effective as 20 mg of fluoxetine over effective as 20 mg of fluoxetine over the course of 8 weeks. the course of 8 weeks. the course of 8 weeks. And what was really interesting, And what was really interesting, And what was really interesting, in addition to that, is that the in addition to that, is that the in addition to that, is that the combination of 1,000 mg of EPA and combination of 1,000 mg of EPA and combination of 1,000 mg of EPA and fluoxetine had a synergistic effect in fluoxetine had a synergistic effect in fluoxetine had a synergistic effect in lowering depressive symptoms. I find lowering depressive symptoms. I find lowering depressive symptoms. I find this remarkable. I heard about this remarkable. I heard about this remarkable. I heard about this when it first came out when it first came out when it first came out and I wasn't sure what to make of it and I wasn't sure what to make of it and I wasn't sure what to make of it because there are a lot of studies that because there are a lot of studies that because there are a lot of studies that come out and I generally like to focus come out and I generally like to focus come out and I generally like to focus my changes in behavior around things my changes in behavior around things my changes in behavior around things where there's a large center of mass, where there's a large center of mass, where there's a large center of mass, there's a lot of information. there's a lot of information. there's a lot of information. A couple years later I did in fact start A couple years later I did in fact start A couple years later I did in fact start taking 1,000 mg per day of EPA taking 1,000 mg per day of EPA taking 1,000 mg per day of EPA in fish oil. Now, in fish oil. Now, in fish oil. Now, there are a few side effects of fish there are a few side effects of fish there are a few side effects of fish oil. Um people who have blood who are oil. Um people who have blood who are oil. Um people who have blood who are bleeders, who have factor five Leiden bleeders, who have factor five Leiden bleeders, who have factor five Leiden mutations or um and women who are taking mutations or um and women who are taking mutations or um and women who are taking birth control, which can make you which birth control, which can make you which birth control, which can make you which can affect blood clotting and things of can affect blood clotting and things of can affect blood clotting and things of that sort, really should talk to your that sort, really should talk to your that sort, really should talk to your doctor. Um make sure it's okay for you. doctor. Um make sure it's okay for you. doctor. Um make sure it's okay for you. Fish oil also can give people fishy Fish oil also can give people fishy Fish oil also can give people fishy breath, which is pretty gross, frankly. breath, which is pretty gross, frankly. breath, which is pretty gross, frankly. But there are now fish oils that um But there are now fish oils that um But there are now fish oils that um either because of the encapsulations or either because of the encapsulations or either because of the encapsulations or because of the because of the because of the um they put some lemon flavoring in um they put some lemon flavoring in um they put some lemon flavoring in there doesn't have that effect. In any there doesn't have that effect. In any there doesn't have that effect. In any event, 1,000 mg per day of EPA, I event, 1,000 mg per day of EPA, I event, 1,000 mg per day of EPA, I started ingesting that regularly. I just started ingesting that regularly. I just started ingesting that regularly. I just felt better. I wasn't clinically felt better. I wasn't clinically felt better. I wasn't clinically depressed, but I generally I did feel, depressed, but I generally I did feel, depressed, but I generally I did feel, at least for me, an increase in mood and at least for me, an increase in mood and at least for me, an increase in mood and affect and a number of other things. affect and a number of other things. affect and a number of other things. It's supposed to reduce inflammation, It's supposed to reduce inflammation, It's supposed to reduce inflammation, the cardiovascular effects are the cardiovascular effects are the cardiovascular effects are controversial. For a long time everyone controversial. For a long time everyone controversial. For a long time everyone thought the effects on platelets were really the effects on platelets were really the effects on platelets were really terrific, then there were articles that terrific, then there were articles that terrific, then there were articles that came out in major newspapers saying came out in major newspapers saying came out in major newspapers saying maybe not so much, but the effects on maybe not so much, but the effects on maybe not so much, but the effects on mood are really profound and now there mood are really profound and now there mood are really profound and now there are lots of studies. If you go into PubMed lots of studies. If you go into PubMed lots of studies. If you go into PubMed and you were to put EPA or fish oil and you were to put EPA or fish oil and you were to put EPA or fish oil and depression, you would find that there depression, you would find that there depression, you would find that there were a number of really impressive were a number of really impressive were a number of really impressive results showing that it's at least as results showing that it's at least as results showing that it's at least as effective as certain effective as certain effective as certain SSRIs antidepressants at these dosages SSRIs antidepressants at these dosages SSRIs antidepressants at these dosages and it can amplify or improve the effect and it can amplify or improve the effect and it can amplify or improve the effect of low dosages of some of these SSRIs. of low dosages of some of these SSRIs. of low dosages of some of these SSRIs. So I feel like more people should know So I feel like more people should know So I feel like more people should know about this. This is nutrition, but it's about this. This is nutrition, but it's about this. This is nutrition, but it's profoundly affecting mood and depression profoundly affecting mood and depression profoundly affecting mood and depression is terrible, right? Depression can have is terrible, right? Depression can have is terrible, right? Depression can have a component of anxiety in some cases a component of anxiety in some cases a component of anxiety in some cases where people are they feel lousy and where people are they feel lousy and where people are they feel lousy and very uncertain. That's kind of how I very uncertain. That's kind of how I very uncertain. That's kind of how I talk about depression with anxiety as talk about depression with anxiety as talk about depression with anxiety as you know, you talk to someone who's you know, you talk to someone who's you know, you talk to someone who's anxious and you can tell them anxious and you can tell them anxious and you can tell them everything's going to be okay, okay and everything's going to be okay, okay and everything's going to be okay, okay and they're always concerned about what they're always concerned about what they're always concerned about what might they might not know. You don't might they might not know. You don't might they might not know. You don't really know the plane isn't going to really know the plane isn't going to really know the plane isn't going to crash. You don't really know that life crash. You don't really know that life crash. You don't really know that life is going to go okay. And in some sense is going to go okay. And in some sense is going to go okay. And in some sense they're right. No one has a crystal ball they're right. No one has a crystal ball they're right. No one has a crystal ball or can predict the future. or can predict the future. or can predict the future. But they tend to perseverate or fixate But they tend to perseverate or fixate But they tend to perseverate or fixate on the uncertainty. And then of course on the uncertainty. And then of course on the uncertainty. And then of course there are the versions of depression there are the versions of depression there are the versions of depression that involve certainty. People are that involve certainty. People are that involve certainty. People are lethargic and they're certain. They say, lethargic and they're certain. They say, lethargic and they're certain. They say, "Yeah, I'm certain I'm never going to "Yeah, I'm certain I'm never going to "Yeah, I'm certain I'm never going to get another job. I'm certain I'm never get another job. I'm certain I'm never get another job. I'm certain I'm never going to meet anyone new. I'm certain going to meet anyone new. I'm certain going to meet anyone new. I'm certain I'm going to fail." So there's this kind I'm going to fail." So there's this kind I'm going to fail." So there's this kind of a divide in the in the sphere of a divide in the in the sphere of a divide in the in the sphere of depression around certainty and depression around certainty and depression around certainty and uncertainty, but what's interesting is uncertainty, but what's interesting is uncertainty, but what's interesting is this 1,000 mg per day or more of EPA has this 1,000 mg per day or more of EPA has this 1,000 mg per day or more of EPA has been shown to relieve both forms of been shown to relieve both forms of been shown to relieve both forms of depression. Now, does that mean it's depression. Now, does that mean it's depression. Now, does that mean it's going to work for everybody? No. I'm not going to work for everybody? No. I'm not going to work for everybody? No. I'm not here to try and play psychiatrist. I here to try and play psychiatrist. I here to try and play psychiatrist. I want to point you in the direction of want to point you in the direction of want to point you in the direction of these manuscripts so that you can make these manuscripts so that you can make these manuscripts so that you can make informed choices for yourself. You can informed choices for yourself. You can informed choices for yourself. You can discuss it with your doctor and family discuss it with your doctor and family discuss it with your doctor and family and make the choices that are right for and make the choices that are right for and make the choices that are right for you. But here's what's especially interesting But here's what's especially interesting But here's what's especially interesting about the heart effects because we've about the heart effects because we've about the heart effects because we've heard that these omega-3s, which of heard that these omega-3s, which of heard that these omega-3s, which of course you can get from other sources course you can get from other sources course you can get from other sources too. You can get from fatty fish. There too. You can get from fatty fish. There too. You can get from fatty fish. There are flaxseeds, hemp seeds. are flaxseeds, hemp seeds. are flaxseeds, hemp seeds. Um there are a number of chia seeds, these there are a number of chia seeds, these there are a number of chia seeds, these kinds of things. Um kinds of things. Um kinds of things. Um but the levels of EPA that are required but the levels of EPA that are required but the levels of EPA that are required are quite high. So this 1,000 mg per day are quite high. So this 1,000 mg per day are quite high. So this 1,000 mg per day is uh that's pretty hard to get from is uh that's pretty hard to get from is uh that's pretty hard to get from food, although it can be done depending food, although it can be done depending food, although it can be done depending on what you're eating. on what you're eating. on what you're eating. What's interesting is that the heart What's interesting is that the heart What's interesting is that the heart effects that are solid, that really stand up in that are solid, that really stand up in that are solid, that really stand up in the literature the literature the literature have a lot more to do with something we have a lot more to do with something we have a lot more to do with something we talked about in a previous episode and talked about in a previous episode and talked about in a previous episode and I'll mention again, which is heart rate I'll mention again, which is heart rate I'll mention again, which is heart rate variability. So we know that having a variability. So we know that having a variability. So we know that having a heart rate that's really high or a heart rate that's really high or a heart rate that's really high or a heart rate that's really low, neither of those rate that's really low, neither of those rate that's really low, neither of those are good. A lot of people think, "Oh, are good. A lot of people think, "Oh, are good. A lot of people think, "Oh, you just want a low heart rate, big you just want a low heart rate, big you just want a low heart rate, big stroke volume." stroke volume." stroke volume." You know, if you're running a lot, you You know, if you're running a lot, you You know, if you're running a lot, you may 30 or 40 beats per minute. That's may 30 or 40 beats per minute. That's may 30 or 40 beats per minute. That's great to be in shape, but you still want great to be in shape, but you still want great to be in shape, but you still want heart rate variability. It has a lot to heart rate variability. It has a lot to heart rate variability. It has a lot to do with the tone of the autonomic do with the tone of the autonomic do with the tone of the autonomic nervous system. nervous system. nervous system. Talked about last time how when you Talked about last time how when you Talked about last time how when you inhale it speeds up heart rate, when you inhale it speeds up heart rate, when you inhale it speeds up heart rate, when you exhale it decreases heart rate. That's exhale it decreases heart rate. That's exhale it decreases heart rate. That's called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. It's the basis of heart rate It's the basis of heart rate It's the basis of heart rate variability. Uh we'll maybe do a short post about Uh we'll maybe do a short post about Uh we'll maybe do a short post about this so you don't have you can get all this so you don't have you can get all this so you don't have you can get all the mechanism and behaviors that the mechanism and behaviors that the mechanism and behaviors that spill out of that might be useful spill out of that might be useful spill out of that might be useful for you. But, the point is heart rate for you. But, the point is heart rate for you. But, the point is heart rate variability HRV is good. And what's variability HRV is good. And what's variability HRV is good. And what's interesting is that there was a study in interesting is that there was a study in interesting is that there was a study in 2009 that showed that people who eat a 2009 that showed that people who eat a 2009 that showed that people who eat a diet where they're and fail to diet where they're and fail to diet where they're and fail to supplement in a way that there's a high supplement in a way that there's a high supplement in a way that there's a high omega-6 to three ratio, so not enough omega-6 to three ratio, so not enough omega-6 to three ratio, so not enough omega-3s, not only are there markers of in not only are there markers of in not only are there markers of in inflammatory cytokines elevated, things inflammatory cytokines elevated, things inflammatory cytokines elevated, things like IL-6 and TNF-alpha, but they tend like IL-6 and TNF-alpha, but they tend like IL-6 and TNF-alpha, but they tend to be non-responders to be non-responders to be non-responders to antidepressants. to antidepressants. to antidepressants. Shifting that omega-3 omega-6 ratio did Shifting that omega-3 omega-6 ratio did Shifting that omega-3 omega-6 ratio did a couple things. First of all, a couple things. First of all, a couple things. First of all, increasing the amount of EPA shifted the increasing the amount of EPA shifted the increasing the amount of EPA shifted the ratio so it was higher omega-3 to ratio so it was higher omega-3 to ratio so it was higher omega-3 to omega-6 ratio, which was good, lowered omega-6 ratio, which was good, lowered omega-6 ratio, which was good, lowered the inflammation markers, and then the inflammation markers, and then the inflammation markers, and then allowed antidepressants to have their allowed antidepressants to have their allowed antidepressants to have their effect even at low doses. And here's the effect even at low doses. And here's the effect even at low doses. And here's the really interesting thing, it worked by really interesting thing, it worked by really interesting thing, it worked by increasing heart rate variability. increasing heart rate variability. increasing heart rate variability. And I have to you think, well, how in And I have to you think, well, how in And I have to you think, well, how in the world would this happen? But, you the world would this happen? But, you the world would this happen? But, you know how I mean that's a ton of effects. know how I mean that's a ton of effects. know how I mean that's a ton of effects. But, the way it works is because of the But, the way it works is because of the But, the way it works is because of the way that these things are impacting the way that these things are impacting the way that these things are impacting the gut and the autonomic nervous system. gut and the autonomic nervous system. gut and the autonomic nervous system. Remember, earlier I said the vagus Remember, earlier I said the vagus Remember, earlier I said the vagus includes connections from the heart includes connections from the heart includes connections from the heart signaling about sensory information signaling about sensory information signaling about sensory information about how fast the heart is beating to about how fast the heart is beating to about how fast the heart is beating to the brain, not just stuff from the brain, not just stuff from the brain, not just stuff from the lungs, but information from the heart. lungs, but information from the heart. lungs, but information from the heart. And the brain then adjusts heart rate by And the brain then adjusts heart rate by And the brain then adjusts heart rate by heart rate variability. So, it's heart rate variability. So, it's heart rate variability. So, it's incredible that there's a way that one incredible that there's a way that one incredible that there's a way that one can use the gut, the ingestion of more of use the gut, the ingestion of more of use the gut, the ingestion of more of these EPAs either through food or these EPAs either through food or these EPAs either through food or supplementation, to increase heart rate supplementation, to increase heart rate supplementation, to increase heart rate variability, and thereby to variability, and thereby to variability, and thereby to improve symptoms, meaning reduce improve symptoms, meaning reduce improve symptoms, meaning reduce symptoms of depression, and to even make symptoms of depression, and to even make symptoms of depression, and to even make low levels of antidepressants that low levels of antidepressants that low levels of antidepressants that wouldn't otherwise work, work. And I wouldn't otherwise work, work. And I wouldn't otherwise work, work. And I think I like the study so much because think I like the study so much because think I like the study so much because A, it's super cool. It bridges the A, it's super cool. It bridges the A, it's super cool. It bridges the brain-body axis. It incorporates brain-body axis. It incorporates brain-body axis. It incorporates nutrition and micronutrients and the nutrition and micronutrients and the nutrition and micronutrients and the brain. But also brain. But also brain. But also because it really points to something because it really points to something because it really points to something that we hear all the time, which is that we hear all the time, which is that we hear all the time, which is that our body is a whole system. It's working our body is a whole system. It's working our body is a whole system. It's working as a whole system. And the brain isn't as a whole system. And the brain isn't as a whole system. And the brain isn't working in isolation up there in the in working in isolation up there in the in working in isolation up there in the in the skull. It's reacting to things that the skull. It's reacting to things that the skull. It's reacting to things that are happening in the body, in the gut, are happening in the body, in the gut, are happening in the body, in the gut, and in the heart rate, and heart rate and in the heart rate, and heart rate and in the heart rate, and heart rate variability. And that the things we variability. And that the things we variability. And that the things we ingest can have a profound effect on ingest can have a profound effect on ingest can have a profound effect on them. Now, of course, I really want to them. Now, of course, I really want to them. Now, of course, I really want to emphasize something, which is that no emphasize something, which is that no emphasize something, which is that no one compound one compound one compound or nutrient or supplement or drug, or nutrient or supplement or drug, or nutrient or supplement or drug, or behavior for that matter, is going to be behavior for that matter, is going to be behavior for that matter, is going to be the be-all end-all of shifting out of the be-all end-all of shifting out of the be-all end-all of shifting out of depression or improving one's mood or depression or improving one's mood or depression or improving one's mood or improving sleep. It's a constellation of improving sleep. It's a constellation of improving sleep. It's a constellation of things. And this is especially true when things. And this is especially true when things. And this is especially true when people start to get excited about people start to get excited about people start to get excited about supplements and drugs of all kinds and supplements and drugs of all kinds and supplements and drugs of all kinds and their potential for various things. their potential for various things. their potential for various things. Right now, there's a lot of excitement Right now, there's a lot of excitement Right now, there's a lot of excitement about psychedelics and their therapeutic about psychedelics and their therapeutic about psychedelics and their therapeutic uses. And I think, great. But as a good uses. And I think, great. But as a good uses. And I think, great. But as a good friend of mine, who's a physician friend of mine, who's a physician friend of mine, who's a physician clinician, says, clinician, says, clinician, says, "Better living through chemistry still "Better living through chemistry still "Better living through chemistry still requires better living." You cannot requires better living." You cannot requires better living." You cannot expect to take a compound, regardless of expect to take a compound, regardless of expect to take a compound, regardless of source or potency, source or potency, source or potency, and have it completely shift your and have it completely shift your and have it completely shift your experience of life without having to experience of life without having to experience of life without having to continue to engage in the proper continue to engage in the proper continue to engage in the proper behaviors, all the things we know, behaviors, all the things we know, behaviors, all the things we know, proper sleep, exercise, social proper sleep, exercise, social proper sleep, exercise, social connection, food, etc. There are many connection, food, etc. There are many connection, food, etc. There are many others, as well. others, as well. others, as well. So, I still find that this I still find that this I still find that this collection of studies about omega-3 to collection of studies about omega-3 to collection of studies about omega-3 to omega-6 ratios to be profoundly omega-6 ratios to be profoundly omega-6 ratios to be profoundly important, so much so that it's important, so much so that it's important, so much so that it's completely changed the way that I think completely changed the way that I think completely changed the way that I think about food, the foods I eat. I do about food, the foods I eat. I do about food, the foods I eat. I do supplement. I don't necessarily that supplement. I don't necessarily that supplement. I don't necessarily that think that's for everybody, but think that's for everybody, but think that's for everybody, but I really think it's incredible that I really think it's incredible that I really think it's incredible that there are these compounds that have there are these compounds that have there are these compounds that have these robust effects on our feelings of these robust effects on our feelings of these robust effects on our feelings of well-being. And there are others, too. well-being. And there are others, too. well-being. And there are others, too. So, that 1,000 mg per day threshold of So, that 1,000 mg per day threshold of So, that 1,000 mg per day threshold of fish oil that's beneficial fish oil that's beneficial fish oil that's beneficial requires that one take, you know, requires that one take, you know, requires that one take, you know, reasonable amount of these things either reasonable amount of these things either reasonable amount of these things either through food or through supplementation. through food or through supplementation. through food or through supplementation. I acknowledge that not everyone wants to I acknowledge that not everyone wants to I acknowledge that not everyone wants to take fish oil. Uh there are a couple take fish oil. Uh there are a couple take fish oil. Uh there are a couple reasons why one might want to avoid reasons why one might want to avoid reasons why one might want to avoid that. Uh one would be for ethical that. Uh one would be for ethical that. Uh one would be for ethical reasons. Uh you have a an emotional reasons. Uh you have a an emotional reasons. Uh you have a an emotional relationship or a uh relationship to the relationship or a uh relationship to the relationship or a uh relationship to the environment that makes you not want to environment that makes you not want to environment that makes you not want to ingest um fish-related products. There's ingest um fish-related products. There's ingest um fish-related products. There's krill oil. Krill is still an organism. krill oil. Krill is still an organism. krill oil. Krill is still an organism. It's a little tiny thing that whales eat It's a little tiny thing that whales eat It's a little tiny thing that whales eat a lot of and people generally eat very a lot of and people generally eat very a lot of and people generally eat very little of. So, krill little of. So, krill little of. So, krill is out there. I personally, just me, I is out there. I personally, just me, I is out there. I personally, just me, I don't know why, I didn't react well to don't know why, I didn't react well to don't know why, I didn't react well to krill. I It didn't make me feel very to krill. I It didn't make me feel very to krill. I It didn't make me feel very good. I had some like kind of skin good. I had some like kind of skin good. I had some like kind of skin itchies and things like that. Um and itchies and things like that. Um and itchies and things like that. Um and they stopped when I stopped taking it, they stopped when I stopped taking it, they stopped when I stopped taking it, but I don't want to bias you against it but I don't want to bias you against it but I don't want to bias you against it if that's your preference. Some people if that's your preference. Some people if that's your preference. Some people really like krill oil as a source of really like krill oil as a source of really like krill oil as a source of omega-3s. I did mention some of the omega-3s. I did mention some of the omega-3s. I did mention some of the other sources um other sources um other sources um like chia seeds and flax seeds, but as like chia seeds and flax seeds, but as like chia seeds and flax seeds, but as you'll notice, these are not things that you'll notice, these are not things that you'll notice, these are not things that we tend to ingest a lot of on a regular we tend to ingest a lot of on a regular we tend to ingest a lot of on a regular basis. It is possible to get omega-3s basis. It is possible to get omega-3s basis. It is possible to get omega-3s from meats if the animals have grazed on from meats if the animals have grazed on from meats if the animals have grazed on grasses that contain a lot of omega-3s. grasses that contain a lot of omega-3s. grasses that contain a lot of omega-3s. Um so, for those of you that um ingest Um so, for those of you that um ingest Um so, for those of you that um ingest meat, you know, your the source of those meat, you know, your the source of those meat, you know, your the source of those meats is going to be very important as meats is going to be very important as meats is going to be very important as it relates to omega-3s. it relates to omega-3s. it relates to omega-3s. Even within the category of fish oil, Even within the category of fish oil, Even within the category of fish oil, there's a concern sometimes about there's a concern sometimes about there's a concern sometimes about mercury and other contaminants. Uh you mercury and other contaminants. Uh you mercury and other contaminants. Uh you want to go with a brand that emphasizes want to go with a brand that emphasizes want to go with a brand that emphasizes that they've um that they've um that they've um gone to really good sources and that gone to really good sources and that gone to really good sources and that they decontaminate uh regardless. they decontaminate uh regardless. they decontaminate uh regardless. Um and so, you have to search out those Um and so, you have to search out those Um and so, you have to search out those brands. There is a test that you can do brands. There is a test that you can do brands. There is a test that you can do as to or not the fish oil is uh as to or not the fish oil is uh as to or not the fish oil is uh rancid or not. Some people take it in rancid or not. Some people take it in rancid or not. Some people take it in liquid form, some people take it in liquid form, some people take it in liquid form, some people take it in capsule form. The liquid form is going capsule form. The liquid form is going capsule form. The liquid form is going to be more affordable. to be more affordable. to be more affordable. The capsule form The capsule form The capsule form is more is a little easier and a little is more is a little easier and a little is more is a little easier and a little more portable. You can actually just more portable. You can actually just more portable. You can actually just chew one of the gel tablets and if it tastes one of the gel tablets and if it tastes one of the gel tablets and if it tastes really fishy and kind of rancid, you'll really fishy and kind of rancid, you'll really fishy and kind of rancid, you'll know. It's disgusting. You'll want to know. It's disgusting. You'll want to know. It's disgusting. You'll want to spit it out. spit it out. spit it out. And if it doesn't and it's tolerable, And if it doesn't and it's tolerable, And if it doesn't and it's tolerable, then you'll know that it's okay. then you'll know that it's okay. then you'll know that it's okay. Unfortunately, you have to buy it first Unfortunately, you have to buy it first Unfortunately, you have to buy it first in order to do that. Although I don't in order to do that. Although I don't in order to do that. Although I don't know, maybe you can get them to open up know, maybe you can get them to open up know, maybe you can get them to open up the bottle for you in the store and tell the bottle for you in the store and tell the bottle for you in the store and tell them that you don't want to try it. them that you don't want to try it. them that you don't want to try it. Someday perhaps fish oil and omega-3s Someday perhaps fish oil and omega-3s Someday perhaps fish oil and omega-3s it'll be like tasting wine at a it'll be like tasting wine at a it'll be like tasting wine at a restaurant where you can send it back. restaurant where you can send it back. restaurant where you can send it back. For now, I think you have to purchase it For now, I think you have to purchase it For now, I think you have to purchase it first. But find a brand you trust first. But find a brand you trust first. But find a brand you trust and like and then and then work with and like and then and then work with and like and then and then work with them. If you decide to go that route, of If you decide to go that route, of If you decide to go that route, of course. There are other compounds that course. There are other compounds that course. There are other compounds that are also interesting for mood elevation are also interesting for mood elevation are also interesting for mood elevation that are essentially like foods or are that are essentially like foods or are that are essentially like foods or are supplement based that supplement based that supplement based that now fortunately there are really good now fortunately there are really good now fortunately there are really good data from peer-reviewed studies. And the data from peer-reviewed studies. And the data from peer-reviewed studies. And the next one I want to mention cuz I think next one I want to mention cuz I think next one I want to mention cuz I think it's really interesting is L-carnitine. it's really interesting is L-carnitine. it's really interesting is L-carnitine. Now L-carnitine has been around a long Now L-carnitine has been around a long Now L-carnitine has been around a long time and it's been discussed in the time and it's been discussed in the time and it's been discussed in the context of heart health and a number of context of heart health and a number of context of heart health and a number of other things. It was actually being other things. It was actually being other things. It was actually being touted as a bit of a weight loss agent touted as a bit of a weight loss agent touted as a bit of a weight loss agent in the early 90s. in the early 90s. in the early 90s. But L-carnitine actually has some really But L-carnitine actually has some really But L-carnitine actually has some really impressive effects on depression. impressive effects on depression. impressive effects on depression. And again, we will look to And again, we will look to And again, we will look to PubMed because looking at examine.com is PubMed because looking at examine.com is PubMed because looking at examine.com is essentially for me anyway looking like essentially for me anyway looking like essentially for me anyway looking like at PubMed. What is L-carnitine? Okay, at PubMed. What is L-carnitine? Okay, at PubMed. What is L-carnitine? Okay, L-carnitine is most prevalent in meat L-carnitine is most prevalent in meat L-carnitine is most prevalent in meat and in beef in particular. Now for the and in beef in particular. Now for the and in beef in particular. Now for the vegans, please know that L-carnitine is vegans, please know that L-carnitine is vegans, please know that L-carnitine is available through non-meat sources as available through non-meat sources as available through non-meat sources as well, although it's not as enriched in well, although it's not as enriched in well, although it's not as enriched in non-meat sources. It's a really non-meat sources. It's a really non-meat sources. It's a really interesting molecule because interesting molecule because interesting molecule because acetyl-L-carnitine is essentially what's made from is essentially what's made from is essentially what's made from L-carnitine. But it's acetylated But it's acetylated But it's acetylated if you're interested in the if you're interested in the if you're interested in the biochemistry, you can look that up. It's biochemistry, you can look that up. It's biochemistry, you can look that up. It's acetylated into a form that can cross acetylated into a form that can cross acetylated into a form that can cross the blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain the blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain the blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain barrier or BBB is a barrier. It's a wall barrier or BBB is a barrier. It's a wall barrier or BBB is a barrier. It's a wall around the brain around the brain around the brain and you have this barrier because and you have this barrier because and you have this barrier because the brain is so important and it has the brain is so important and it has the brain is so important and it has this feature that the neurons there this feature that the neurons there this feature that the neurons there don't recreate themselves after injury don't recreate themselves after injury don't recreate themselves after injury like other organs of the body. There's like other organs of the body. There's like other organs of the body. There's not a lot of turnover of cells despite not a lot of turnover of cells despite not a lot of turnover of cells despite what you might have heard. And so nature what you might have heard. And so nature what you might have heard. And so nature has created this BBB, this blood-brain has created this BBB, this blood-brain has created this BBB, this blood-brain barrier to make sure that certain barrier to make sure that certain barrier to make sure that certain molecules, in particular large molecules, in particular large molecules, in particular large molecules, don't get across the molecules, don't get across the molecules, don't get across the blood-brain barrier cuz it can be blood-brain barrier cuz it can be blood-brain barrier cuz it can be damaging to those tissues. Incidentally, damaging to those tissues. Incidentally, damaging to those tissues. Incidentally, you also have you also have you also have a very rigid or stringent barrier around a very rigid or stringent barrier around a very rigid or stringent barrier around other organs, which are the gonads. So other organs, which are the gonads. So other organs, which are the gonads. So the ovaries and the testes and the brain the ovaries and the testes and the brain the ovaries and the testes and the brain are the organs of the body that the that are the organs of the body that the that are the organs of the body that the that nature has gone out of its way to nature has gone out of its way to nature has gone out of its way to protect, give this additional layer of protect, give this additional layer of protect, give this additional layer of the blood-brain barrier or as you might the blood-brain barrier or as you might the blood-brain barrier or as you might imagine for the testes and the ovaries, imagine for the testes and the ovaries, imagine for the testes and the ovaries, it's going to be the blood-gonadal it's going to be the blood-gonadal it's going to be the blood-gonadal barrier. So barrier. So barrier. So these barriers exist and make it such these barriers exist and make it such these barriers exist and make it such that just because you eat something, that just because you eat something, that just because you eat something, just because you ingest it, doesn't mean just because you ingest it, doesn't mean just because you ingest it, doesn't mean it's going to cross the blood-brain it's going to cross the blood-brain it's going to cross the blood-brain barrier. But L-carnitine, when taken, is barrier. But L-carnitine, when taken, is barrier. But L-carnitine, when taken, is acetylated and converted into this form acetylated and converted into this form acetylated and converted into this form that gets across the blood-brain barrier that gets across the blood-brain barrier that gets across the blood-brain barrier and it has a lot of effects. It's and it has a lot of effects. It's and it has a lot of effects. It's involved in mitochondrial activation of involved in mitochondrial activation of involved in mitochondrial activation of long-chain fatty acids, which that's a long-chain fatty acids, which that's a long-chain fatty acids, which that's a big mouthful um that we can get into big mouthful um that we can get into big mouthful um that we can get into sometime when we're talking about sometime when we're talking about sometime when we're talking about metabolics, but it has some interesting metabolics, but it has some interesting metabolics, but it has some interesting effects on the neuro side. So if you effects on the neuro side. So if you effects on the neuro side. So if you decide to check it out um on decide to check it out um on decide to check it out um on examine.com, you'll see some really examine.com, you'll see some really examine.com, you'll see some really interesting things. Lots of effects on interesting things. Lots of effects on interesting things. Lots of effects on ammonia, C-reactive proteins, things of ammonia, C-reactive proteins, things of ammonia, C-reactive proteins, things of that sort, blood glucose is lowered, that sort, blood glucose is lowered, that sort, blood glucose is lowered, etc. That's all stuff that's um etc. That's all stuff that's um etc. That's all stuff that's um the level of blood in periphery, side the level of blood in periphery, side the level of blood in periphery, side effects in lowering cholesterol. Um effects in lowering cholesterol. Um effects in lowering cholesterol. Um here's some interesting ones. here's some interesting ones. here's some interesting ones. Rates of pregnancy go way up when people Rates of pregnancy go way up when people Rates of pregnancy go way up when people are taking L-carnitine, both the father are taking L-carnitine, both the father are taking L-carnitine, both the father and the mother, both the source of sperm and the mother, both the source of sperm and the mother, both the source of sperm and the source of egg and the source of egg and the source of egg are affected in ways that favor are affected in ways that favor are affected in ways that favor pregnancy. It does increase, here we go pregnancy. It does increase, here we go pregnancy. It does increase, here we go again with sperm quality, sperm motility again with sperm quality, sperm motility again with sperm quality, sperm motility in males, and it seems to have positive in males, and it seems to have positive in males, and it seems to have positive effects on females that have polycystic effects on females that have polycystic effects on females that have polycystic ovary syndrome. So, check that out. Um, ovary syndrome. So, check that out. Um, ovary syndrome. So, check that out. Um, you know, the effects are very strong. you know, the effects are very strong. you know, the effects are very strong. There are three studies listed there. There are three studies listed there. There are three studies listed there. Again, I'm not promoting this, but um Again, I'm not promoting this, but um Again, I'm not promoting this, but um that people take L-carnitine, that people take L-carnitine, that people take L-carnitine, especially if you're trying to get especially if you're trying to get especially if you're trying to get pregnant, but um check it out because it pregnant, but um check it out because it pregnant, but um check it out because it the effects there in the studies that the effects there in the studies that the effects there in the studies that are mentioned are um published in are mentioned are um published in are mentioned are um published in peer-reviewed rigorous journals. peer-reviewed rigorous journals. peer-reviewed rigorous journals. In terms of the neural effects, In terms of the neural effects, In terms of the neural effects, those are quite interesting. The effects those are quite interesting. The effects those are quite interesting. The effects on depression are still emerging, but on depression are still emerging, but on depression are still emerging, but they do seem to exist that people feel they do seem to exist that people feel they do seem to exist that people feel a notable decrease in depressive a notable decrease in depressive a notable decrease in depressive symptoms. There are seven studies listed symptoms. There are seven studies listed symptoms. There are seven studies listed on examine.com um that it has a notable on examine.com um that it has a notable on examine.com um that it has a notable benefit in a variety of circumstances benefit in a variety of circumstances benefit in a variety of circumstances where participants have heightened where participants have heightened where participants have heightened depression already, they start taking depression already, they start taking depression already, they start taking L-carnitine, and they start feeling L-carnitine, and they start feeling L-carnitine, and they start feeling better. And they talk about dosages in better. And they talk about dosages in better. And they talk about dosages in those various studies. It also has been those various studies. It also has been those various studies. It also has been shown to have a notable decrease in the shown to have a notable decrease in the shown to have a notable decrease in the symptoms of autism, which I find symptoms of autism, which I find symptoms of autism, which I find fascinating, also. Again, the things we fascinating, also. Again, the things we fascinating, also. Again, the things we ingest impact our chem- the chemicals in ingest impact our chem- the chemicals in ingest impact our chem- the chemicals in our brain and how they impact the rest our brain and how they impact the rest our brain and how they impact the rest of our body. There's other things it's of our body. There's other things it's of our body. There's other things it's been used to treat certain forms of been used to treat certain forms of been used to treat certain forms of alcohol dependence. I think this is alcohol dependence. I think this is alcohol dependence. I think this is going to be a very exciting emerging going to be a very exciting emerging going to be a very exciting emerging area. We're going to do a whole month area. We're going to do a whole month area. We're going to do a whole month about addiction. I've got a great guest about addiction. I've got a great guest about addiction. I've got a great guest lined up for that month, but there's now lined up for that month, but there's now lined up for that month, but there's now an emerging field an emerging field an emerging field about what people can take in supplement about what people can take in supplement about what people can take in supplement to help ease the cravings and the to help ease the cravings and the to help ease the cravings and the withdrawal when trying to quit drugs of withdrawal when trying to quit drugs of withdrawal when trying to quit drugs of abuse, like cocaine, alcohol, heroin, abuse, like cocaine, alcohol, heroin, abuse, like cocaine, alcohol, heroin, and smoking, and things of that sort. and smoking, and things of that sort. and smoking, and things of that sort. So, really interesting um area. This is So, really interesting um area. This is So, really interesting um area. This is I like to think is early days, and then I like to think is early days, and then I like to think is early days, and then we're going to discover a lot more. we're going to discover a lot more. we're going to discover a lot more. There's a huge list of things here. There's a huge list of things here. There's a huge list of things here. Since we talked about pain in our Since we talked about pain in our Since we talked about pain in our previous episode, and I know a lot of previous episode, and I know a lot of previous episode, and I know a lot of people um have written to me about um have written to me about um have written to me about fibromyalgia. It does L-carnitine has fibromyalgia. It does L-carnitine has fibromyalgia. It does L-carnitine has been shown to reduce symptoms of been shown to reduce symptoms of been shown to reduce symptoms of fibromyalgia. Again, all the links to fibromyalgia. Again, all the links to fibromyalgia. Again, all the links to studies are on examine.com, total studies are on examine.com, total studies are on examine.com, total totally free site. And that was my totally free site. And that was my totally free site. And that was my bulldog being a battering ram. There's bulldog being a battering ram. There's bulldog being a battering ram. There's nothing graceful about this bulldog. nothing graceful about this bulldog. nothing graceful about this bulldog. He's decided he wanted to leave to go He's decided he wanted to leave to go He's decided he wanted to leave to go get a drink of water, and so please get a drink of water, and so please get a drink of water, and so please forgive the noise. forgive the noise. forgive the noise. Okay, so now let's turn to another Okay, so now let's turn to another Okay, so now let's turn to another aspect of the gut-brain relationship aspect of the gut-brain relationship aspect of the gut-brain relationship that will surprise you, that will surprise you, that will surprise you, in some cases might shock you, and that in some cases might shock you, and that in some cases might shock you, and that has some really cool and actionable has some really cool and actionable has some really cool and actionable biology. And that's the gut microbiome, biology. And that's the gut microbiome, biology. And that's the gut microbiome, probiotics, and prebiotics. I know today probiotics, and prebiotics. I know today probiotics, and prebiotics. I know today we're talking about emotions and not we're talking about emotions and not we're talking about emotions and not pain, but I'd be remiss if I didn't pain, but I'd be remiss if I didn't pain, but I'd be remiss if I didn't mention another effect of mention another effect of mention another effect of acetyl-L-carnitine that's been reported, acetyl-L-carnitine that's been reported, acetyl-L-carnitine that's been reported, and that you can find listed with link and that you can find listed with link and that you can find listed with link to study on examine.com, to study on examine.com, to study on examine.com, which is its effect in reducing the which is its effect in reducing the which is its effect in reducing the symptoms of migraine. This was a symptoms of migraine. This was a symptoms of migraine. This was a randomized controlled trial with 133 randomized controlled trial with 133 randomized controlled trial with 133 participants who had frequent migraines. participants who had frequent migraines. participants who had frequent migraines. They were taking 500 mg of They were taking 500 mg of They were taking 500 mg of L-carnitine or nothing for 12 weeks. So, the control or nothing for 12 weeks. So, the control or nothing for 12 weeks. So, the control is a little bit um the control is a little bit um the control is a little bit um the control experiment there is a little bit tricky, experiment there is a little bit tricky, experiment there is a little bit tricky, but it had a significant effect on but it had a significant effect on but it had a significant effect on reducing the number of migraine attacks reducing the number of migraine attacks reducing the number of migraine attacks per month. So, I find that really per month. So, I find that really per month. So, I find that really interesting. There's a lot more listed there about There's a lot more listed there about There's a lot more listed there about the study. the study. the study. Um and I think it these compounds are Um and I think it these compounds are Um and I think it these compounds are powerful. Um they carry risks for powerful. Um they carry risks for powerful. Um they carry risks for certain people, not for others. So, certain people, not for others. So, certain people, not for others. So, again, you have to find out what's right again, you have to find out what's right again, you have to find out what's right for you, but I do think they are super for you, but I do think they are super for you, but I do think they are super interesting as interesting as interesting as potential therapeutics for various potential therapeutics for various potential therapeutics for various people. So, what's the deal with the gut So, what's the deal with the gut So, what's the deal with the gut microbiome and the gut-brain axis? microbiome and the gut-brain axis? microbiome and the gut-brain axis? Today, we've actually been talking a lot Today, we've actually been talking a lot Today, we've actually been talking a lot already about the gut-brain axis. already about the gut-brain axis. already about the gut-brain axis. That has nothing to do with microbiomes. That has nothing to do with microbiomes. That has nothing to do with microbiomes. We've been talking about this vagus We've been talking about this vagus We've been talking about this vagus nerve that connects providing sensory nerve that connects providing sensory nerve that connects providing sensory information from the body to the brain information from the body to the brain information from the body to the brain and then the brain and then the brain and then the brain also sends in the same nerve motor also sends in the same nerve motor also sends in the same nerve motor information to control the motility that information to control the motility that information to control the motility that got the heart rate how fast we breathe got the heart rate how fast we breathe got the heart rate how fast we breathe and deployment of immune stuff killer cells deployment of immune stuff killer cells deployment of immune stuff killer cells and things of that sort. and things of that sort. and things of that sort. But oftentimes when we hear about the But oftentimes when we hear about the But oftentimes when we hear about the gut brain axis these days gut brain axis these days gut brain axis these days it's a discussion about the gut it's a discussion about the gut it's a discussion about the gut microbiome and once again we're in a microbiome and once again we're in a microbiome and once again we're in a situation where there's incredible situation where there's incredible situation where there's incredible biology. I'm very happy there's so much I'm very happy there's so much I'm very happy there's so much discussion about the gut microbiome. discussion about the gut microbiome. discussion about the gut microbiome. I am somewhat dismayed and concerned I am somewhat dismayed and concerned I am somewhat dismayed and concerned that most of what I hear out there is that most of what I hear out there is that most of what I hear out there is either false either false either false or partially false. So we're going to or partially false. So we're going to or partially false. So we're going to clear up some of the misconceptions clear up some of the misconceptions clear up some of the misconceptions first by understanding the biology and first by understanding the biology and first by understanding the biology and then we're going to talk about some of then we're going to talk about some of then we're going to talk about some of the actionable items. It is true that we have a lot of these It is true that we have a lot of these It is true that we have a lot of these little micro organisms living in little micro organisms living in little micro organisms living in our gut. our gut. our gut. They're not there because they want to They're not there because they want to They're not there because they want to help us. They don't have brains. They help us. They don't have brains. They help us. They don't have brains. They are adaptive however they try and find are adaptive however they try and find are adaptive however they try and find and create environments that make it and create environments that make it and create environments that make it easier for them to proliferate. So they easier for them to proliferate. So they easier for them to proliferate. So they don't care about you and me but they are don't care about you and me but they are don't care about you and me but they are perfectly willing to exploit you and me perfectly willing to exploit you and me perfectly willing to exploit you and me in order to make more of themselves. The in order to make more of themselves. The in order to make more of themselves. The same way viruses are. Viruses don't have same way viruses are. Viruses don't have same way viruses are. Viruses don't have a mind they infect cells they hijack the a mind they infect cells they hijack the a mind they infect cells they hijack the genome and they use that genome to make genome and they use that genome to make genome and they use that genome to make more of themselves. The microbiota that live in us vary The microbiota that live in us vary The microbiota that live in us vary along the length of our digestive tract. along the length of our digestive tract. along the length of our digestive tract. But let's just take a step back and But let's just take a step back and But let's just take a step back and think about how our body plan is made. think about how our body plan is made. think about how our body plan is made. We are actually a series of tubes. Our We are actually a series of tubes. Our We are actually a series of tubes. Our brain is actually a tube. You see it's brain is actually a tube. You see it's brain is actually a tube. You see it's all squishy on the outside and then it's all squishy on the outside and then it's all squishy on the outside and then it's got that long thing the spinal cord that got that long thing the spinal cord that got that long thing the spinal cord that goes down to the base of the spine. goes down to the base of the spine. goes down to the base of the spine. That's the central nervous system. That That's the central nervous system. That That's the central nervous system. That all started out as a tube. It just looks all started out as a tube. It just looks all started out as a tube. It just looks like a cauliflower on the other end like a cauliflower on the other end like a cauliflower on the other end up in the brain because up in the brain because up in the brain because the tube is so big and it has to be the tube is so big and it has to be the tube is so big and it has to be crammed into the skull, so it gets all crammed into the skull, so it gets all crammed into the skull, so it gets all wrinkled up. But if we were to splay it wrinkled up. But if we were to splay it wrinkled up. But if we were to splay it out, you'd find it's just one big tube. out, you'd find it's just one big tube. out, you'd find it's just one big tube. Similarly, our digestive tract and our Similarly, our digestive tract and our Similarly, our digestive tract and our airways are essentially one big tube. It airways are essentially one big tube. It airways are essentially one big tube. It starts with our mouth, also our nose, starts with our mouth, also our nose, starts with our mouth, also our nose, and then we have all these other tubes and then we have all these other tubes and then we have all these other tubes that go down through our throat, and that go down through our throat, and that go down through our throat, and then into our stomach, and then into our then into our stomach, and then into our then into our stomach, and then into our various intestines, and then various intestines, and then various intestines, and then the tube ends out the other end. So, we the tube ends out the other end. So, we the tube ends out the other end. So, we are one long tube for digestion. And are one long tube for digestion. And are one long tube for digestion. And inside of that tube is a mucosal lining. inside of that tube is a mucosal lining. inside of that tube is a mucosal lining. It's these little microvilli, tiny, It's these little microvilli, tiny, It's these little microvilli, tiny, tiny little like velvety tiny, tiny little like velvety tiny, tiny little like velvety ends of cells that are able to move and ends of cells that are able to move and ends of cells that are able to move and move things along, move things along, move things along, and mucus, mucosa. and mucus, mucosa. and mucus, mucosa. And the conditions of that mucosal And the conditions of that mucosal And the conditions of that mucosal lining set a number of different things. lining set a number of different things. lining set a number of different things. It sets the rate of our digestion and It sets the rate of our digestion and It sets the rate of our digestion and the quality of our digestion. the quality of our digestion. the quality of our digestion. It sets, for instance, our immune It sets, for instance, our immune It sets, for instance, our immune system. I Most people probably don't system. I Most people probably don't system. I Most people probably don't realize this, but most infections in the realize this, but most infections in the realize this, but most infections in the environment have Well, they have to get environment have Well, they have to get environment have Well, they have to get into our body somehow. Some of them are into our body somehow. Some of them are into our body somehow. Some of them are inhaled. A lot of them go into our mouth inhaled. A lot of them go into our mouth inhaled. A lot of them go into our mouth and lodge in the mucosal lining of the and lodge in the mucosal lining of the and lodge in the mucosal lining of the mouth, and then infections start there. mouth, and then infections start there. mouth, and then infections start there. And you've probably had the experience, And you've probably had the experience, And you've probably had the experience, unfortunately, of, you know, feeling unfortunately, of, you know, feeling unfortunately, of, you know, feeling like you have a tickle in your throat, like you have a tickle in your throat, like you have a tickle in your throat, like something's irritating your throat, like something's irritating your throat, like something's irritating your throat, and then it kind of migrates up into a and then it kind of migrates up into a and then it kind of migrates up into a head cold or runny nose. head cold or runny nose. head cold or runny nose. Sometimes it'll start as a headache, Sometimes it'll start as a headache, Sometimes it'll start as a headache, sometimes it won't. sometimes it won't. sometimes it won't. Things that are in our can migrate down Things that are in our can migrate down Things that are in our can migrate down into the gut. So, we're ingesting things into the gut. So, we're ingesting things into the gut. So, we're ingesting things all the time. Think about air, you know, all the time. Think about air, you know, all the time. Think about air, you know, bacteria, viruses, they're making their bacteria, viruses, they're making their bacteria, viruses, they're making their way into our gut. And some of those way into our gut. And some of those way into our gut. And some of those bacteria live in the gut, and some of bacteria live in the gut, and some of bacteria live in the gut, and some of those bacteria bias the mucosal lining those bacteria bias the mucosal lining those bacteria bias the mucosal lining in the gut, in the gut, in the gut, stomach and intestines, stomach and intestines, stomach and intestines, to be to be to be more acidic or more basic so that they more acidic or more basic so that they more acidic or more basic so that they can make more of themselves. So they can make more of themselves. So they can make more of themselves. So they can replicate. They like a particular replicate. They like a particular replicate. They like a particular comfort. It's like they like a comfort. It's like they like a comfort. It's like they like a particular kind of bedding to lie down particular kind of bedding to lie down particular kind of bedding to lie down in and create more of themselves. in and create more of themselves. in and create more of themselves. Now, some of those mucosal linings that they some of those mucosal linings that they some of those mucosal linings that they promote make us feel better. They make promote make us feel better. They make promote make us feel better. They make us feel more alert. They bolster our us feel more alert. They bolster our us feel more alert. They bolster our immune system and others make us feel immune system and others make us feel immune system and others make us feel worse. So first rule, worse. So first rule, worse. So first rule, the microbiome isn't good or bad. Some the microbiome isn't good or bad. Some the microbiome isn't good or bad. Some of these little bugs that live in us do of these little bugs that live in us do of these little bugs that live in us do bad things to us. They make us feel bad things to us. They make us feel bad things to us. They make us feel worse. They lower our immunity. They worse. They lower our immunity. They worse. They lower our immunity. They affect us in negative ways. Some of them affect us in negative ways. Some of them affect us in negative ways. Some of them make us feel better and they do that make us feel better and they do that make us feel better and they do that mainly by changing the mainly by changing the mainly by changing the conditions of our gut environment. In conditions of our gut environment. In conditions of our gut environment. In addition to that, they do impact addition to that, they do impact addition to that, they do impact the neurotransmitters and the neurons that neurotransmitters and the neurons that neurotransmitters and the neurons that live in the gut and that signal up to live in the gut and that signal up to live in the gut and that signal up to the brain to impact things like dopamine the brain to impact things like dopamine the brain to impact things like dopamine and serotonin that we've been talking and serotonin that we've been talking and serotonin that we've been talking about previously. So, about previously. So, about previously. So, there's a vast world now there's a vast world now there's a vast world now devoted to try to understand what devoted to try to understand what devoted to try to understand what sources of food, what kinds of foods are sources of food, what kinds of foods are sources of food, what kinds of foods are good or not good for the gut microbiome. good or not good for the gut microbiome. good or not good for the gut microbiome. So let's just talk about some general So let's just talk about some general So let's just talk about some general rules of thumb related to the research, rules of thumb related to the research, rules of thumb related to the research, quality research that's peer-reviewed, quality research that's peer-reviewed, quality research that's peer-reviewed, and then in a future episode we will go and then in a future episode we will go and then in a future episode we will go far deeper into the gut microbiome and far deeper into the gut microbiome and far deeper into the gut microbiome and gut-brain axis. But, here's a few gut-brain axis. But, here's a few gut-brain axis. But, here's a few things that I think you might find things that I think you might find things that I think you might find surprising. First of all, supporting a healthy gut First of all, supporting a healthy gut First of all, supporting a healthy gut microbiome is good for mood, great for microbiome is good for mood, great for microbiome is good for mood, great for digestion, and great for immune system digestion, and great for immune system digestion, and great for immune system function. However, that does not mean However, that does not mean However, that does not mean maxing out or taking the most probiotic maxing out or taking the most probiotic maxing out or taking the most probiotic and prebiotic that you can possibly and prebiotic that you can possibly and prebiotic that you can possibly manage. As I mentioned many times before, I do As I mentioned many times before, I do As I mentioned many times before, I do believe in probiotics. I take believe in probiotics. I take believe in probiotics. I take probiotics. But there are studies that probiotics. But there are studies that probiotics. But there are studies that show that if you take lots and lots of show that if you take lots and lots of show that if you take lots and lots of certain probiotics like lactobacillus, certain probiotics like lactobacillus, certain probiotics like lactobacillus, and you really ramp up the levels more, and you really ramp up the levels more, and you really ramp up the levels more, it is not a case of more is better. it is not a case of more is better. it is not a case of more is better. There are There are There are things like brain fog that can come from things like brain fog that can come from things like brain fog that can come from that. Brain fog is just this inability that. Brain fog is just this inability that. Brain fog is just this inability to focus. People feel really not well to focus. People feel really not well to focus. People feel really not well generally. Some of those studies are a little bit Some of those studies are a little bit Some of those studies are a little bit controversial, but I think it's fair to controversial, but I think it's fair to controversial, but I think it's fair to say that if people say that if people say that if people really increase the amount of probiotic really increase the amount of probiotic really increase the amount of probiotic that they're taking beyond that they're taking beyond that they're taking beyond a certain amount, then they start a certain amount, then they start a certain amount, then they start feeling foggy in the mind. Now, what's feeling foggy in the mind. Now, what's feeling foggy in the mind. Now, what's too much? Well, too much? Well, too much? Well, I get probiotics from I've mentioned I get probiotics from I've mentioned I get probiotics from I've mentioned before from Athletic Greens. You can get before from Athletic Greens. You can get before from Athletic Greens. You can get them from fermented foods like um them from fermented foods like um them from fermented foods like um sauerkraut, um pickles, kimchi, natto. sauerkraut, um pickles, kimchi, natto. sauerkraut, um pickles, kimchi, natto. These are different sources from around These are different sources from around These are different sources from around the world. I Actually, I'd love to hear the world. I Actually, I'd love to hear the world. I Actually, I'd love to hear some of the other sources that people some of the other sources that people some of the other sources that people know, other foods from around the world. know, other foods from around the world. know, other foods from around the world. I'm fascinated by the way in which I'm fascinated by the way in which I'm fascinated by the way in which different cultures have all um arrived different cultures have all um arrived different cultures have all um arrived at these at these at these um foods that provide and support um foods that provide and support um foods that provide and support healthy microbiomes because they're healthy microbiomes because they're healthy microbiomes because they're fermented. Uh I have a colleague at Stanford, Uh I have a colleague at Stanford, Uh I have a colleague at Stanford, Justin Sonnenburg. He and I have talked Justin Sonnenburg. He and I have talked Justin Sonnenburg. He and I have talked about this. I don't um want to uh quote about this. I don't um want to uh quote about this. I don't um want to uh quote him um inappropriately, um but you know, him um inappropriately, um but you know, him um inappropriately, um but you know, we've had discussions about and they've we've had discussions about and they've we've had discussions about and they've published that the ingestion of published that the ingestion of published that the ingestion of fermented foods fermented foods fermented foods is one of the best ways to support is one of the best ways to support is one of the best ways to support healthy levels of gut microbiobiota healthy levels of gut microbiobiota healthy levels of gut microbiobiota um without exceeding the threshold that um without exceeding the threshold that um without exceeding the threshold that would cause things like brain fog. So, would cause things like brain fog. So, would cause things like brain fog. So, foods and fermented foods are going to foods and fermented foods are going to foods and fermented foods are going to be the best source. And be the best source. And be the best source. And uh there are a number of different ways there are a number of different ways there are a number of different ways that one could do that. Some people that one could do that. Some people that one could do that. Some people don't like fermented foods, however. don't like fermented foods, however. don't like fermented foods, however. Some people supplement it. Some people supplement it. Some people supplement it. So, it isn't a case of more is better. Okay, it isn't a case of more is better. Okay, it isn't a case of more is better. Okay, so we know that. The other is that it is so we know that. The other is that it is so we know that. The other is that it is true that true that true that healthy gut microbiota have been shown healthy gut microbiota have been shown healthy gut microbiota have been shown to improve symptoms of certain um to improve symptoms of certain um to improve symptoms of certain um psychiatric illnesses as well as certain psychiatric illnesses as well as certain psychiatric illnesses as well as certain conditions like conditions like conditions like particular features along the autism particular features along the autism particular features along the autism spectrum, which is interesting. And spectrum, which is interesting. And spectrum, which is interesting. And those effects are probably due to not those effects are probably due to not those effects are probably due to not just improvement of immune system just improvement of immune system just improvement of immune system function, but to the conditions in function, but to the conditions in function, but to the conditions in which the neurons that sense nutrients, which the neurons that sense nutrients, which the neurons that sense nutrients, convey information to the brain, and convey information to the brain, and convey information to the brain, and increase levels of serotonin and or increase levels of serotonin and or increase levels of serotonin and or dopamine. So, gut microbiome provides dopamine. So, gut microbiome provides dopamine. So, gut microbiome provides kind of a foundation for healthy gut and kind of a foundation for healthy gut and kind of a foundation for healthy gut and healthy gut-brain axis. healthy gut-brain axis. healthy gut-brain axis. So much so that some people report that So much so that some people report that So much so that some people report that when they start eating small bits, cuz when they start eating small bits, cuz when they start eating small bits, cuz doesn't require a lot of fermented doesn't require a lot of fermented doesn't require a lot of fermented foods, that their overall mood is foods, that their overall mood is foods, that their overall mood is better. Not unlike the effects of EPA, better. Not unlike the effects of EPA, better. Not unlike the effects of EPA, although I don't think it's been looked although I don't think it's been looked although I don't think it's been looked at directly in the context of clinical at directly in the context of clinical at directly in the context of clinical depression yet. And if someone knows of depression yet. And if someone knows of depression yet. And if someone knows of a study, please mention it in the a study, please mention it in the a study, please mention it in the comments. That would be terrific. comments. That would be terrific. comments. That would be terrific. There are some things that you can do to There are some things that you can do to There are some things that you can do to really damage your gut microbiome. And really damage your gut microbiome. And really damage your gut microbiome. And this is where there's a huge this is where there's a huge this is where there's a huge misconception that I want to clear up. misconception that I want to clear up. misconception that I want to clear up. There was a study that was published in There was a study that was published in There was a study that was published in Nature, which is among the three top Nature, which is among the three top Nature, which is among the three top journals that we have in science, you journals that we have in science, you journals that we have in science, you know, Nature, Science, and Cell are know, Nature, Science, and Cell are know, Nature, Science, and Cell are considered the top tops, but excellent considered the top tops, but excellent considered the top tops, but excellent journal, that showed that artificial sweeteners, that showed that artificial sweeteners, that showed that artificial sweeteners, but a particular artificial sweetener, but a particular artificial sweetener, but a particular artificial sweetener, which was saccharin, which was saccharin, which was saccharin, can disrupt the gut microbiome can disrupt the gut microbiome can disrupt the gut microbiome in ways that is detrimental to a number in ways that is detrimental to a number in ways that is detrimental to a number of different health markers, increasing of different health markers, increasing of different health markers, increasing inflammatory cytokines, and all the inflammatory cytokines, and all the inflammatory cytokines, and all the other bad things that happen when other bad things that happen when other bad things that happen when the gut microbiome is thrown off kilter. the gut microbiome is thrown off kilter. the gut microbiome is thrown off kilter. That study was widely discussed, but That study was widely discussed, but That study was widely discussed, but there were a few things that were not there were a few things that were not there were a few things that were not mentioned there that are really mentioned there that are really mentioned there that are really important. That study was about important. That study was about important. That study was about saccharin in particular. saccharin in particular. saccharin in particular. Saccharin is not the most typical Saccharin is not the most typical Saccharin is not the most typical artificial sweetener that's used. The artificial sweetener that's used. The artificial sweetener that's used. The most typical sweetener artificial most typical sweetener artificial most typical sweetener artificial sweeteners that are used are things like sweeteners that are used are things like sweeteners that are used are things like aspartame, so-called NutraSweet, or aspartame, so-called NutraSweet, or aspartame, so-called NutraSweet, or sucralose, or these days stevia. There's sucralose, or these days stevia. There's sucralose, or these days stevia. There's monk fruits. To my knowledge, and please monk fruits. To my knowledge, and please monk fruits. To my knowledge, and please correct me if anyone knows of any correct me if anyone knows of any correct me if anyone knows of any studies, to my knowledge, studies, to my knowledge, studies, to my knowledge, the negative effects of these artificial the negative effects of these artificial the negative effects of these artificial of artificial sweeteners on the gut of artificial sweeteners on the gut of artificial sweeteners on the gut microbiome were restricted to saccharin. microbiome were restricted to saccharin. microbiome were restricted to saccharin. Now, there is enough chemical similarity Now, there is enough chemical similarity Now, there is enough chemical similarity between saccharin and some of the other between saccharin and some of the other between saccharin and some of the other ones that I mentioned, but not all of ones that I mentioned, but not all of ones that I mentioned, but not all of them. For instance, stevia, monk fruit them. For instance, stevia, monk fruit them. For instance, stevia, monk fruit are distinct in their chemical makeup so are distinct in their chemical makeup so are distinct in their chemical makeup so that they that they that they probably don't have probably don't have probably don't have if they have any, have lower effects, if they have any, have lower effects, if they have any, have lower effects, negative effects on the gut microbiome, negative effects on the gut microbiome, negative effects on the gut microbiome, but it should still be tested. So, but it should still be tested. So, but it should still be tested. So, saccharin is really um it was shown in saccharin is really um it was shown in saccharin is really um it was shown in this study and several other studies can this study and several other studies can this study and several other studies can really negatively impact uh impact, really negatively impact uh impact, really negatively impact uh impact, excuse me, the quality of the gut excuse me, the quality of the gut excuse me, the quality of the gut microbiome. Interestingly, the narrative around Interestingly, the narrative around Interestingly, the narrative around artificial sweeteners and gut microbiome artificial sweeteners and gut microbiome artificial sweeteners and gut microbiome is incorrect. Most people thought, "Oh, saccharin is Most people thought, "Oh, saccharin is Most people thought, "Oh, saccharin is bad for the microbiome. It must kill the bad for the microbiome. It must kill the bad for the microbiome. It must kill the microbiome." And so, you hear people microbiome." And so, you hear people microbiome." And so, you hear people saying, "Oh, you know, artificial saying, "Oh, you know, artificial saying, "Oh, you know, artificial sweeteners kill the microbiome." That's sweeteners kill the microbiome." That's sweeteners kill the microbiome." That's not true at all. In fact, in that very not true at all. In fact, in that very not true at all. In fact, in that very same study published in nature, they same study published in nature, they same study published in nature, they showed that the negative effects of showed that the negative effects of showed that the negative effects of saccharin on the microbiome could be saccharin on the microbiome could be saccharin on the microbiome could be blocked or eliminated by giving blocked or eliminated by giving blocked or eliminated by giving antibiotics. So, what happens is certain artificial So, what happens is certain artificial So, what happens is certain artificial sweeteners, in particular saccharin, sweeteners, in particular saccharin, sweeteners, in particular saccharin, disrupt the microbiome and make the disrupt the microbiome and make the disrupt the microbiome and make the environment within the gut, that mucosal environment within the gut, that mucosal environment within the gut, that mucosal lining, more favorable to bacteria lining, more favorable to bacteria lining, more favorable to bacteria microbiota that are not good for the microbiota that are not good for the microbiota that are not good for the organism. Okay? This is an important organism. Okay? This is an important organism. Okay? This is an important distinction. It's not just that a distinction. It's not just that a distinction. It's not just that a language thing where people say, "Oh, language thing where people say, "Oh, language thing where people say, "Oh, you know, it kills the microbiome." you know, it kills the microbiome." you know, it kills the microbiome." It doesn't kill the microbiome. It doesn't kill the microbiome. It doesn't kill the microbiome. It shifts the microbiome. shifts the microbiome. shifts the microbiome. And shifts in the microbiome can be good And shifts in the microbiome can be good And shifts in the microbiome can be good or they can be bad. And that takes us to or they can be bad. And that takes us to or they can be bad. And that takes us to another topic that's a bit of a hot another topic that's a bit of a hot another topic that's a bit of a hot button topic, but I'm willing to go button topic, but I'm willing to go button topic, but I'm willing to go there cuz I think it deserves there cuz I think it deserves there cuz I think it deserves conversation, which is nowadays, you conversation, which is nowadays, you conversation, which is nowadays, you there are many um examples out there are many um examples out there are many um examples out there where people have switched from a kind where people have switched from a kind where people have switched from a kind of standard diet or a even a vegetarian of standard diet or a even a vegetarian of standard diet or a even a vegetarian diet to a diet to a diet to a or vegan diet to a keto diet. Now, keto or vegan diet to a keto diet. Now, keto or vegan diet to a keto diet. Now, keto doesn't necessarily have to mean the doesn't necessarily have to mean the doesn't necessarily have to mean the ingestion of meats, but it can. ingestion of meats, but it can. ingestion of meats, but it can. And they experience positive effects for And they experience positive effects for And they experience positive effects for themselves. Not everybody. And I've themselves. Not everybody. And I've themselves. Not everybody. And I've talked previously about some of the um talked previously about some of the um talked previously about some of the um kind of the uh kind of the uh kind of the uh incorrect, what I believe is incorrect incorrect, what I believe is incorrect incorrect, what I believe is incorrect marketing of keto as it relates to the marketing of keto as it relates to the marketing of keto as it relates to the cosmetic effects and some of the cosmetic effects and some of the cosmetic effects and some of the challenges with sleep that some people challenges with sleep that some people challenges with sleep that some people have. But some people love keto and it have. But some people love keto and it have. But some people love keto and it works great for them. But the ketogenic works great for them. But the ketogenic works great for them. But the ketogenic diet is interesting because when one shifts is interesting because when one shifts is interesting because when one shifts to the ketogenic diet, there is a shift to the ketogenic diet, there is a shift to the ketogenic diet, there is a shift in the gut microbiome. And some people in the gut microbiome. And some people in the gut microbiome. And some people end up feeling better. Some people end up feeling better. Some people end up feeling better. Some people end up feeling worse. up feeling worse. up feeling worse. Likewise, some people go from ingesting Likewise, some people go from ingesting Likewise, some people go from ingesting animal products including meat or animal products including meat or animal products including meat or they're vegetarian and they go to vegan. they're vegetarian and they go to vegan. they're vegetarian and they go to vegan. And they experience positive shifts in And they experience positive shifts in And they experience positive shifts in mood and affect. And we know that the mood and affect. And we know that the mood and affect. And we know that the that the transition to a more that the transition to a more that the transition to a more plant-based diet plant-based diet plant-based diet and especially the enrichment of fiber and especially the enrichment of fiber and especially the enrichment of fiber that's present in those diets that's present in those diets that's present in those diets also creates dramatic shifts in the gut also creates dramatic shifts in the gut also creates dramatic shifts in the gut microbiome. Some people feel better microbiome. Some people feel better microbiome. Some people feel better doing that. Some people feel worse. And doing that. Some people feel worse. And doing that. Some people feel worse. And of course, it's going to depend on of course, it's going to depend on of course, it's going to depend on whether or not you're ingesting a lot of whether or not you're ingesting a lot of whether or not you're ingesting a lot of processed foods or not. There was a processed foods or not. There was a processed foods or not. There was a paper published in Cell, paper published in Cell, paper published in Cell, a Cell Press journal, obviously, a Cell Press journal, obviously, a Cell Press journal, obviously, excellent journal, showing that excellent journal, showing that excellent journal, showing that ingestion of processed foods, regardless ingestion of processed foods, regardless ingestion of processed foods, regardless of whether or not they come from animal of whether or not they come from animal of whether or not they come from animal sources or non-animal sources, sources or non-animal sources, sources or non-animal sources, the processed foods themselves tend to the processed foods themselves tend to the processed foods themselves tend to create activity within the body, and create activity within the body, and create activity within the body, and this surely has roots in the nervous this surely has roots in the nervous this surely has roots in the nervous system that lead to overconsumption of system that lead to overconsumption of system that lead to overconsumption of calories and weight gain. calories and weight gain. calories and weight gain. Even some weight gain that couldn't be Even some weight gain that couldn't be Even some weight gain that couldn't be explained by increased calories. In explained by increased calories. In explained by increased calories. In other words, processed foods are bad other words, processed foods are bad other words, processed foods are bad regardless of whether or not you're regardless of whether or not you're regardless of whether or not you're talking about animal products or talking about animal products or talking about animal products or non-animal products. non-animal products. non-animal products. Probably not surprising now given what Probably not surprising now given what Probably not surprising now given what you know about these sugar sensing and you know about these sugar sensing and you know about these sugar sensing and others amino acid sensing cells in the others amino acid sensing cells in the others amino acid sensing cells in the gut that we talked about earlier. So, gut that we talked about earlier. So, gut that we talked about earlier. So, the point of all this is that when I say the point of all this is that when I say the point of all this is that when I say you have to find what's right for you, you have to find what's right for you, you have to find what's right for you, that's not a throwaway statement. Some that's not a throwaway statement. Some that's not a throwaway statement. Some people's microbiome people's microbiome people's microbiome and the lining of their of their mucosa and the lining of their of their mucosa and the lining of their of their mucosa Let me excuse me, the mucosal lining of Let me excuse me, the mucosal lining of Let me excuse me, the mucosal lining of their of their throat, of their gut, of their of their throat, of their gut, of their of their throat, of their gut, of their nose, everything their nose, everything their nose, everything is improved by diets that are heavily is improved by diets that are heavily is improved by diets that are heavily meat-based and don't have many plants. meat-based and don't have many plants. meat-based and don't have many plants. Other people do much better on a Other people do much better on a Other people do much better on a plant-based diet without many meat plant-based diet without many meat plant-based diet without many meat products or animal products. It's highly products or animal products. It's highly products or animal products. It's highly individual and this probably has roots individual and this probably has roots individual and this probably has roots in genetic makeup. This probably has in genetic makeup. This probably has in genetic makeup. This probably has roots in roots in roots in what people were raised on because what people were raised on because what people were raised on because remember the nervous system of course is remember the nervous system of course is remember the nervous system of course is set up by your genes, your genetic set up by your genes, your genetic set up by your genes, your genetic program, but your nervous system adapts program, but your nervous system adapts program, but your nervous system adapts early in life to your conditions. That's early in life to your conditions. That's early in life to your conditions. That's what it's for. The reason you have a what it's for. The reason you have a what it's for. The reason you have a nervous system is to move your body nervous system is to move your body nervous system is to move your body appropriately towards things that are appropriately towards things that are appropriately towards things that are good for you and away from things that good for you and away from things that good for you and away from things that are not, but also the it was designed to are not, but also the it was designed to are not, but also the it was designed to adapt. The early life period has this adapt. The early life period has this adapt. The early life period has this incredible thing about plasticity that incredible thing about plasticity that incredible thing about plasticity that we spent a whole month on so that it can we spent a whole month on so that it can we spent a whole month on so that it can change so that yes indeed some people change so that yes indeed some people change so that yes indeed some people may like certain foods and react to may like certain foods and react to may like certain foods and react to certain foods better than others because certain foods better than others because certain foods better than others because of the way that their nervous system was of the way that their nervous system was of the way that their nervous system was wired. This enteric as it's called wired. This enteric as it's called wired. This enteric as it's called nervous system that lines the gut and it nervous system that lines the gut and it nervous system that lines the gut and it communicates with the brain. So most of communicates with the brain. So most of communicates with the brain. So most of what I've talked about today is what I've talked about today is what I've talked about today is uh black and white. These are things that black and white. These are things that black and white. These are things that are present in all of us. The sugar are present in all of us. The sugar are present in all of us. The sugar sensing neurons of the gut, the way the sensing neurons of the gut, the way the sensing neurons of the gut, the way the vagus is wired, the fact that omega-3, vagus is wired, the fact that omega-3, vagus is wired, the fact that omega-3, omega-6 tend to improve the ratios tend omega-6 tend to improve the ratios tend omega-6 tend to improve the ratios tend to impact mood with high omega-3, to impact mood with high omega-3, to impact mood with high omega-3, omega-6 ratios improving mood. omega-6 ratios improving mood. omega-6 ratios improving mood. We talked about We talked about We talked about all sorts of things in the gut brain and all sorts of things in the gut brain and all sorts of things in the gut brain and body brain axis, but when it comes to body brain axis, but when it comes to body brain axis, but when it comes to the microbiome, the key thing is that we the microbiome, the key thing is that we the microbiome, the key thing is that we all have a microbiome. You want a all have a microbiome. You want a all have a microbiome. You want a microbiome, but you want to promote the microbiome, but you want to promote the microbiome, but you want to promote the microbiome that is right for you and microbiome that is right for you and microbiome that is right for you and that can be shifted and steered by that can be shifted and steered by that can be shifted and steered by ingesting certain categories of foods ingesting certain categories of foods ingesting certain categories of foods and not others. And one thing that and not others. And one thing that and not others. And one thing that really frustrates me is when the people really frustrates me is when the people really frustrates me is when the people show up with an agenda like, you know, show up with an agenda like, you know, show up with an agenda like, you know, all meat agenda or a vegan agenda or a all meat agenda or a vegan agenda or a all meat agenda or a vegan agenda or a keto agenda and they talk about these keto agenda and they talk about these keto agenda and they talk about these positive effects on the gut microbiome positive effects on the gut microbiome positive effects on the gut microbiome and it's all true, frankly. And so it's and it's all true, frankly. And so it's and it's all true, frankly. And so it's highly individual. Now, this doesn't get highly individual. Now, this doesn't get highly individual. Now, this doesn't get to any of the ethical issues around to any of the ethical issues around to any of the ethical issues around animals or the planet or animals or the planet or animals or the planet or and you hear rapid debates about that, and you hear rapid debates about that, and you hear rapid debates about that, you know, on both sides. And I am not you know, on both sides. And I am not you know, on both sides. And I am not qualified or equipped to talk about qualified or equipped to talk about qualified or equipped to talk about whether or not, you know, regenerative whether or not, you know, regenerative whether or not, you know, regenerative agriculture animal products or farming agriculture animal products or farming agriculture animal products or farming or any of these things how those or any of these things how those or any of these things how those actually impact the environment. That is actually impact the environment. That is actually impact the environment. That is not my expertise. But when it comes to not my expertise. But when it comes to not my expertise. But when it comes to your health and your microbiome, you your health and your microbiome, you your health and your microbiome, you want to support the microbiome. It's want to support the microbiome. It's want to support the microbiome. It's very clear that these fermented foods very clear that these fermented foods very clear that these fermented foods support the microbiome. That we should support the microbiome. That we should support the microbiome. That we should be ingesting at least two servings per be ingesting at least two servings per be ingesting at least two servings per day, which is quite a lot. day, which is quite a lot. day, which is quite a lot. That supplementation at low levels can That supplementation at low levels can That supplementation at low levels can be good. Supplementation at high levels be good. Supplementation at high levels be good. Supplementation at high levels can create this brain fog. Even though can create this brain fog. Even though can create this brain fog. Even though some people say that result is some people say that result is some people say that result is controversial. I've experienced this myself and the I've experienced this myself and the I've experienced this myself and the data look to me pretty darn solid. So, data look to me pretty darn solid. So, data look to me pretty darn solid. So, that's one thing to think about as well. that's one thing to think about as well. that's one thing to think about as well. And the other thing about the gut microbiome the other thing about the gut microbiome the other thing about the gut microbiome is that it's highly contextual based on is that it's highly contextual based on is that it's highly contextual based on other things that you're doing. So, even other things that you're doing. So, even other things that you're doing. So, even things like exercise and social things like exercise and social things like exercise and social well-being and connection, those things well-being and connection, those things well-being and connection, those things are also impacting the gut microbiome. are also impacting the gut microbiome. are also impacting the gut microbiome. So, find the diet that's right for you So, find the diet that's right for you So, find the diet that's right for you and that works for you in the context of and that works for you in the context of and that works for you in the context of the other the other the other ethical and lifestyle choices that are ethical and lifestyle choices that are ethical and lifestyle choices that are important to you. That's my advice. A important to you. That's my advice. A important to you. That's my advice. A note about fasting. I have a colleague note about fasting. I have a colleague note about fasting. I have a colleague at Yale who's an expert in the gut at Yale who's an expert in the gut at Yale who's an expert in the gut microbiome and he told me something microbiome and he told me something microbiome and he told me something really interesting really interesting really interesting which is which is which is when we fast when we fast when we fast we actually digest certain components actually digest certain components actually digest certain components within our dietary tract. It actually within our dietary tract. It actually within our dietary tract. It actually depletes a good amount of the gut depletes a good amount of the gut depletes a good amount of the gut microbiome. And this is interesting. microbiome. And this is interesting. microbiome. And this is interesting. I've had good results from I guess I've had good results from I guess I've had good results from I guess you would call it intermittent or kind you would call it intermittent or kind you would call it intermittent or kind of circadian type fasting where I've of circadian type fasting where I've of circadian type fasting where I've never done long fast, but where I push never done long fast, but where I push never done long fast, but where I push out my first meal by a few hours. My out my first meal by a few hours. My out my first meal by a few hours. My first meal is generally around lunchtime first meal is generally around lunchtime first meal is generally around lunchtime or so. or so. or so. But the longer periods of fasting But the longer periods of fasting But the longer periods of fasting that go for a day or two or three days that go for a day or two or three days that go for a day or two or three days are known to deplete the gut microbiome are known to deplete the gut microbiome are known to deplete the gut microbiome in major ways. And but that's not always in major ways. And but that's not always in major ways. And but that's not always necessarily a bad thing because when necessarily a bad thing because when necessarily a bad thing because when it's replenished, it often is replenished at replenished, it often is replenished at replenished, it often is replenished at levels that exceeded its previous level. levels that exceeded its previous level. levels that exceeded its previous level. But I think that some of the But I think that some of the But I think that some of the GI tract and even some of the mental GI tract and even some of the mental GI tract and even some of the mental effects of returning to eating after effects of returning to eating after effects of returning to eating after feeding, sometimes people don't feel so feeding, sometimes people don't feel so feeding, sometimes people don't feel so good when they start eating. They really good when they start eating. They really good when they start eating. They really want food, but then they start eating want food, but then they start eating want food, but then they start eating again, they don't feel as good as they again, they don't feel as good as they again, they don't feel as good as they did on the fast. Some of that may be did on the fast. Some of that may be did on the fast. Some of that may be related to the depletion of the related to the depletion of the related to the depletion of the microbiome that occurs during long fast. microbiome that occurs during long fast. microbiome that occurs during long fast. So again, this is something to think So again, this is something to think So again, this is something to think about and talk about with your doctor, about and talk about with your doctor, about and talk about with your doctor, but the idea that fasting across the board the idea that fasting across the board the idea that fasting across the board is good. is good. is good. There may be some merits to that and There may be some merits to that and There may be some merits to that and certainly in some cases, but it does certainly in some cases, but it does certainly in some cases, but it does deplete the microbiome. And that deplete the microbiome. And that deplete the microbiome. And that depletion of the microbiome is depletion of the microbiome is depletion of the microbiome is significant because it means when you significant because it means when you significant because it means when you return to eating, you are actually not return to eating, you are actually not return to eating, you are actually not in the same position to digest and in the same position to digest and in the same position to digest and assimilate those foods and those foods assimilate those foods and those foods assimilate those foods and those foods are not in the same position to impact are not in the same position to impact are not in the same position to impact your brain and body the same way they your brain and body the same way they your brain and body the same way they were prior to the fast. This is I think were prior to the fast. This is I think were prior to the fast. This is I think why people suggest a kind of gradual why people suggest a kind of gradual why people suggest a kind of gradual transition back to transition back to transition back to consuming nutrients after a fast. consuming nutrients after a fast. consuming nutrients after a fast. So as we round up, I want to share some So as we round up, I want to share some So as we round up, I want to share some results with you results with you results with you that without question will impact the that without question will impact the that without question will impact the way that you respond to food mentally way that you respond to food mentally way that you respond to food mentally and even physically. And I know that and even physically. And I know that and even physically. And I know that because that's the central theme of the because that's the central theme of the because that's the central theme of the studies I'm about to tell you about. studies I'm about to tell you about. studies I'm about to tell you about. I have a colleague at Stanford, I have a colleague at Stanford, I have a colleague at Stanford, Alia Crum, who's done some remarkable Alia Crum, who's done some remarkable Alia Crum, who's done some remarkable experiments on mindset. on mindset. on mindset. And some people could think about these And some people could think about these And some people could think about these as placebo effects or belief effects, as placebo effects or belief effects, as placebo effects or belief effects, but they actually go way beyond those but they actually go way beyond those but they actually go way beyond those terms. And terms. And terms. And there are a number of different examples there are a number of different examples there are a number of different examples of this that Alia's lab and her of this that Alia's lab and her of this that Alia's lab and her co-workers have demonstrated, but two co-workers have demonstrated, but two co-workers have demonstrated, but two that are particularly interesting to me, that are particularly interesting to me, that are particularly interesting to me, I want to share with you now because I want to share with you now because I want to share with you now because they really emphasize how our beliefs they really emphasize how our beliefs they really emphasize how our beliefs can really impact the way that our brain can really impact the way that our brain can really impact the way that our brain and body work together. I think the most and body work together. I think the most and body work together. I think the most famous of these is an experiment they famous of these is an experiment they famous of these is an experiment they did where they had two groups of did where they had two groups of did where they had two groups of individuals. They were each given a individuals. They were each given a individuals. They were each given a milkshake and they had some factors measured from and they had some factors measured from and they had some factors measured from their blood by an IV while they ingested their blood by an IV while they ingested their blood by an IV while they ingested the milkshake and then afterwards as the milkshake and then afterwards as the milkshake and then afterwards as well. And one of the factors that they were And one of the factors that they were And one of the factors that they were looking at was something called ghrelin, looking at was something called ghrelin, looking at was something called ghrelin, g h r g h r g h r e l i n. Ghrelin is a peptide that is e l i n. Ghrelin is a peptide that is e l i n. Ghrelin is a peptide that is increases with hunger. So, the longer increases with hunger. So, the longer increases with hunger. So, the longer you haven't eaten, the ghrelin goes up. you haven't eaten, the ghrelin goes up. you haven't eaten, the ghrelin goes up. And I know some of you say, "Well, I And I know some of you say, "Well, I And I know some of you say, "Well, I fast I fast I fast and I eventually lose fast I fast I fast and I eventually lose fast I fast I fast and I eventually lose my appetite." Well, ghrelin still goes my appetite." Well, ghrelin still goes my appetite." Well, ghrelin still goes up and then it drops. So, if you were up and then it drops. So, if you were up and then it drops. So, if you were one of these people that eats every 3 one of these people that eats every 3 one of these people that eats every 3 hours regularly, ghrelin kind of gets a hours regularly, ghrelin kind of gets a hours regularly, ghrelin kind of gets a little pulse as you get to that 2 hour little pulse as you get to that 2 hour little pulse as you get to that 2 hour and 50 minute mark. So, it's a little and 50 minute mark. So, it's a little and 50 minute mark. So, it's a little bit of a timer as well. It's really bit of a timer as well. It's really bit of a timer as well. It's really interesting peptide. interesting peptide. interesting peptide. In any event, In any event, In any event, what they did is they gave people what they did is they gave people what they did is they gave people milkshakes, two groups. One group got a milkshakes, two groups. One group got a milkshakes, two groups. One group got a shake that they were told was a shake that they were told was a shake that they were told was a low-calorie, healthy shake. The other low-calorie, healthy shake. The other low-calorie, healthy shake. The other group got a group got a group got a milkshake that they were told was the milkshake that they were told was the milkshake that they were told was the very decadent, high-calorie shake. I very decadent, high-calorie shake. I very decadent, high-calorie shake. I think it was something like two or maybe think it was something like two or maybe think it was something like two or maybe even two and a half times as many even two and a half times as many even two and a half times as many calories as the other. calories as the other. calories as the other. Perhaps even more. Perhaps even more. Perhaps even more. I don't recall the details, but you had I don't recall the details, but you had I don't recall the details, but you had a high-calorie and a low-calorie a high-calorie and a low-calorie a high-calorie and a low-calorie condition. And then they drank the shake condition. And then they drank the shake condition. And then they drank the shake and then they measured ghrelin in these and then they measured ghrelin in these and then they measured ghrelin in these subjects' blood. And what they found was subjects' blood. And what they found was subjects' blood. And what they found was that the high-calorie shake had a much that the high-calorie shake had a much that the high-calorie shake had a much more robust effect on blunting ghrelin more robust effect on blunting ghrelin more robust effect on blunting ghrelin and reducing ghrelin. and reducing ghrelin. and reducing ghrelin. But the interesting thing, you probably But the interesting thing, you probably But the interesting thing, you probably guessed already, is that it was the guessed already, is that it was the guessed already, is that it was the exact same shake given to both groups. exact same shake given to both groups. exact same shake given to both groups. So, people's belief about the content of So, people's belief about the content of So, people's belief about the content of something impacted their physiology in a And this impacted their physiology in a And this impacted their physiology in a And this speaks to the so-called top-down speaks to the so-called top-down speaks to the so-called top-down mechanisms or modulation of our mechanisms or modulation of our mechanisms or modulation of our physiology. In previous episode about physiology. In previous episode about physiology. In previous episode about pain, we talked about the effects of, pain, we talked about the effects of, pain, we talked about the effects of, you know, um obsessive, believe it not you know, um obsessive, believe it not you know, um obsessive, believe it not it was kind of obsessive infatuation and it was kind of obsessive infatuation and it was kind of obsessive infatuation and love on pain responses and pain love on pain responses and pain love on pain responses and pain thresholds. This is yet another example thresholds. This is yet another example thresholds. This is yet another example where beliefs or subjective feelings can where beliefs or subjective feelings can where beliefs or subjective feelings can impact physiology at the level of the impact physiology at the level of the impact physiology at the level of the periphery because ghrelin is released periphery because ghrelin is released periphery because ghrelin is released in the periphery in the body. in the periphery in the body. in the periphery in the body. Now, these belief effects Now, these belief effects Now, these belief effects extend beyond examples like this. extend beyond examples like this. extend beyond examples like this. Another good example that I'd like to Another good example that I'd like to Another good example that I'd like to share is share is share is uh Allie, Dr. Crum and her colleagues did Allie, Dr. Crum and her colleagues did Allie, Dr. Crum and her colleagues did uh an experiment where they took um uh an experiment where they took um uh an experiment where they took um housekeepers, hotel They were housekeepers, hotel They were housekeepers, hotel They were essentially hotel workers, divided them essentially hotel workers, divided them essentially hotel workers, divided them into two groups. They had them watch a into two groups. They had them watch a into two groups. They had them watch a short film. In one case, the film was short film. In one case, the film was short film. In one case, the film was about how, you know, their work was about how, you know, their work was about how, you know, their work was important, it helped people feel important, it helped people feel important, it helped people feel comfortable in the hotel, et cetera, et comfortable in the hotel, et cetera, et comfortable in the hotel, et cetera, et cetera. The other group heard that the cetera. The other group heard that the cetera. The other group heard that the activity that they were doing, cleaning activity that they were doing, cleaning activity that they were doing, cleaning and taking care of the hotel, was good and taking care of the hotel, was good and taking care of the hotel, was good for them, it was good for their health, for them, it was good for their health, for them, it was good for their health, et cetera, et cetera. et cetera, et cetera. et cetera, et cetera. They controlled very nicely in the study They controlled very nicely in the study They controlled very nicely in the study for health parameters, for individual for health parameters, for individual for health parameters, for individual differences, and for the behaviors of differences, and for the behaviors of differences, and for the behaviors of these people in the period that followed these people in the period that followed these people in the period that followed this short tutorial. this short tutorial. this short tutorial. And what they found was 8 weeks later, And what they found was 8 weeks later, And what they found was 8 weeks later, the group that had been told that the group that had been told that the group that had been told that the activity was good for them showed lower activity was good for them showed lower activity was good for them showed lower blood pressure, they had lost a blood pressure, they had lost a blood pressure, they had lost a significant amount of body fat, and they significant amount of body fat, and they significant amount of body fat, and they reported enjoying their work far more than the enjoying their work far more than the enjoying their work far more than the other group. The same work. Simply other group. The same work. Simply other group. The same work. Simply biased mentally biased mentally biased mentally by the information that they were given, by the information that they were given, by the information that they were given, but their physiology followed that but their physiology followed that but their physiology followed that information. And so, information. And so, information. And so, this is not just the placebo effect. this is not just the placebo effect. this is not just the placebo effect. This is an incredible set of findings This is an incredible set of findings This is an incredible set of findings that illustrate the extent to which that illustrate the extent to which that illustrate the extent to which whether or not we believe a food is whether or not we believe a food is whether or not we believe a food is going to be good for us or not good for going to be good for us or not good for going to be good for us or not good for us, well, we can't escape the reality. You well, we can't escape the reality. You well, we can't escape the reality. You can't tell yourself that a poison is can't tell yourself that a poison is can't tell yourself that a poison is going to be good for you and ingest that going to be good for you and ingest that going to be good for you and ingest that poison and expect it to not kill you, poison and expect it to not kill you, poison and expect it to not kill you, nor can you tell yourself that eating, nor can you tell yourself that eating, nor can you tell yourself that eating, you know, uh 12 croissants, I confess you know, uh 12 croissants, I confess you know, uh 12 croissants, I confess I've done it. It was after a very long I've done it. It was after a very long I've done it. It was after a very long run, a long time ago, but you can't tell run, a long time ago, but you can't tell run, a long time ago, but you can't tell yourself that that's necessarily going yourself that that's necessarily going yourself that that's necessarily going to be good for you or that it's going to be good for you or that it's going to be good for you or that it's going to make you lose weight. These belief make you lose weight. These belief make you lose weight. These belief effects are not about lying to yourself. effects are not about lying to yourself. effects are not about lying to yourself. In these cases, in these experiments, as In these cases, in these experiments, as In these cases, in these experiments, as you'll notice, the subjects didn't have you'll notice, the subjects didn't have you'll notice, the subjects didn't have prior knowledge about ghrelin or about prior knowledge about ghrelin or about prior knowledge about ghrelin or about the effects of their daily routine on the effects of their daily routine on the effects of their daily routine on weight loss and blood pressure. So, in weight loss and blood pressure. So, in weight loss and blood pressure. So, in order for them to work, you have to be order for them to work, you have to be order for them to work, you have to be naive to the information, right? You naive to the information, right? You naive to the information, right? You can't simply lie to yourself and tell can't simply lie to yourself and tell can't simply lie to yourself and tell yourself what you want to believe. yourself what you want to believe. yourself what you want to believe. And that's important, but also important And that's important, but also important And that's important, but also important is that the mind and the body are in is that the mind and the body are in is that the mind and the body are in this fascinating interplay. And today this fascinating interplay. And today this fascinating interplay. And today we've talked mainly about how the body we've talked mainly about how the body we've talked mainly about how the body and things that we put inside this and things that we put inside this and things that we put inside this tube this uh that runs from our mouth to tube this uh that runs from our mouth to tube this uh that runs from our mouth to the other end, to our rectum, to the other end, to our rectum, to the other end, to our rectum, basically, is impacting all these cells, basically, is impacting all these cells, basically, is impacting all these cells, these neurons, microbiota in there, um these neurons, microbiota in there, um these neurons, microbiota in there, um mucosal lining, uh heart, lungs, and how mucosal lining, uh heart, lungs, and how mucosal lining, uh heart, lungs, and how all that information is feeding up to all that information is feeding up to all that information is feeding up to the brain to impact how we feel up here. the brain to impact how we feel up here. the brain to impact how we feel up here. But also how we feel up here is But also how we feel up here is But also how we feel up here is impacting how our body reacts at levels impacting how our body reacts at levels impacting how our body reacts at levels of very core physiology that you of very core physiology that you of very core physiology that you couldn't just tell yourself that this couldn't just tell yourself that this couldn't just tell yourself that this was going to work, but what you believe was going to work, but what you believe was going to work, but what you believe about certain substances, certain foods, about certain substances, certain foods, about certain substances, certain foods, certain nutrients does have a profound certain nutrients does have a profound certain nutrients does have a profound effect on the magnitude of their impact effect on the magnitude of their impact effect on the magnitude of their impact and sometimes even the quality and sometimes even the quality and sometimes even the quality and direction of that impact. direction of that impact. direction of that impact. Well, first of all, I want to thank Well, first of all, I want to thank Well, first of all, I want to thank everybody for their support of this everybody for their support of this everybody for their support of this podcast. The response that we've podcast. The response that we've podcast. The response that we've received since releasing at the received since releasing at the received since releasing at the beginning of the new year has been beginning of the new year has been beginning of the new year has been tremendous and we're so grateful for it. tremendous and we're so grateful for it. tremendous and we're so grateful for it. I know some of you and uh people you I know some of you and uh people you I know some of you and uh people you know have said, "Well, it's a lot of know have said, "Well, it's a lot of know have said, "Well, it's a lot of information. It's like a college information. It's like a college information. It's like a college lecture." Um indeed, there's a lot of lecture." Um indeed, there's a lot of lecture." Um indeed, there's a lot of information, but I believe very strongly information, but I believe very strongly information, but I believe very strongly that if you learn mechanism and maybe that if you learn mechanism and maybe that if you learn mechanism and maybe even if you hear it several times over, even if you hear it several times over, even if you hear it several times over, eventually those mechanisms become eventually those mechanisms become eventually those mechanisms become embedded into the way that you view an embedded into the way that you view an embedded into the way that you view an entire topic. As well, I always try and entire topic. As well, I always try and entire topic. As well, I always try and put tools as I go along that you can put tools as I go along that you can put tools as I go along that you can look to immediately. Some of them might look to immediately. Some of them might look to immediately. Some of them might be right for you, others might not. You be right for you, others might not. You be right for you, others might not. You know, try them if you like and don't if know, try them if you like and don't if know, try them if you like and don't if you don't want to. And if they don't if you don't want to. And if they don't if you don't want to. And if they don't work for you, then discard them. work for you, then discard them. work for you, then discard them. If, however, you are finding benefits If, however, you are finding benefits If, however, you are finding benefits from the information and from the tools, from the information and from the tools, from the information and from the tools, and you know others that you think could and you know others that you think could and you know others that you think could benefit from it, please pass along benefit from it, please pass along benefit from it, please pass along information about the podcast. information about the podcast. information about the podcast. Please subscribe to the YouTube channel Please subscribe to the YouTube channel Please subscribe to the YouTube channel if you haven't already. Please subscribe if you haven't already. Please subscribe if you haven't already. Please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify if you to us on Apple and Spotify if you to us on Apple and Spotify if you haven't already. Please leave a review haven't already. Please leave a review haven't already. Please leave a review in the comment section here on YouTube. in the comment section here on YouTube. in the comment section here on YouTube. Also, if you feel we deserve it, please Also, if you feel we deserve it, please Also, if you feel we deserve it, please give us a five-star review on Apple. All give us a five-star review on Apple. All give us a five-star review on Apple. All those things really help us. those things really help us. those things really help us. In addition, if you'd like to support In addition, if you'd like to support In addition, if you'd like to support the podcast further, we've set up a the podcast further, we've set up a the podcast further, we've set up a Patreon account. It's Patreon account. It's Patreon account. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. It allows you to support the podcast at It allows you to support the podcast at It allows you to support the podcast at a variety of levels. a variety of levels. a variety of levels. We have the 5-HTP serotonin for $5 a We have the 5-HTP serotonin for $5 a We have the 5-HTP serotonin for $5 a month, the Costello $10 a month in honor month, the Costello $10 a month in honor month, the Costello $10 a month in honor of Costello, etc. You don't have to, but of Costello, etc. You don't have to, but of Costello, etc. You don't have to, but if you'd like to, that would be if you'd like to, that would be if you'd like to, that would be terrific. In addition, please check out terrific. In addition, please check out terrific. In addition, please check out our sponsors that we've mentioned at the our sponsors that we've mentioned at the our sponsors that we've mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's one of beginning of the podcast. That's one of beginning of the podcast. That's one of the best ways to help support us, and we the best ways to help support us, and we the best ways to help support us, and we do believe in all the products that we do believe in all the products that we do believe in all the products that we support and our sponsors very much. support and our sponsors very much. support and our sponsors very much. Otherwise, we wouldn't be working with Otherwise, we wouldn't be working with Otherwise, we wouldn't be working with them. So much so that when I mention So much so that when I mention So much so that when I mention supplements and I talk about supplements and I talk about supplements and I talk about supplements throughout the course of the episodes, I throughout the course of the episodes, I throughout the course of the episodes, I don't mention specific brands, but I don't mention specific brands, but I don't mention specific brands, but I would be remiss if I didn't mention the would be remiss if I didn't mention the would be remiss if I didn't mention the fact that we have partnered with Thorne, fact that we have partnered with Thorne, fact that we have partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e. t h o r n e. t h o r n e. And we've done that because we know that And we've done that because we know that And we've done that because we know that Thorne uses the highest levels of Thorne uses the highest levels of Thorne uses the highest levels of stringency in terms of the products they stringency in terms of the products they stringency in terms of the products they produce, what they say is in each produce, what they say is in each produce, what they say is in each capsule and tablet actually is. They're capsule and tablet actually is. They're capsule and tablet actually is. They're used by the Mayo Clinic, by all the used by the Mayo Clinic, by all the used by the Mayo Clinic, by all the major sports teams because of their major sports teams because of their major sports teams because of their level of stringency and rigor. If you level of stringency and rigor. If you level of stringency and rigor. If you want to know which supplements I take, want to know which supplements I take, want to know which supplements I take, you can go to thorne.com/theletteru /huberman, and you can see the /huberman, and you can see the /huberman, and you can see the supplements that I take, and you can get supplements that I take, and you can get supplements that I take, and you can get those as well as any of the other those as well as any of the other those as well as any of the other supplements and products that Thorne supplements and products that Thorne supplements and products that Thorne makes for 20% off. So, it's makes for 20% off. So, it's makes for 20% off. So, it's thorne.com/the letter U /huberman to get 20% off any letter U /huberman to get 20% off any letter U /huberman to get 20% off any supplements that Thorne makes. supplements that Thorne makes. supplements that Thorne makes. So, today's episode we took a full So, today's episode we took a full So, today's episode we took a full journey into the brain-body relationship journey into the brain-body relationship journey into the brain-body relationship and discussed a lot of the mechanisms and discussed a lot of the mechanisms and discussed a lot of the mechanisms and the actionable items that you can and the actionable items that you can and the actionable items that you can approach if you want to explore this approach if you want to explore this approach if you want to explore this aspect of your biology and psychology aspect of your biology and psychology aspect of your biology and psychology further. Last, but certainly not least, further. Last, but certainly not least, further. Last, but certainly not least, I want to thank everybody for your time I want to thank everybody for your time I want to thank everybody for your time and attention today and as always thank and attention today and as always thank and attention today and as always thank you for your interest in science.