Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of opthalmology at Stamford School of opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Karolina Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Karolina Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Karolina Westland. Dr. Karolina Westland is an Westland. Dr. Karolina Westland is an Westland. Dr. Karolina Westland is an animal ethologist and expert in animal ethologist and expert in animal ethologist and expert in animal behavior. Dr. Wesland and I behavior. Dr. Wesland and I behavior. Dr. Wesland and I discussed the relationship between discussed the relationship between discussed the relationship between humans and domesticated animals with a humans and domesticated animals with a humans and domesticated animals with a focus on the evidence-based protocols focus on the evidence-based protocols focus on the evidence-based protocols for optimizing the mental and physical for optimizing the mental and physical for optimizing the mental and physical health of our pets. Dr. Weslin explains health of our pets. Dr. Weslin explains health of our pets. Dr. Weslin explains the best way to interact with our the best way to interact with our the best way to interact with our animals. Now, we may assume that the way animals. Now, we may assume that the way animals. Now, we may assume that the way we pet our animals and exercise them and we pet our animals and exercise them and we pet our animals and exercise them and feed them makes them truly happy. But, feed them makes them truly happy. But, feed them makes them truly happy. But, as she points out, many of the things as she points out, many of the things as she points out, many of the things that people assume turn out to be false that people assume turn out to be false that people assume turn out to be false when it comes to our pets and their when it comes to our pets and their when it comes to our pets and their fundamental drives. She teaches us the fundamental drives. She teaches us the fundamental drives. She teaches us the very basic but powerful things that we very basic but powerful things that we very basic but powerful things that we can do to satisfy those drives both for can do to satisfy those drives both for can do to satisfy those drives both for the animals sake of course and to better the animals sake of course and to better the animals sake of course and to better our relationship with them. We also our relationship with them. We also our relationship with them. We also discuss the unique neurological and discuss the unique neurological and discuss the unique neurological and physiological requirements of different physiological requirements of different physiological requirements of different dog breeds. That's a fascinating dog breeds. That's a fascinating dog breeds. That's a fascinating conversation that stems from their conversation that stems from their conversation that stems from their lineage from wolves and we'll tell you lineage from wolves and we'll tell you lineage from wolves and we'll tell you whether or not your particular breed, whether or not your particular breed, whether or not your particular breed, even if it's a mut should be exercised even if it's a mut should be exercised even if it's a mut should be exercised in a particular way, whether or not it in a particular way, whether or not it in a particular way, whether or not it needs additional forms of stimulation needs additional forms of stimulation needs additional forms of stimulation that you're not currently giving it and that you're not currently giving it and that you're not currently giving it and so on. And because we both realize there so on. And because we both realize there so on. And because we both realize there are also cat owners out there too, we are also cat owners out there too, we are also cat owners out there too, we discuss the often misunderstood discuss the often misunderstood discuss the often misunderstood communication signals and social needs communication signals and social needs communication signals and social needs of cats. As you may know, there is a of cats. As you may know, there is a of cats. As you may know, there is a tremendous amount of debate out there tremendous amount of debate out there tremendous amount of debate out there about the best training and practices about the best training and practices about the best training and practices for taking care of our dogs and other for taking care of our dogs and other for taking care of our dogs and other animals. And so much of that is grounded animals. And so much of that is grounded animals. And so much of that is grounded in speculation and training outcomes, in speculation and training outcomes, in speculation and training outcomes, which of course are important. The which of course are important. The which of course are important. The conversation today with Dr. for Westland conversation today with Dr. for Westland conversation today with Dr. for Westland approaches animal health and welfare approaches animal health and welfare approaches animal health and welfare through the lens of ethology and the through the lens of ethology and the through the lens of ethology and the species that our pets evolved from to species that our pets evolved from to species that our pets evolved from to provide actionable protocols that are provide actionable protocols that are provide actionable protocols that are grounded in science and that you can grounded in science and that you can grounded in science and that you can implement right away to improve your implement right away to improve your implement right away to improve your pet's well-being. So, if you're a pet pet's well-being. So, if you're a pet pet's well-being. So, if you're a pet owner, this episode is going to be of owner, this episode is going to be of owner, this episode is going to be of immense value to you. If you're not a immense value to you. If you're not a immense value to you. If you're not a pet owner, you'll still learn a ton pet owner, you'll still learn a ton pet owner, you'll still learn a ton about animal biology and psychology, about animal biology and psychology, about animal biology and psychology, including yours. Before we begin, I'd including yours. Before we begin, I'd including yours. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost my desire and effort to bring zerocost my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this public. In keeping with that theme, this public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now episode does include sponsors. And now episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Karolina for my discussion with Dr. Karolina for my discussion with Dr. Karolina Westland. Dr. Karolina Westland, Westland. Dr. Karolina Westland, Westland. Dr. Karolina Westland, welcome. Thank you. I'm super excited welcome. Thank you. I'm super excited welcome. Thank you. I'm super excited for this conversation. Yeah, me too. Can for this conversation. Yeah, me too. Can for this conversation. Yeah, me too. Can barely contain myself. I think we have barely contain myself. I think we have barely contain myself. I think we have so much to learn from animals and I so much to learn from animals and I so much to learn from animals and I think we have so much to learn from our think we have so much to learn from our think we have so much to learn from our relationship to animals. I also believe relationship to animals. I also believe relationship to animals. I also believe that we have all sorts of ideas about that we have all sorts of ideas about that we have all sorts of ideas about what animals experience, what they think what animals experience, what they think what animals experience, what they think about us, the relationship that we think about us, the relationship that we think about us, the relationship that we think we have with them. Oh yeah. Today you're we have with them. Oh yeah. Today you're we have with them. Oh yeah. Today you're going to set the record straight. going to set the record straight. going to set the record straight. To start off, could you just briefly To start off, could you just briefly To start off, could you just briefly list off some of the species of animals list off some of the species of animals list off some of the species of animals that your students have worked with and that your students have worked with and that your students have worked with and studied? Most of my students are like studied? Most of my students are like studied? Most of my students are like guardians of animals. So they're like guardians of animals. So they're like guardians of animals. So they're like dog owners or horse trainers or they dog owners or horse trainers or they dog owners or horse trainers or they might be veterinarians. Some of them might be veterinarians. Some of them might be veterinarians. Some of them work uh in a zoo as a zookeeper or work uh in a zoo as a zookeeper or work uh in a zoo as a zookeeper or animal trainer and so on. So my students animal trainer and so on. So my students animal trainer and so on. So my students are really diverse and their are really diverse and their are really diverse and their knowledge levels is also really diverse knowledge levels is also really diverse knowledge levels is also really diverse from the sort of person who has their from the sort of person who has their from the sort of person who has their first dog at the age of 40 to somebody first dog at the age of 40 to somebody first dog at the age of 40 to somebody who's been training animals for 30 who's been training animals for 30 who's been training animals for 30 years. I grew up around a few horse years. I grew up around a few horse years. I grew up around a few horse people. Ah uh my first girlfriend had a people. Ah uh my first girlfriend had a people. Ah uh my first girlfriend had a horse and it was remarkable to me horse and it was remarkable to me horse and it was remarkable to me to see and to um get some just external to see and to um get some just external to see and to um get some just external understanding of the relationship understanding of the relationship understanding of the relationship between human and animal through between human and animal through between human and animal through observing that I think of all the observing that I think of all the observing that I think of all the relationships between animals and humans relationships between animals and humans relationships between animals and humans the horse human relationship seems to be the horse human relationship seems to be the horse human relationship seems to be the one where there's the most amount of the one where there's the most amount of the one where there's the most amount of physical contact right you ride a horse physical contact right you ride a horse physical contact right you ride a horse um uh you learn to read the horse's uh um uh you learn to read the horse's uh um uh you learn to read the horse's uh intentions. It learns to read yours intentions. It learns to read yours intentions. It learns to read yours through these subtle, you know, through these subtle, you know, through these subtle, you know, squeezing of the legs or you kicking or squeezing of the legs or you kicking or squeezing of the legs or you kicking or not kicking hard, but you know, um like not kicking hard, but you know, um like not kicking hard, but you know, um like just like a nudge of the heel. Um just a just like a nudge of the heel. Um just a just like a nudge of the heel. Um just a slight tug on the reins. It's really slight tug on the reins. It's really slight tug on the reins. It's really remarkable. Um what does the horse experience the Um what does the horse experience the Um what does the horse experience the world as? We I I've heard before that, world as? We I I've heard before that, world as? We I I've heard before that, you know, they sort of have these orbs you know, they sort of have these orbs you know, they sort of have these orbs of awareness around them and that of awareness around them and that of awareness around them and that they're paying attention to things on they're paying attention to things on they're paying attention to things on the horizon that they're um clearly the horizon that they're um clearly the horizon that they're um clearly paying attention to things very up close paying attention to things very up close paying attention to things very up close to their body. But if you were to put us to their body. But if you were to put us to their body. But if you were to put us into the mind of a horse uh as best you into the mind of a horse uh as best you into the mind of a horse uh as best you can, how does the horse experience the can, how does the horse experience the can, how does the horse experience the world as an wild horse and with a rider world as an wild horse and with a rider world as an wild horse and with a rider on its back trying to steer it in a on its back trying to steer it in a on its back trying to steer it in a particular direction at a particular direction at a particular direction at a particular speed? As an ethologist, I tend to speed? As an ethologist, I tend to speed? As an ethologist, I tend to take a step back and look at sort of u take a step back and look at sort of u take a step back and look at sort of u the species in general. And horses the species in general. And horses the species in general. And horses are prey are prey are prey animals. They are also herd animals. And animals. They are also herd animals. And animals. They are also herd animals. And I think that um we as humans, we tend to I think that um we as humans, we tend to I think that um we as humans, we tend to not really understand how different not really understand how different not really understand how different animal species can be from ourselves in animal species can be from ourselves in animal species can be from ourselves in how they perceive the world and what's how they perceive the world and what's how they perceive the world and what's important to them. Uh so horses being important to them. Uh so horses being important to them. Uh so horses being prey animals means that they're usually prey animals means that they're usually prey animals means that they're usually quite vigilant. So they're paying a lot quite vigilant. So they're paying a lot quite vigilant. So they're paying a lot of attention to the world and they have of attention to the world and they have of attention to the world and they have this the vis their visual field is this the vis their visual field is this the vis their visual field is really big so they can sort of see really big so they can sort of see really big so they can sort of see what's happening back there. The issue I what's happening back there. The issue I what's happening back there. The issue I have with how we raise and keep horses have with how we raise and keep horses have with how we raise and keep horses today as an ethologist and sort of today as an ethologist and sort of today as an ethologist and sort of looking at how animals live their lives looking at how animals live their lives looking at how animals live their lives in the wild is that we keep them in a in the wild is that we keep them in a in the wild is that we keep them in a way that sort of challenges them in way that sort of challenges them in way that sort of challenges them in several aspects of that. So we tend to several aspects of that. So we tend to several aspects of that. So we tend to separate them quite early from their mom separate them quite early from their mom separate them quite early from their mom even though in the wild they would stay even though in the wild they would stay even though in the wild they would stay for a very long time. So I think some of for a very long time. So I think some of for a very long time. So I think some of the concerns that I have as an the concerns that I have as an the concerns that I have as an ethologist with how we raise horses is ethologist with how we raise horses is ethologist with how we raise horses is the early weaning that we the early weaning that we the early weaning that we sometimes see and also single housing sometimes see and also single housing sometimes see and also single housing for a species that's um an aggregating for a species that's um an aggregating for a species that's um an aggregating species and also that they uh in the species and also that they uh in the species and also that they uh in the wild they will forage up to 16 hours a wild they will forage up to 16 hours a wild they will forage up to 16 hours a day. And when we bring them into day. And when we bring them into day. And when we bring them into captivity, we typically feed them in the captivity, we typically feed them in the captivity, we typically feed them in the way that promotes very quick eating, you way that promotes very quick eating, you way that promotes very quick eating, you know, for just a fraction of that time. know, for just a fraction of that time. know, for just a fraction of that time. And that can then lead to problem And that can then lead to problem And that can then lead to problem behavior. So, so for me, I think horses behavior. So, so for me, I think horses behavior. So, so for me, I think horses are probably one of the captive animal are probably one of the captive animal are probably one of the captive animal species where for many individual horses, the where for many individual horses, the where for many individual horses, the type of life that we're offering is type of life that we're offering is type of life that we're offering is really not that great. Interesting. really not that great. Interesting. really not that great. Interesting. Dogs I know are very uh smelloriented. Dogs I know are very uh smelloriented. Dogs I know are very uh smelloriented. They experience the world um perhaps They experience the world um perhaps They experience the world um perhaps largely but certainly uh quite a bit largely but certainly uh quite a bit largely but certainly uh quite a bit through their noses. Um they can sense through their noses. Um they can sense through their noses. Um they can sense odor and set a distance and certainly up odor and set a distance and certainly up odor and set a distance and certainly up close. They like to get their nose right close. They like to get their nose right close. They like to get their nose right into things and sniff get deep into things and sniff get deep into things and sniff get deep sniffs. Um and they're always collecting sniffs. Um and they're always collecting sniffs. Um and they're always collecting information with their noses. information with their noses. information with their noses. There's a huge range of dog breeds and I There's a huge range of dog breeds and I There's a huge range of dog breeds and I think any discussion about dogs requires think any discussion about dogs requires think any discussion about dogs requires that we uh first kind of separate out that we uh first kind of separate out that we uh first kind of separate out some of the major differences um at some of the major differences um at some of the major differences um at least in terms of the purebred least in terms of the purebred least in terms of the purebred versions of them. When I see a versions of them. When I see a versions of them. When I see a mastiff versus a chihuahua mastiff versus a chihuahua mastiff versus a chihuahua uh versus a like a scent hound, I'm uh versus a like a scent hound, I'm uh versus a like a scent hound, I'm looking at to me what appear to be very looking at to me what appear to be very looking at to me what appear to be very different animals. Is it true that different animals. Is it true that different animals. Is it true that certain dogs rely on their sense of certain dogs rely on their sense of certain dogs rely on their sense of smell far more than others? And if so, smell far more than others? And if so, smell far more than others? And if so, um, do the ones that rely on their on um, do the ones that rely on their on um, do the ones that rely on their on their nose just not pay attention to their nose just not pay attention to their nose just not pay attention to what they're looking at unless you what they're looking at unless you what they're looking at unless you insist. I mean, the other version of insist. I mean, the other version of insist. I mean, the other version of this question is how should we interact this question is how should we interact this question is how should we interact with dogs differently depending on what with dogs differently depending on what with dogs differently depending on what breed of dog they are? Yeah. So, I think breed of dog they are? Yeah. So, I think breed of dog they are? Yeah. So, I think I can't really answer the first part of I can't really answer the first part of I can't really answer the first part of that question. I don't know the extent that question. I don't know the extent that question. I don't know the extent to which uh different dog breeds uh to which uh different dog breeds uh to which uh different dog breeds uh their sensory capabilities, how their sensory capabilities, how their sensory capabilities, how much that differs between different how much that differs between different how much that differs between different dog breeds. However, um how to interact dog breeds. However, um how to interact dog breeds. However, um how to interact with different dog breeds. I think with different dog breeds. I think with different dog breeds. I think that's really a really interesting that's really a really interesting that's really a really interesting question because so during the process question because so during the process question because so during the process of domestication and in just the of domestication and in just the of domestication and in just the last couple of hundred years really we last couple of hundred years really we last couple of hundred years really we started selecting for different started selecting for different started selecting for different capabilities in the different dog um capabilities in the different dog um capabilities in the different dog um dogs that we needed for different dogs that we needed for different dogs that we needed for different tasks essentially. So, if we look at a tasks essentially. So, if we look at a tasks essentially. So, if we look at a wolf hunting sequence, what they'll do wolf hunting sequence, what they'll do wolf hunting sequence, what they'll do is they'll do an orient response where is they'll do an orient response where is they'll do an orient response where they sniff and they they're sort of they sniff and they they're sort of they sniff and they they're sort of looking for a uh prey and then they will looking for a uh prey and then they will looking for a uh prey and then they will do some eyeing and stalking behavior. do some eyeing and stalking behavior. do some eyeing and stalking behavior. So, they'll focus and they'll do So, they'll focus and they'll do So, they'll focus and they'll do stalking and then they'll do chasing and stalking and then they'll do chasing and stalking and then they'll do chasing and then they'll do a grab bite, a killing then they'll do a grab bite, a killing then they'll do a grab bite, a killing bite, then they'll dissect and then bite, then they'll dissect and then bite, then they'll dissect and then they'll eat the prey. So we have this they'll eat the prey. So we have this they'll eat the prey. So we have this whole predatory sequence that we see in whole predatory sequence that we see in whole predatory sequence that we see in wolves. And what happened during the wolves. And what happened during the wolves. And what happened during the process of domestication was that we process of domestication was that we process of domestication was that we sort of selected for certain aspects of sort of selected for certain aspects of sort of selected for certain aspects of that sequence in different breeds. So that sequence in different breeds. So that sequence in different breeds. So we'll have the sniffers, the hounds we'll have the sniffers, the hounds we'll have the sniffers, the hounds that are really great at and I guess that are really great at and I guess that are really great at and I guess maybe that answers your first question. maybe that answers your first question. maybe that answers your first question. I think that probably all dog breeds I think that probably all dog breeds I think that probably all dog breeds enjoy sniffing. It's one of the big enjoy sniffing. It's one of the big enjoy sniffing. It's one of the big things that people are exploring a lot things that people are exploring a lot things that people are exploring a lot new now is nose work. But anyway, new now is nose work. But anyway, new now is nose work. But anyway, back to the this process of back to the this process of back to the this process of domestication that and then we had the domestication that and then we had the domestication that and then we had the um uh the pointers who are who um uh the pointers who are who um uh the pointers who are who sort of we have really um uh selected sort of we have really um uh selected sort of we have really um uh selected for that behavior. You know that in a for that behavior. You know that in a for that behavior. You know that in a in a litter of puppies, we would select in a litter of puppies, we would select in a litter of puppies, we would select the one that was mo the most prone to do the one that was mo the most prone to do the one that was mo the most prone to do that behavior. And so over generations that behavior. And so over generations that behavior. And so over generations we really um sculpted that uh niche we really um sculpted that uh niche we really um sculpted that uh niche so to speak. So a pointer will typically so to speak. So a pointer will typically so to speak. So a pointer will typically not proceed to the to the next behavior not proceed to the to the next behavior not proceed to the to the next behavior of the predatory sequence. Then we have of the predatory sequence. Then we have of the predatory sequence. Then we have like the border collies who might do like the border collies who might do like the border collies who might do some chasing uh or some um eyeing some chasing uh or some um eyeing some chasing uh or some um eyeing and stalking and a little bit of chase and stalking and a little bit of chase and stalking and a little bit of chase but ideally no grabbing. Then we have but ideally no grabbing. Then we have but ideally no grabbing. Then we have the pure chasers, the greyhounds for the pure chasers, the greyhounds for the pure chasers, the greyhounds for instance. And then we have the instance. And then we have the instance. And then we have the grabbers, the uh the retrievers. And grabbers, the uh the retrievers. And grabbers, the uh the retrievers. And then we have the killers, the um the then we have the killers, the um the then we have the killers, the um the terriers. People I I'm assuming were terriers. People I I'm assuming were terriers. People I I'm assuming were anticipating you to say the pitbulls or anticipating you to say the pitbulls or anticipating you to say the pitbulls or the dobermans, but uh anyone that's the dobermans, but uh anyone that's the dobermans, but uh anyone that's owned a terrier will know that they are owned a terrier will know that they are owned a terrier will know that they are great uh ratting dogs. They were bred to great uh ratting dogs. They were bred to great uh ratting dogs. They were bred to uh exterminate uh small like rodents to uh exterminate uh small like rodents to uh exterminate uh small like rodents and stuff. Yeah. Anyone who's seen a and stuff. Yeah. Anyone who's seen a and stuff. Yeah. Anyone who's seen a Westy, those cute little uh West Westy, those cute little uh West Westy, those cute little uh West Highland Terriers, the little white Highland Terriers, the little white Highland Terriers, the little white ones, they're real cute. If if one of ones, they're real cute. If if one of ones, they're real cute. If if one of those hears or senses a rodent in the those hears or senses a rodent in the those hears or senses a rodent in the wall, I've seen one stalk one for wall, I've seen one stalk one for wall, I've seen one stalk one for several days, that will move along. We several days, that will move along. We several days, that will move along. We used to call it rat TV. The um Westy used to call it rat TV. The um Westy used to call it rat TV. The um Westy will sense where when and where the will sense where when and where the will sense where when and where the rodent is there with an absolute rodent is there with an absolute rodent is there with an absolute fixation and if there's any way to get fixation and if there's any way to get fixation and if there's any way to get into that wall and kill that rodent, into that wall and kill that rodent, into that wall and kill that rodent, it's coming out with that rodent in its it's coming out with that rodent in its it's coming out with that rodent in its mouth. It's remarkable. The amount of mouth. It's remarkable. The amount of mouth. It's remarkable. The amount of dedication is just striking and it's all dedication is just striking and it's all dedication is just striking and it's all about killing that rat. Yeah. So, so we about killing that rat. Yeah. So, so we about killing that rat. Yeah. So, so we systematically intentionally bred for we systematically intentionally bred for we systematically intentionally bred for that like a couple hundred years ago. that like a couple hundred years ago. that like a couple hundred years ago. And then we have the ones that don't And then we have the ones that don't And then we have the ones that don't show much of the predatory sequence at show much of the predatory sequence at show much of the predatory sequence at all that simply mostly just eat uh which all that simply mostly just eat uh which all that simply mostly just eat uh which are the um what do you call them? are the um what do you call them? are the um what do you call them? The ones that um help uh livestock The ones that um help uh livestock The ones that um help uh livestock guardians. they still like the sniffing. they still like the sniffing. they still like the sniffing. So they tend to retain the sniffing part So they tend to retain the sniffing part So they tend to retain the sniffing part and then specific breeds will and then specific breeds will and then specific breeds will have one or perhaps a few of the have one or perhaps a few of the have one or perhaps a few of the behaviors from the be from the hunting behaviors from the be from the hunting behaviors from the be from the hunting sequence. Um so I think if we want to sequence. Um so I think if we want to sequence. Um so I think if we want to offer uh dogs a good um a good life, we should uh dogs a good um a good life, we should uh dogs a good um a good life, we should understand where they are on that scale. understand where they are on that scale. understand where they are on that scale. And also that the working dogs come sort And also that the working dogs come sort And also that the working dogs come sort of with this evolutionary backpack, of with this evolutionary backpack, of with this evolutionary backpack, their genetic backpack will uh their genetic backpack will uh their genetic backpack will uh encourage them to really want to do that encourage them to really want to do that encourage them to really want to do that work. And then we have the also the work. And then we have the also the work. And then we have the also the sort of um I think they're sometimes sort of um I think they're sometimes sort of um I think they're sometimes referred to as toy breeds, the ones that referred to as toy breeds, the ones that referred to as toy breeds, the ones that the lap dogs who are not that interested the lap dogs who are not that interested the lap dogs who are not that interested in any of that working dog in any of that working dog in any of that working dog behavior. So I think it's we need to uh behavior. So I think it's we need to uh behavior. So I think it's we need to uh with regards to the different breeds, we with regards to the different breeds, we with regards to the different breeds, we need to really need to really need to really understand what purpose they were bred understand what purpose they were bred understand what purpose they were bred for. I think I'd like to take a quick for. I think I'd like to take a quick for. I think I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Our break and acknowledge our sponsor, Our break and acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our Place makes my favorite pots, Place. Our Place makes my favorite pots, Place. Our Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever toxic compounds such as PASES or forever toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of chemicals are still found in 80% of chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well as utensils, non-stick pans, as well as utensils, non-stick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen appliances, and countless other kitchen appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before in products. As I've discussed before in products. As I've discussed before in this podcast, these PASES or forever this podcast, these PASES or forever this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked chemicals like Teflon have been linked chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone to major health issues such as hormone to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's really important to problems. So, it's really important to problems. So, it's really important to try and avoid them. This is why I'm a try and avoid them. This is why I'm a try and avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Our place products huge fan of ourplace. Our place products huge fan of ourplace. Our place products are made with the highest quality are made with the highest quality are made with the highest quality materials and are all completely PAS and materials and are all completely PAS and materials and are all completely PAS and toxin-free. I especially love their toxin-free. I especially love their toxin-free. I especially love their titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it and it puts a really and steaks in it and it puts a really and steaks in it and it puts a really nice sear on the meat. But again, nice sear on the meat. But again, nice sear on the meat. But again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean and it's even dishwasher easy to clean and it's even dishwasher easy to clean and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it and I basically use it safe. I love it and I basically use it safe. I love it and I basically use it constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full line of titanium pro cookware that uses line of titanium pro cookware that uses line of titanium pro cookware that uses its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to go to go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the fromourplace.com/huberman and use the fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code hubman at checkout. Right now, our code hubman at checkout. Right now, our code hubman at checkout. Right now, our place is having their biggest sale of place is having their biggest sale of place is having their biggest sale of the season. You can get up to 30% off the season. You can get up to 30% off the season. You can get up to 30% off all products now through May 12th, 2025. all products now through May 12th, 2025. all products now through May 12th, 2025. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can try shipping, and free returns, you can try shipping, and free returns, you can try ourplace with zero risk and see why more ourplace with zero risk and see why more ourplace with zero risk and see why more than 1 million people have made the than 1 million people have made the than 1 million people have made the switch to ourplace kitchen wear. Again, switch to ourplace kitchen wear. Again, switch to ourplace kitchen wear. Again, that's from that's from that's from hourplace.com/huberman to get up to 30% hourplace.com/huberman to get up to 30% hourplace.com/huberman to get up to 30% off. Today's episode is also brought to off. Today's episode is also brought to off. Today's episode is also brought to us by EightLe. Eight makes smart us by EightLe. Eight makes smart us by EightLe. Eight makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, mattress covers with cooling, heating, mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. Now, I've and sleep tracking capacity. Now, I've and sleep tracking capacity. Now, I've spoken before on this podcast about the spoken before on this podcast about the spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate critical need for us to get adequate critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each and every amounts of quality sleep each and every amounts of quality sleep each and every night. Now, one of the best ways to night. Now, one of the best ways to night. Now, one of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your ensure that the temperature of your ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop about 1 to 3°. And actually has to drop about 1 to 3°. And actually has to drop about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed in order to wake up feeling refreshed in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature and energized, your body temperature and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the 3°. Eight automatically regulates the 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the temperature of your bed throughout the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. night according to your unique needs. night according to your unique needs. Now, I find that extremely useful Now, I find that extremely useful Now, I find that extremely useful because I like to make the bed really because I like to make the bed really because I like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night, even cool at the beginning of the night, even cool at the beginning of the night, even colder in the middle of the night, and colder in the middle of the night, and colder in the middle of the night, and warm as I wake up. That's what gives me warm as I wake up. That's what gives me warm as I wake up. That's what gives me the most slowwave sleep and rapid eye the most slowwave sleep and rapid eye the most slowwave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. And I know that because movement sleep. And I know that because movement sleep. And I know that because EightLe has a great sleep tracker that EightLe has a great sleep tracker that EightLe has a great sleep tracker that tells me how well I've slept and the tells me how well I've slept and the tells me how well I've slept and the types of sleep that I'm getting types of sleep that I'm getting types of sleep that I'm getting throughout the night. I've been sleeping throughout the night. I've been sleeping throughout the night. I've been sleeping on an EightLe mattress cover for four on an EightLe mattress cover for four on an EightLe mattress cover for four years now, and it has completely years now, and it has completely years now, and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of transformed and improved the quality of transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. Their latest model, the Pod 4 my sleep. Their latest model, the Pod 4 my sleep. Their latest model, the Pod 4 Ultra, also has snoring detection that Ultra, also has snoring detection that Ultra, also has snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few will automatically lift your head a few will automatically lift your head a few degrees in order to improve your air degrees in order to improve your air degrees in order to improve your air flow and stop you from snoring. If you flow and stop you from snoring. If you flow and stop you from snoring. If you decide to try eight, you have 30 days to decide to try eight, you have 30 days to decide to try eight, you have 30 days to try it at home, and you can return it if try it at home, and you can return it if try it at home, and you can return it if you don't like it, no questions asked. you don't like it, no questions asked. you don't like it, no questions asked. But I'm sure that you'll love it. Go to But I'm sure that you'll love it. Go to But I'm sure that you'll love it. Go to eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 off your Pod 4 Ultra. 8LE ships to many off your Pod 4 Ultra. 8LE ships to many off your Pod 4 Ultra. 8LE ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico countries worldwide, including Mexico countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's and the UAE. Again, that's and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 off your Pod4 Ultra. That's a beautiful off your Pod4 Ultra. That's a beautiful off your Pod4 Ultra. That's a beautiful and to me completely novel description and to me completely novel description and to me completely novel description of the breakdown of different breeds. of the breakdown of different breeds. of the breakdown of different breeds. Um, not according to the dosing of wolf Um, not according to the dosing of wolf Um, not according to the dosing of wolf versus mastiff genes, which is what some versus mastiff genes, which is what some versus mastiff genes, which is what some of the more reductionist um research of the more reductionist um research of the more reductionist um research papers on this really do. They have papers on this really do. They have papers on this really do. They have these charts. Uh we'll provide a link to these charts. Uh we'll provide a link to these charts. Uh we'll provide a link to one that was published in Science one that was published in Science one that was published in Science magazine about 10 years back that had magazine about 10 years back that had magazine about 10 years back that had this sort of dosing of mastiff um genes this sort of dosing of mastiff um genes this sort of dosing of mastiff um genes versus uh wolf genes. And versus uh wolf genes. And versus uh wolf genes. And um what you just described beautifully um what you just described beautifully um what you just described beautifully breaks down what one observes if you go breaks down what one observes if you go breaks down what one observes if you go to a dog park or the beach. My bulldog to a dog park or the beach. My bulldog to a dog park or the beach. My bulldog Mastiff Costello, he was he was a mudded Mastiff Costello, he was he was a mudded Mastiff Costello, he was he was a mudded bulldog. So I always say um you know no bulldog. So I always say um you know no bulldog. So I always say um you know no underbite. So it wasn't disha. It was underbite. So it wasn't disha. It was underbite. So it wasn't disha. It was this right. So, a proper bulldog um this right. So, a proper bulldog um this right. So, a proper bulldog um before they inbred them so much that before they inbred them so much that before they inbred them so much that they have the underbite and the short they have the underbite and the short they have the underbite and the short snout, the brachiophalic, the breathing snout, the brachiophalic, the breathing snout, the brachiophalic, the breathing issues. But he um neither stalked issues. But he um neither stalked issues. But he um neither stalked nor uh chased. Mhm. Nor was he nor uh chased. Mhm. Nor was he nor uh chased. Mhm. Nor was he interested in killing anything. He interested in killing anything. He interested in killing anything. He didn't have that um sense to try and didn't have that um sense to try and didn't have that um sense to try and harm. Uh but he certainly liked to harm. Uh but he certainly liked to harm. Uh but he certainly liked to consume. So, he was at the end of that consume. So, he was at the end of that consume. So, he was at the end of that behavioral description. Um and what were behavioral description. Um and what were behavioral description. Um and what were they bred for? So, um, I'll try and not they bred for? So, um, I'll try and not they bred for? So, um, I'll try and not take up too much time on this one take up too much time on this one take up too much time on this one because I want to learn from you. The because I want to learn from you. The because I want to learn from you. The original bulldog line, um, was a cross original bulldog line, um, was a cross original bulldog line, um, was a cross between a mastiff, something like a between a mastiff, something like a between a mastiff, something like a mastiff, a strong, large, uh, high pain mastiff, a strong, large, uh, high pain mastiff, a strong, large, uh, high pain tolerance, um, and a pug, short snout. tolerance, um, and a pug, short snout. tolerance, um, and a pug, short snout. And the gene cross there and And the gene cross there and And the gene cross there and obviously the dog geneticists weren't obviously the dog geneticists weren't obviously the dog geneticists weren't thinking about specific genes. They were thinking about specific genes. They were thinking about specific genes. They were thinking about traits was the short thinking about traits was the short thinking about traits was the short snout um was great for what's called snout um was great for what's called snout um was great for what's called bull baiting because that short snout bull baiting because that short snout bull baiting because that short snout provides a the kind of lever that when provides a the kind of lever that when provides a the kind of lever that when they bite down onto the nose of a bull, they bite down onto the nose of a bull, they bite down onto the nose of a bull, which is what they were used for. It was which is what they were used for. It was which is what they were used for. It was a pretty cruel practice. Um very hard to a pretty cruel practice. Um very hard to a pretty cruel practice. Um very hard to shake them loose. The bull could shake them loose. The bull could shake them loose. The bull could shake them and they're not going to shake them and they're not going to shake them and they're not going to shake loose. Just think about trying to pick loose. Just think about trying to pick loose. Just think about trying to pick something up with long tongs, right? The something up with long tongs, right? The something up with long tongs, right? The physics of this versus a clamp, right? physics of this versus a clamp, right? physics of this versus a clamp, right? Like a C clamp. Yeah. Like a C clamp. Yeah. Like a C clamp. Yeah. um the mutation that takes the pain um the mutation that takes the pain um the mutation that takes the pain receptors out of the face or reduces receptors out of the face or reduces receptors out of the face or reduces them um is close by another gene that is them um is close by another gene that is them um is close by another gene that is involved in generating the tensile involved in generating the tensile involved in generating the tensile nature of the skin. So this is why they nature of the skin. So this is why they nature of the skin. So this is why they have the jowls, the folds. And you can I have the jowls, the folds. And you can I have the jowls, the folds. And you can I don't suggest anyone do this, but don't suggest anyone do this, but don't suggest anyone do this, but Costello, I'll just give an example. Costello, I'll just give an example. Costello, I'll just give an example. Sometimes unfortunately, would like get Sometimes unfortunately, would like get Sometimes unfortunately, would like get a fish hook through his jaw when he was a fish hook through his jaw when he was a fish hook through his jaw when he was playing at the ocean or something. And playing at the ocean or something. And playing at the ocean or something. And he'd come up to me bleeding, smiling, he'd come up to me bleeding, smiling, he'd come up to me bleeding, smiling, you know, basically you have to take you know, basically you have to take you know, basically you have to take this thing out. Um, so his pain this thing out. Um, so his pain this thing out. Um, so his pain tolerance was quite high. Pain tolerance was quite high. Pain tolerance was quite high. Pain tolerance very high in the front of the animal in very high in the front of the animal in very high in the front of the animal in the face and toward the rear of the face and toward the rear of the face and toward the rear of the animal. you touch his back toe and it's animal. you touch his back toe and it's animal. you touch his back toe and it's you know the so they have a gradient of you know the so they have a gradient of you know the so they have a gradient of pain receptors that runs high density in pain receptors that runs high density in pain receptors that runs high density in the back low density to the front. So the back low density to the front. So the back low density to the front. So they were bred for bull baiting. Yeah. they were bred for bull baiting. Yeah. they were bred for bull baiting. Yeah. And the original line um has been bred And the original line um has been bred And the original line um has been bred out. It's uh people who care about the out. It's uh people who care about the out. It's uh people who care about the bulldog breed um and bringing some more bulldog breed um and bringing some more bulldog breed um and bringing some more uh humane breeding practices to the uh humane breeding practices to the uh humane breeding practices to the bulldog because it's a pretty brutal bulldog because it's a pretty brutal bulldog because it's a pretty brutal breed now. um have tried to re breed now. um have tried to re breed now. um have tried to re reestablish the original line which reestablish the original line which reestablish the original line which again were elbows back, no strong again were elbows back, no strong again were elbows back, no strong underbite um as opposed to what you see underbite um as opposed to what you see underbite um as opposed to what you see now. Uh so that's the sort of brief now. Uh so that's the sort of brief now. Uh so that's the sort of brief history on the bulldog. Um they have history on the bulldog. Um they have history on the bulldog. Um they have to be born by cescareian because big to be born by cescareian because big to be born by cescareian because big shoulders, small hips. Anyway, um the uh shoulders, small hips. Anyway, um the uh shoulders, small hips. Anyway, um the uh the interesting thing about the bulldog, the interesting thing about the bulldog, the interesting thing about the bulldog, I always said, and this will take us I always said, and this will take us I always said, and this will take us back to behavior, was the contract that back to behavior, was the contract that back to behavior, was the contract that I felt I had with my bulldog was one I felt I had with my bulldog was one I felt I had with my bulldog was one of he would protect me to the death. You of he would protect me to the death. You of he would protect me to the death. You do notice that anytime they hear a noise do notice that anytime they hear a noise do notice that anytime they hear a noise or anything, they're hypervigilant. Um or anything, they're hypervigilant. Um or anything, they're hypervigilant. Um but if there's no impending threat, but if there's no impending threat, but if there's no impending threat, total relaxation, the most efficient use total relaxation, the most efficient use total relaxation, the most efficient use of energy of any species. So basically of energy of any species. So basically of energy of any species. So basically it was I'll die for you, Andrew, but it was I'll die for you, Andrew, but it was I'll die for you, Andrew, but unless your life is in danger, I'm not unless your life is in danger, I'm not unless your life is in danger, I'm not going to do anything. So maybe we going to do anything. So maybe we going to do anything. So maybe we could talk about temperament in dogs and could talk about temperament in dogs and could talk about temperament in dogs and how they experience their emotional how they experience their emotional how they experience their emotional life. It I don't know if we can make life. It I don't know if we can make life. It I don't know if we can make general statements about this, but general statements about this, but general statements about this, but you've spent a lot of your uh you've spent a lot of your uh you've spent a lot of your uh time um thinking about the emotional time um thinking about the emotional time um thinking about the emotional life of animals. What does a dog need in life of animals. What does a dog need in life of animals. What does a dog need in order to feel calm and safe? Great order to feel calm and safe? Great order to feel calm and safe? Great question. Um yeah. So in order to feel calm and Um yeah. So in order to feel calm and Um yeah. So in order to feel calm and safe [Music] um I think we perhaps we should go to um I think we perhaps we should go to um I think we perhaps we should go to the core effect space. Okay. Which I the core effect space. Okay. Which I the core effect space. Okay. Which I think is one of the three emotional think is one of the three emotional think is one of the three emotional models that I find very useful in models that I find very useful in models that I find very useful in understanding uh and providing like a good uh and providing like a good uh and providing like a good environment for animals so that they can environment for animals so that they can environment for animals so that they can thrive really. So the core effect space thrive really. So the core effect space thrive really. So the core effect space is one way of depicting or is one way of depicting or is one way of depicting or conceptualizing emotions where we have conceptualizing emotions where we have conceptualizing emotions where we have like veilance on the x-axis. So how like veilance on the x-axis. So how like veilance on the x-axis. So how pleasant or unpleasant something is and pleasant or unpleasant something is and pleasant or unpleasant something is and we have arousal on the y- axis. So what we have arousal on the y- axis. So what we have arousal on the y- axis. So what you're asking is how can we make animals you're asking is how can we make animals you're asking is how can we make animals and I'm not just not just dogs but any and I'm not just not just dogs but any and I'm not just not just dogs but any species. How can we put them in quadrant species. How can we put them in quadrant species. How can we put them in quadrant two of that core effect space two of that core effect space two of that core effect space essentially? So uh low arousal and essentially? So uh low arousal and essentially? So uh low arousal and pleasant. So where they're relaxed and pleasant. So where they're relaxed and pleasant. So where they're relaxed and they're feeling safe and they're feeling safe and they're feeling safe and they're sort of engaging socially with others sort of engaging socially with others sort of engaging socially with others and being sort of at ease if you will. and being sort of at ease if you will. and being sort of at ease if you will. So how do we get there? And I think that So how do we get there? And I think that So how do we get there? And I think that some of the things to consider is then some of the things to consider is then some of the things to consider is then the absence of negative emotions. So if the absence of negative emotions. So if the absence of negative emotions. So if again if we're in the core effect space again if we're in the core effect space again if we're in the core effect space in the in the quadrant 4 with the high in the in the quadrant 4 with the high in the in the quadrant 4 with the high arousal unpleasant states, we'll find arousal unpleasant states, we'll find arousal unpleasant states, we'll find things like fear, uh aggression. So things like fear, uh aggression. So things like fear, uh aggression. So helping reduce that will sort of helping reduce that will sort of helping reduce that will sort of automatically help animals move to the automatically help animals move to the automatically help animals move to the right in the right in the right in the matrix. And in the lower quadrant three matrix. And in the lower quadrant three matrix. And in the lower quadrant three with the unpleasant low arousal state with the unpleasant low arousal state with the unpleasant low arousal state where animals tend to end up if they're where animals tend to end up if they're where animals tend to end up if they're sort of bored or depressed is engaging them. of bored or depressed is engaging them. of bored or depressed is engaging them. providing an environment that's providing an environment that's providing an environment that's stimulating that they can sort of do stimulating that they can sort of do stimulating that they can sort of do interesting things in to help them move interesting things in to help them move interesting things in to help them move into the to the right side of the core into the to the right side of the core into the to the right side of the core effect space. Um and also to the to the effect space. Um and also to the to the effect space. Um and also to the to the top in that um the quadum one is the top in that um the quadum one is the top in that um the quadum one is the high arousal pleasant state but that high arousal pleasant state but that high arousal pleasant state but that would be like seeking or foraging that would be like seeking or foraging that would be like seeking or foraging behavior, exploration, play, sex. behavior, exploration, play, sex. behavior, exploration, play, sex. Um but as to your question, how do we Um but as to your question, how do we Um but as to your question, how do we get into get into get into uh quadrant two with feeling safe uh quadrant two with feeling safe uh quadrant two with feeling safe and sort of that warm fuzzy feeling? Um and sort of that warm fuzzy feeling? Um and sort of that warm fuzzy feeling? Um so some of the things to do might be to so some of the things to do might be to so some of the things to do might be to uh if the animal enjoys it coming from uh if the animal enjoys it coming from uh if the animal enjoys it coming from you and they often have to know you in you and they often have to know you in you and they often have to know you in order to really appreciate it is like order to really appreciate it is like order to really appreciate it is like tactile stimulation. so petty. tactile stimulation. so petty. tactile stimulation. so petty. Essentially, something that might Essentially, something that might Essentially, something that might interfere is that we primates, we humans interfere is that we primates, we humans interfere is that we primates, we humans are primates and we're huggers. We tend are primates and we're huggers. We tend are primates and we're huggers. We tend to sort of go like this when we want to sort of go like this when we want to sort of go like this when we want to interact with an animal that we really interact with an animal that we really interact with an animal that we really like. And to many animals, this is like. And to many animals, this is like. And to many animals, this is restraint and really restraint and really restraint and really scary. Uh and so, scary. Uh and so, scary. Uh and so, uh the type of body contact that we uh the type of body contact that we uh the type of body contact that we offer to animals that we should consider offer to animals that we should consider offer to animals that we should consider whether they really enjoy it or not, whether they really enjoy it or not, whether they really enjoy it or not, whether they tolerate it or enjoy it. whether they tolerate it or enjoy it. whether they tolerate it or enjoy it. And one way of doing that is to offer a And one way of doing that is to offer a And one way of doing that is to offer a consent test. So you might you might off consent test. So you might you might off consent test. So you might you might off your hand and scratch a little bit, your hand and scratch a little bit, your hand and scratch a little bit, ideally in a place that the animal ideally in a place that the animal ideally in a place that the animal really enjoys. So most dogs don't enjoy really enjoys. So most dogs don't enjoy really enjoys. So most dogs don't enjoy having a hand on top of their head, but having a hand on top of their head, but having a hand on top of their head, but rather perhaps here on their neck or rather perhaps here on their neck or rather perhaps here on their neck or the upper chest sort of. Yeah. So you the upper chest sort of. Yeah. So you the upper chest sort of. Yeah. So you might do that for a few seconds and then might do that for a few seconds and then might do that for a few seconds and then you remove your hand to see does the you remove your hand to see does the you remove your hand to see does the animal enjoy this and will they then animal enjoy this and will they then animal enjoy this and will they then reinitiate that contact or not or will reinitiate that contact or not or will reinitiate that contact or not or will they move away? And I have I have this they move away? And I have I have this they move away? And I have I have this issue with my cat now that he is not issue with my cat now that he is not issue with my cat now that he is not very he doesn't sort of enjoy petting as very he doesn't sort of enjoy petting as very he doesn't sort of enjoy petting as much as I do petting him. So I have to much as I do petting him. So I have to much as I do petting him. So I have to be really mindful that I really offer be really mindful that I really offer be really mindful that I really offer him the chance to say no thanks. So we him the chance to say no thanks. So we him the chance to say no thanks. So we um might consider just touching the um might consider just touching the um might consider just touching the animal as a you calling a consent test animal as a you calling a consent test animal as a you calling a consent test like as a as a test and then if they like as a as a test and then if they like as a as a test and then if they move toward you then what is the pattern move toward you then what is the pattern move toward you then what is the pattern of uh tactile stimulation that's that of uh tactile stimulation that's that of uh tactile stimulation that's that dogs like? I've been reading up on this dogs like? I've been reading up on this dogs like? I've been reading up on this a little bit and somebody um ran an a little bit and somebody um ran an a little bit and somebody um ran an experiment that I think is kind of experiment that I think is kind of experiment that I think is kind of interesting describing the differences interesting describing the differences interesting describing the differences between rates of petting and it between rates of petting and it between rates of petting and it basically the conclusion was that basically the conclusion was that basically the conclusion was that essentially they claim that all dogs um essentially they claim that all dogs um essentially they claim that all dogs um are averse to very rapid touch and but are averse to very rapid touch and but are averse to very rapid touch and but that people tend to pat um pet quickly that people tend to pat um pet quickly that people tend to pat um pet quickly and they showed a beautiful example and they showed a beautiful example and they showed a beautiful example of just if one just deliberately strokes of just if one just deliberately strokes of just if one just deliberately strokes the animal very slowly the animals the animal very slowly the animals the animal very slowly the animals eyelids just start to hood and you eyelids just start to hood and you eyelids just start to hood and you basically just um diffuse the tension basically just um diffuse the tension basically just um diffuse the tension very quickly, which I think is very quickly, which I think is very quickly, which I think is interesting. You know, as humans, we interesting. You know, as humans, we interesting. You know, as humans, we think, "Oh, we want to pat the dog on think, "Oh, we want to pat the dog on think, "Oh, we want to pat the dog on its head." And for some reason, we its head." And for some reason, we its head." And for some reason, we associate patting with fast patting or associate patting with fast patting or associate patting with fast patting or petting as a as a quick process. You're petting as a as a quick process. You're petting as a as a quick process. You're going to scratch and pet this animal going to scratch and pet this animal going to scratch and pet this animal where it very well could be that all the where it very well could be that all the where it very well could be that all the dogs out there are just dying for some dogs out there are just dying for some dogs out there are just dying for some really nice slow strokes. Yeah. And I really nice slow strokes. Yeah. And I really nice slow strokes. Yeah. And I also think that nice slow stroke if also think that nice slow stroke if also think that nice slow stroke if you're sort of in a calm emotional state you're sort of in a calm emotional state you're sort of in a calm emotional state yourself then we might tap into another yourself then we might tap into another yourself then we might tap into another interesting uh emotion theory which is interesting uh emotion theory which is interesting uh emotion theory which is the poly vagal theory and this concept the poly vagal theory and this concept the poly vagal theory and this concept of co-regulation. So if you're really of co-regulation. So if you're really of co-regulation. So if you're really calm and relaxed then you're sort of calm and relaxed then you're sort of calm and relaxed then you're sort of sending out these cues these sending out these cues these sending out these cues these um subtle cues that other individuals um subtle cues that other individuals um subtle cues that other individuals are reading and picking up on. And it are reading and picking up on. And it are reading and picking up on. And it seems that we do that with visav also seems that we do that with visav also seems that we do that with visav also our dogs and uh certainly also horses it our dogs and uh certainly also horses it our dogs and uh certainly also horses it seems. So that just being calm and seems. So that just being calm and seems. So that just being calm and relaxed yourself can really help relax relaxed yourself can really help relax relaxed yourself can really help relax the dog. And what you say about the fast the dog. And what you say about the fast the dog. And what you say about the fast petting or patting really makes sense to petting or patting really makes sense to petting or patting really makes sense to me. I know there's one study in horses me. I know there's one study in horses me. I know there's one study in horses that show that if you pat a horse, that show that if you pat a horse, that show that if you pat a horse, many horses find that aversive. So in many horses find that aversive. So in many horses find that aversive. So in other words, it's something that they'll other words, it's something that they'll other words, it's something that they'll work to avoid. And yet that is often how work to avoid. And yet that is often how work to avoid. And yet that is often how we reinfor. They do enjoy wither reinfor. They do enjoy wither reinfor. They do enjoy wither scratching. So back at the nape of the scratching. So back at the nape of the scratching. So back at the nape of the man, if you scratch them there, the man, if you scratch them there, the man, if you scratch them there, they'll typically enjoy that. But I they'll typically enjoy that. But I they'll typically enjoy that. But I would say that would say that would say that um different animals, different um different animals, different um different animals, different individuals will have these individual individuals will have these individual individuals will have these individual preferences and just trying to see what preferences and just trying to see what preferences and just trying to see what they like. And perhaps also if you if they like. And perhaps also if you if they like. And perhaps also if you if you're offering your hands like this, you're offering your hands like this, you're offering your hands like this, they might even scoot around to show you they might even scoot around to show you they might even scoot around to show you which body part they want scratched once which body part they want scratched once which body part they want scratched once they learn this uh the rules of they learn this uh the rules of they learn this uh the rules of that communication. I feel like dogs that communication. I feel like dogs that communication. I feel like dogs want the part of their body scratched want the part of their body scratched want the part of their body scratched that uh they can't access on their own. that uh they can't access on their own. that uh they can't access on their own. Yes. Like I'm yet to meet a dog that Yes. Like I'm yet to meet a dog that Yes. Like I'm yet to meet a dog that doesn't like being scratched on its doesn't like being scratched on its doesn't like being scratched on its rump. Bump scratching is a big thing for rump. Bump scratching is a big thing for rump. Bump scratching is a big thing for many animals. Yeah. Like like the many animals. Yeah. Like like the many animals. Yeah. Like like the top side of their back leg, right? Like top side of their back leg, right? Like top side of their back leg, right? Like right there. It's got to feel so good right there. It's got to feel so good right there. It's got to feel so good because they can't get to that. Um as because they can't get to that. Um as because they can't get to that. Um as well as underneath their rear leg, well as underneath their rear leg, well as underneath their rear leg, right? Like just kind of in the crook of right? Like just kind of in the crook of right? Like just kind of in the crook of the rear leg um with that soft skin the rear leg um with that soft skin the rear leg um with that soft skin there. Right. that. Um, but you know, there. Right. that. Um, but you know, there. Right. that. Um, but you know, having interacted with dogs that were having interacted with dogs that were having interacted with dogs that were more skittish versus more calm, Yeah. more skittish versus more calm, Yeah. more skittish versus more calm, Yeah. Um, I totally agree that different Um, I totally agree that different Um, I totally agree that different animals, regardless of breed, um, just animals, regardless of breed, um, just animals, regardless of breed, um, just have a completely different relationship have a completely different relationship have a completely different relationship to touch. Yeah. And and how quickly to touch. Yeah. And and how quickly to touch. Yeah. And and how quickly they want to interact. I've heard, and I they want to interact. I've heard, and I they want to interact. I've heard, and I don't know if it's true, that for dogs, don't know if it's true, that for dogs, don't know if it's true, that for dogs, space is a big thing. space is a big thing. space is a big thing. Um, I don't know if this is true. I'm Um, I don't know if this is true. I'm Um, I don't know if this is true. I'm sure uh someone will um refute this, but sure uh someone will um refute this, but sure uh someone will um refute this, but the idea that you know if your dog runs the idea that you know if your dog runs the idea that you know if your dog runs up to you when you walk in or to you a up to you when you walk in or to you a up to you when you walk in or to you a dog runs up to you and it's a new dog runs up to you and it's a new dog runs up to you and it's a new dog you're just meeting and they touch you you're just meeting and they touch you you're just meeting and they touch you or they jump up on your shin that it's a or they jump up on your shin that it's a or they jump up on your shin that it's a that it's their attempt to dominate you that it's their attempt to dominate you that it's their attempt to dominate you like this is my space. I'm controlling like this is my space. I'm controlling like this is my space. I'm controlling you that because you wouldn't you that because you wouldn't you that because you wouldn't necessarily walk up to a dog that you necessarily walk up to a dog that you necessarily walk up to a dog that you just met and just get right in their just met and just get right in their just met and just get right in their space without kind of them approaching space without kind of them approaching space without kind of them approaching you as well. What are your thoughts on you as well. What are your thoughts on you as well. What are your thoughts on this whole dominant submission thing on this whole dominant submission thing on this whole dominant submission thing on the basis of touch and space? That's the basis of touch and space? That's the basis of touch and space? That's like Pandora's box there, right there. like Pandora's box there, right there. like Pandora's box there, right there. Great. I don't have any sta, you know, Great. I don't have any sta, you know, Great. I don't have any sta, you know, stake in this. I just would like to stake in this. I just would like to stake in this. I just would like to learn and I would like people to learn and I would like people to learn and I would like people to learn so that they can have um better so that they can have um better so that they can have um better interactions with and for animals. interactions with and for animals. interactions with and for animals. Sure. Yeah. So, first of all, I think Sure. Yeah. So, first of all, I think Sure. Yeah. So, first of all, I think that actually we often do walk up that actually we often do walk up that actually we often do walk up to strange dogs that we never met to strange dogs that we never met to strange dogs that we never met before. We're like, "Hi, can I pet him?" before. We're like, "Hi, can I pet him?" before. We're like, "Hi, can I pet him?" And then we start patting on top of And then we start patting on top of And then we start patting on top of the animal's head. So, I think that we the animal's head. So, I think that we the animal's head. So, I think that we do that. And then this whole do that. And then this whole do that. And then this whole discussion about dominance is really discussion about dominance is really discussion about dominance is really interesting because as an interesting because as an interesting because as an ethologist, how we define dominance is ethologist, how we define dominance is ethologist, how we define dominance is completely different from how most completely different from how most completely different from how most people define it. And I actually I people define it. And I actually I people define it. And I actually I looked into the encyclopedia to see how looked into the encyclopedia to see how looked into the encyclopedia to see how is um dominance defined there. And I is um dominance defined there. And I is um dominance defined there. And I find that there's two like two lines of find that there's two like two lines of find that there's two like two lines of that definition. So one is the that definition. So one is the that definition. So one is the ethological definition of dominance and ethological definition of dominance and ethological definition of dominance and one is the sociological definition of one is the sociological definition of one is the sociological definition of dominance. And I think that what we're dominance. And I think that what we're dominance. And I think that what we're doing often is that we're misusing we're doing often is that we're misusing we're doing often is that we're misusing we're using the sociological we're using the sociological we're using the sociological definition on animals definition on animals definition on animals um in a way that's I think unfortunate um in a way that's I think unfortunate um in a way that's I think unfortunate because the ethological definition is because the ethological definition is because the ethological definition is about priority of access to about priority of access to about priority of access to resources. Here's a resource. Here's resources. Here's a resource. Here's resources. Here's a resource. Here's like five individuals coming up to it. like five individuals coming up to it. like five individuals coming up to it. There's just one there. The dominant There's just one there. The dominant There's just one there. The dominant individual will have priority of access individual will have priority of access individual will have priority of access to that resource. the others simply have to that resource. the others simply have to that resource. the others simply have to wait or look elsewhere. Uh and this to wait or look elsewhere. Uh and this to wait or look elsewhere. Uh and this reduces the risk of sort of reduces the risk of sort of reduces the risk of sort of confrontation and aggression and all the confrontation and aggression and all the confrontation and aggression and all the costs associated with that. So it's costs associated with that. So it's costs associated with that. So it's just it's normal that animals who hang just it's normal that animals who hang just it's normal that animals who hang out together who are like in a stable out together who are like in a stable out together who are like in a stable social group will organize or have social group will organize or have social group will organize or have some sort of uh dominance hierarchy some sort of uh dominance hierarchy some sort of uh dominance hierarchy within them that allows this to within them that allows this to within them that allows this to take place to reduce the ris the risk of take place to reduce the ris the risk of take place to reduce the ris the risk of aggression. uh it tends to become aggression. uh it tends to become aggression. uh it tends to become exacerbated in captivity compared to uh exacerbated in captivity compared to uh exacerbated in captivity compared to uh in wild contexts because then the in wild contexts because then the in wild contexts because then the animals can disperse and there's like animals can disperse and there's like animals can disperse and there's like there's a resource over there that they there's a resource over there that they there's a resource over there that they can go and get instead. But when we can go and get instead. But when we can go and get instead. But when we house them uh and we're offering house them uh and we're offering house them uh and we're offering specifically we're offering like here's specifically we're offering like here's specifically we're offering like here's you have two cats or three cats and here you have two cats or three cats and here you have two cats or three cats and here here's the here's the here's the food. you're putting the animals food. you're putting the animals food. you're putting the animals in conflict because cats are solitary in conflict because cats are solitary in conflict because cats are solitary hunters. So they actually do prefer if hunters. So they actually do prefer if hunters. So they actually do prefer if you have several cats, you should feed you have several cats, you should feed you have several cats, you should feed them in a sort of separate locations to them in a sort of separate locations to them in a sort of separate locations to reduce that sort of heightened arousal reduce that sort of heightened arousal reduce that sort of heightened arousal that goes with that type of feeding. that goes with that type of feeding. that goes with that type of feeding. Okay. There's dominance among dogs or Okay. There's dominance among dogs or Okay. There's dominance among dogs or among dogs and other non-human animals. among dogs and other non-human animals. among dogs and other non-human animals. I'm thinking in terms of the I'm thinking in terms of the I'm thinking in terms of the relationship between human and dog um relationship between human and dog um relationship between human and dog um and touch and space. You know, I've and touch and space. You know, I've and touch and space. You know, I've heard that um the dog touches you, it heard that um the dog touches you, it heard that um the dog touches you, it thinks it owns you. I've heard that if thinks it owns you. I've heard that if thinks it owns you. I've heard that if you move into a space um that the dog is you move into a space um that the dog is you move into a space um that the dog is and it backs away, then it's uh you and it backs away, then it's uh you and it backs away, then it's uh you know, it thinks of you as dominant. Um know, it thinks of you as dominant. Um know, it thinks of you as dominant. Um I've also heard that if the dog moves I've also heard that if the dog moves I've also heard that if the dog moves into your space very quickly, that it into your space very quickly, that it into your space very quickly, that it sees itself as kind of the leader in sees itself as kind of the leader in sees itself as kind of the leader in this uh relationship. There are a lot of this uh relationship. There are a lot of this uh relationship. There are a lot of theories out there about this. And I'm theories out there about this. And I'm theories out there about this. And I'm realizing that all these theories about realizing that all these theories about realizing that all these theories about animals um must be very contentious animals um must be very contentious animals um must be very contentious because um they lack the language to because um they lack the language to because um they lack the language to tell us what we want to know. And so tell us what we want to know. And so tell us what we want to know. And so we're always sort of guessing when we're always sort of guessing when we're always sort of guessing when we're doing ethology. I would not label any doing ethology. I would not label any doing ethology. I would not label any of those situations that you described of those situations that you described of those situations that you described as a dominance interaction. Actually, I as a dominance interaction. Actually, I as a dominance interaction. Actually, I would rather if the dog backs away when would rather if the dog backs away when would rather if the dog backs away when you confront them, I would sort of you confront them, I would sort of you confront them, I would sort of rather label that as perhaps a fearful rather label that as perhaps a fearful rather label that as perhaps a fearful reaction. uh not submissive as in giving reaction. uh not submissive as in giving reaction. uh not submissive as in giving you priority of access to a resource. you priority of access to a resource. you priority of access to a resource. Typically feral dogs in the wild will Typically feral dogs in the wild will Typically feral dogs in the wild will form linear dominance hierarchies with form linear dominance hierarchies with form linear dominance hierarchies with regards to the access to resources and regards to the access to resources and regards to the access to resources and that might shift depending on what that might shift depending on what that might shift depending on what the resource is. So it's not like it's the resource is. So it's not like it's the resource is. So it's not like it's is written in stone or anything. So it's is written in stone or anything. So it's is written in stone or anything. So it's like fluid and variable but there's it's like fluid and variable but there's it's like fluid and variable but there's still typically some sort of like uh still typically some sort of like uh still typically some sort of like uh hierarchy when it comes to the priority hierarchy when it comes to the priority hierarchy when it comes to the priority of access to resources. Then we have of access to resources. Then we have of access to resources. Then we have another social role which is the role as another social role which is the role as another social role which is the role as a leader and when I as an ethologist say leader and when I as an ethologist say leader and when I as an ethologist say leader I mean the one that leads that leader I mean the one that leads that leader I mean the one that leads that sort of work walks first in line that sort of work walks first in line that sort of work walks first in line from one um location to another. I like from one um location to another. I like from one um location to another. I like to take the example of elephants that to take the example of elephants that to take the example of elephants that they when they migrate, it's typically they when they migrate, it's typically they when they migrate, it's typically one of the old females, the one of the old females, the one of the old females, the matriarch who leads the way. She's the matriarch who leads the way. She's the matriarch who leads the way. She's the leader. So, she'll help them find she leader. So, she'll help them find she leader. So, she'll help them find she knows where to go essentially. Um, and knows where to go essentially. Um, and knows where to go essentially. Um, and there's other social roles as well. there's other social roles as well. there's other social roles as well. There might be the controller who is the There might be the controller who is the There might be the controller who is the animal who tends to initiate animal who tends to initiate animal who tends to initiate um a change in activity. So we see this um a change in activity. So we see this um a change in activity. So we see this in cows for instance that all the cows in cows for instance that all the cows in cows for instance that all the cows are standing up and they're are standing up and they're are standing up and they're grazing and then one cow the controller grazing and then one cow the controller grazing and then one cow the controller lies down and everybody else lies down lies down and everybody else lies down lies down and everybody else lies down also and they start ruminating. They also and they start ruminating. They also and they start ruminating. They will often synchronize their behavior will often synchronize their behavior will often synchronize their behavior but they'll follow. It's not that one but they'll follow. It's not that one but they'll follow. It's not that one individual is sort of imposing on the individual is sort of imposing on the individual is sort of imposing on the others but rather they do that and the others but rather they do that and the others but rather they do that and the others follow suit. Interesting. Yeah. others follow suit. Interesting. Yeah. others follow suit. Interesting. Yeah. Um I have heard this that uh when you Um I have heard this that uh when you Um I have heard this that uh when you walk your dog that your dog should be walk your dog that your dog should be walk your dog that your dog should be next to you or behind you. Uh very few next to you or behind you. Uh very few next to you or behind you. Uh very few dog owners actually walk with their dog owners actually walk with their dog owners actually walk with their dog behind them. Just I live in an area that behind them. Just I live in an area that behind them. Just I live in an area that is you know uh frequented by dogs and is you know uh frequented by dogs and is you know uh frequented by dogs and uh and owners. Um it's and uh and owners. Um it's and uh and owners. Um it's interesting to kind of interpret that as interesting to kind of interpret that as interesting to kind of interpret that as a question which is if the dog walks in a question which is if the dog walks in a question which is if the dog walks in front does it mean that it somehow is front does it mean that it somehow is front does it mean that it somehow is the leader? I mean, are humans just the leader? I mean, are humans just the leader? I mean, are humans just completely wrong about all this stuff? I completely wrong about all this stuff? I completely wrong about all this stuff? I think so. Great. Yeah. I think that we I think so. Great. Yeah. I think that we I think so. Great. Yeah. I think that we carry a lot of and actually I we carry a lot of and actually I we carry a lot of and actually I we haven't mentioned this, I think, but I haven't mentioned this, I think, but I haven't mentioned this, I think, but I have very little practical experience have very little practical experience have very little practical experience about dogs with dogs. I haven't lived about dogs with dogs. I haven't lived about dogs with dogs. I haven't lived with dogs. I haven't trained dogs, but with dogs. I haven't trained dogs, but with dogs. I haven't trained dogs, but many of my students train dogs and I many of my students train dogs and I many of my students train dogs and I help them. So, but that also means that help them. So, but that also means that help them. So, but that also means that I don't carry any of these sort of I don't carry any of these sort of I don't carry any of these sort of assumptions that you you're supposed to assumptions that you you're supposed to assumptions that you you're supposed to have your dog behind you or beside you have your dog behind you or beside you have your dog behind you or beside you then if you don't then so um which means then if you don't then so um which means then if you don't then so um which means that I can I can look at that type of that I can I can look at that type of that I can I can look at that type of statement and go really statement and go really statement and go really uh because I think that there's a uh because I think that there's a uh because I think that there's a lot of learning occurring of course that lot of learning occurring of course that lot of learning occurring of course that you teach the dog that if you stay at my you teach the dog that if you stay at my you teach the dog that if you stay at my side or behind me then you know there side or behind me then you know there side or behind me then you know there won't be any unpleasantness but if you won't be any unpleasantness but if you won't be any unpleasantness but if you pull ahead head, I'm going to yank you pull ahead head, I'm going to yank you pull ahead head, I'm going to yank you back. So, there'll be an unpleasant um back. So, there'll be an unpleasant um back. So, there'll be an unpleasant um uh consequence to the pulling behavior, uh consequence to the pulling behavior, uh consequence to the pulling behavior, which will then influence the animal's which will then influence the animal's which will then influence the animal's choice in staying next to you. But I choice in staying next to you. But I choice in staying next to you. But I think we very often what we label as think we very often what we label as think we very often what we label as dominance can very often be just if we dominance can very often be just if we dominance can very often be just if we just remove that label and we look at just remove that label and we look at just remove that label and we look at the animals behavior, we can we can the animals behavior, we can we can the animals behavior, we can we can explain it in other terms. And again, I explain it in other terms. And again, I explain it in other terms. And again, I would not use for me dominance as an would not use for me dominance as an would not use for me dominance as an ethologist has to do the prior with the ethologist has to do the prior with the ethologist has to do the prior with the priority of access to resources. So priority of access to resources. So priority of access to resources. So along the lines of priority of access to along the lines of priority of access to along the lines of priority of access to resources, when I got my puppy, I was resources, when I got my puppy, I was resources, when I got my puppy, I was taught in the dog training course that I taught in the dog training course that I taught in the dog training course that I took with him. Uh that I should eat and took with him. Uh that I should eat and took with him. Uh that I should eat and then he should eat. Um or that we could then he should eat. Um or that we could then he should eat. Um or that we could eat alongside one another different eat alongside one another different eat alongside one another different food. Although I confess I often fed him food. Although I confess I often fed him food. Although I confess I often fed him steak. Um if it was appropriate food for steak. Um if it was appropriate food for steak. Um if it was appropriate food for a bulldog, I fed it to him. Uh it as a bulldog, I fed it to him. Uh it as a bulldog, I fed it to him. Uh it as opposed to letting him eat before me opposed to letting him eat before me opposed to letting him eat before me because of this access to resources because of this access to resources because of this access to resources thing. Is there any truth to that? This thing. Is there any truth to that? This thing. Is there any truth to that? This is taught in a lot of uh dog/owner is taught in a lot of uh dog/owner is taught in a lot of uh dog/owner training because a lot of dog training because a lot of dog training because a lot of dog training is actually owner training. Yeah. is actually owner training. Yeah. is actually owner training. Yeah. Sure. I mean, you have to set up Yeah. Sure. I mean, you have to set up Yeah. Sure. I mean, you have to set up the situation to work for you and the situation to work for you and the situation to work for you and the animal, but again, I would not frame animal, but again, I would not frame animal, but again, I would not frame that in terms of uh dominance. Dogs that in terms of uh dominance. Dogs that in terms of uh dominance. Dogs uh form relationships with us, but as uh form relationships with us, but as uh form relationships with us, but as far as I know from the ethological far as I know from the ethological far as I know from the ethological perspective, we have no role in a perspective, we have no role in a perspective, we have no role in a dominance hierarchy among dogs. They dominance hierarchy among dogs. They dominance hierarchy among dogs. They know that we are different and they will know that we are different and they will know that we are different and they will respond they will learn to expect that respond they will learn to expect that respond they will learn to expect that if in this context that will happen in if in this context that will happen in if in this context that will happen in that context that will happen and so we that context that will happen and so we that context that will happen and so we can often reframe that uh from in a can often reframe that uh from in a can often reframe that uh from in a different learning system than different learning system than different learning system than dominance. That's a novel perspective because I That's a novel perspective because I That's a novel perspective because I think that so much of what's out there think that so much of what's out there think that so much of what's out there in terms of dog/owner training is really in terms of dog/owner training is really in terms of dog/owner training is really about um not so much dominance, but about um not so much dominance, but about um not so much dominance, but really trying to establish a really trying to establish a really trying to establish a relationship where it's clear that relationship where it's clear that relationship where it's clear that you're the caretaker to quote unquote you're the caretaker to quote unquote you're the caretaker to quote unquote make them feel safe um so that their job make them feel safe um so that their job make them feel safe um so that their job is very clear so they don't feel the is very clear so they don't feel the is very clear so they don't feel the anxiety of needing to perform roles that anxiety of needing to perform roles that anxiety of needing to perform roles that perhaps are yours. This is a lot like perhaps are yours. This is a lot like perhaps are yours. This is a lot like what you hear when you hear about parent what you hear when you hear about parent what you hear when you hear about parent child training basically. Um, so maybe child training basically. Um, so maybe child training basically. Um, so maybe given the sort of pattern of your given the sort of pattern of your given the sort of pattern of your answers over the last couple of answers over the last couple of answers over the last couple of questions, I should ask the question questions, I should ask the question questions, I should ask the question um, which is a really straightforward um, which is a really straightforward um, which is a really straightforward one, which is how do you think about one, which is how do you think about one, which is how do you think about animals? Like like what is your view of animals? Like like what is your view of animals? Like like what is your view of animals when you when you think about animals when you when you think about animals when you when you think about them? I know you're interested in their them? I know you're interested in their them? I know you're interested in their welfare and improving their well-being welfare and improving their well-being welfare and improving their well-being and um conditions, but how do you like and um conditions, but how do you like and um conditions, but how do you like when you see an animal? Um most people when you see an animal? Um most people when you see an animal? Um most people say, "Okay, well that's a dog, that's a say, "Okay, well that's a dog, that's a say, "Okay, well that's a dog, that's a horse, that's a parrot. Um can I horse, that's a parrot. Um can I horse, that's a parrot. Um can I interact with it? Maybe I don't want interact with it? Maybe I don't want interact with it? Maybe I don't want to." Or maybe I have a phobia. Who to." Or maybe I have a phobia. Who to." Or maybe I have a phobia. Who knows? But how do you think about knows? But how do you think about knows? But how do you think about animals? Like what's driving this animals? Like what's driving this animals? Like what's driving this inquiry in terms of their inquiry in terms of their inquiry in terms of their emotional and their cognitive life? emotional and their cognitive life? emotional and their cognitive life? First of all, I think that we humans are First of all, I think that we humans are First of all, I think that we humans are also an animal also an animal also an animal species and that we I we tend to species and that we I we tend to species and that we I we tend to sort of put ourselves on a pedestal and sort of put ourselves on a pedestal and sort of put ourselves on a pedestal and thinking that we are one and then thinking that we are one and then thinking that we are one and then animals are like this animals are like this animals are like this other as if it were homogeneous this other as if it were homogeneous this other as if it were homogeneous which is really isn't. So, so each which is really isn't. So, so each which is really isn't. So, so each animal species have their own adapt we animal species have their own adapt we animal species have their own adapt we have our own have our own have our own adaptations and each animal all the adaptations and each animal all the adaptations and each animal all the other animal species that we surround other animal species that we surround other animal species that we surround ourselves with do as well. So, um I ourselves with do as well. So, um I ourselves with do as well. So, um I don't know if that really answers your don't know if that really answers your don't know if that really answers your question, but uh I tend to so the work I question, but uh I tend to so the work I question, but uh I tend to so the work I do is to sort of try to help animals do is to sort of try to help animals do is to sort of try to help animals live better lives with humans. And that live better lives with humans. And that live better lives with humans. And that very often starts with understanding how very often starts with understanding how very often starts with understanding how that animal species would live in the that animal species would live in the that animal species would live in the wild and the type of life that they wild and the type of life that they wild and the type of life that they have, whether they're a predator, have, whether they're a predator, have, whether they're a predator, whether they're a prey animal species, whether they're a prey animal species, whether they're a prey animal species, uh how they process the world, the uh how they process the world, the uh how they process the world, the type of information that they take in. type of information that they take in. type of information that they take in. Um so for instance, we might see a dog Um so for instance, we might see a dog Um so for instance, we might see a dog who's wagging his tail, and we might who's wagging his tail, and we might who's wagging his tail, and we might think that it's only happy dogs that wag think that it's only happy dogs that wag think that it's only happy dogs that wag their tails, but actually tail wagging their tails, but actually tail wagging their tails, but actually tail wagging is seen in many different contexts. is seen in many different contexts. is seen in many different contexts. Uh, and we might think of it as a visual Uh, and we might think of it as a visual Uh, and we might think of it as a visual communication thing, but actually it communication thing, but actually it communication thing, but actually it could be that they're dispersing could be that they're dispersing could be that they're dispersing scent. The tail wag will sort of that scent. The tail wag will sort of that scent. The tail wag will sort of that scent will waft over to you so you can scent will waft over to you so you can scent will waft over to you so you can take in information about my current take in information about my current take in information about my current emotional state. They definitely have emotional state. They definitely have emotional state. They definitely have scent glands back there. Oh yeah. Yeah. scent glands back there. Oh yeah. Yeah. scent glands back there. Oh yeah. Yeah. Interesting. So, can we interpret dog Interesting. So, can we interpret dog Interesting. So, can we interpret dog wags of different types? Is there is wags of different types? Is there is wags of different types? Is there is there a way to do that? So one very there a way to do that? So one very there a way to do that? So one very interesting thing is that the dog interesting thing is that the dog interesting thing is that the dog wagging with a predominant left wag left wagging with a predominant left wag left wagging with a predominant left wag left for the dog. Left for the dog. So he's for the dog. Left for the dog. So he's for the dog. Left for the dog. So he's wagging on the left hand side of his wagging on the left hand side of his wagging on the left hand side of his body tends to be associated with body tends to be associated with body tends to be associated with negative emotional states and on the negative emotional states and on the negative emotional states and on the right tends to be associated with right tends to be associated with right tends to be associated with positive emotional states. Uh and positive emotional states. Uh and positive emotional states. Uh and the same cats tend to look at the world the same cats tend to look at the world the same cats tend to look at the world from the left when in a negative from the left when in a negative from the left when in a negative emotional state and from the right when emotional state and from the right when emotional state and from the right when in a positive emotional state. So in a positive emotional state. So in a positive emotional state. So looking from the left meaning the left looking from the left meaning the left looking from the left meaning the left eye slightly forward the head tilted. So eye slightly forward the head tilted. So eye slightly forward the head tilted. So the right eye taking in that information the right eye taking in that information the right eye taking in that information with this eye. So okay some people are with this eye. So okay some people are with this eye. So okay some people are just listening. They're not watching so just listening. They're not watching so just listening. They're not watching so they can't see this. So what um what they can't see this. So what um what they can't see this. So what um what Carolina is describing is if the Carolina is describing is if the Carolina is describing is if the head is turned slightly to the side. So head is turned slightly to the side. So head is turned slightly to the side. So the left eye is forward. Yeah, that's a the left eye is forward. Yeah, that's a the left eye is forward. Yeah, that's a um So they're looking at the stimulus um So they're looking at the stimulus um So they're looking at the stimulus with their left eye if that stimulus is with their left eye if that stimulus is with their left eye if that stimulus is fearinducing and the opposite to the fearinducing and the opposite to the fearinducing and the opposite to the right hand side if it's um more right hand side if it's um more right hand side if it's um more attractive to them or so this is attractive to them or so this is attractive to them or so this is lateralized. Interesting. And then the lateralized. Interesting. And then the lateralized. Interesting. And then the tail wag you said a dog wagging on the tail wag you said a dog wagging on the tail wag you said a dog wagging on the left hand side more negative right hand left hand side more negative right hand left hand side more negative right hand side and more positive. What about full side and more positive. What about full side and more positive. What about full sweeps? Yeah, full sweeps. And I don't sweeps? Yeah, full sweeps. And I don't sweeps? Yeah, full sweeps. And I don't know the details here, but certainly the know the details here, but certainly the know the details here, but certainly the type of tail wag, whether it's sort of type of tail wag, whether it's sort of type of tail wag, whether it's sort of very low and fast or whether it's high very low and fast or whether it's high very low and fast or whether it's high and sort of stiff, will communicate and sort of stiff, will communicate and sort of stiff, will communicate different emotional states. Do you think different emotional states. Do you think different emotional states. Do you think that over time we learn these signals that over time we learn these signals that over time we learn these signals without realizing that we learn these without realizing that we learn these without realizing that we learn these signals? Absolutely. Because we signals? Absolutely. Because we signals? Absolutely. Because we associate it with our dog being in a associate it with our dog being in a associate it with our dog being in a particular circumstance or behaving in a particular circumstance or behaving in a particular circumstance or behaving in a certain way. So studies have shown that certain way. So studies have shown that certain way. So studies have shown that we humans are actually um we learn that we humans are actually um we learn that we humans are actually um we learn to read dogs by exposure even passive to read dogs by exposure even passive to read dogs by exposure even passive exposure just living in an environment exposure just living in an environment exposure just living in an environment and apparently it's if we live in a and apparently it's if we live in a and apparently it's if we live in a culture where dogs live close with culture where dogs live close with culture where dogs live close with humans we get better in reading dogs and humans we get better in reading dogs and humans we get better in reading dogs and then in cultures where dogs don't then in cultures where dogs don't then in cultures where dogs don't interact that much with humans. Um, so interact that much with humans. Um, so interact that much with humans. Um, so there's that and there's also this the there's that and there's also this the there's that and there's also this the issue that we are typically better at issue that we are typically better at issue that we are typically better at reading gross body language than we are reading gross body language than we are reading gross body language than we are at reading facial expressions. at reading facial expressions. at reading facial expressions. Apparently, one of the reasons being Apparently, one of the reasons being Apparently, one of the reasons being that dogs move different facial that dogs move different facial that dogs move different facial muscles when they make emotional facial muscles when they make emotional facial muscles when they make emotional facial expressions, they move different muscles expressions, they move different muscles expressions, they move different muscles than what humans do. What can you tell than what humans do. What can you tell than what humans do. What can you tell us about the facial expressions of dogs? us about the facial expressions of dogs? us about the facial expressions of dogs? Well, there's been some studies in the Well, there's been some studies in the Well, there's been some studies in the last couple of years that have looked at last couple of years that have looked at last couple of years that have looked at which muscles are moving when in which muscles are moving when in which muscles are moving when in which contexts. which contexts. which contexts. So, uh so they'll expose the dog So, uh so they'll expose the dog So, uh so they'll expose the dog to different types of stimula and to different types of stimula and to different types of stimula and they'll look at they'll film the dog and they'll look at they'll film the dog and they'll look at they'll film the dog and look at what muscles are twitching, look at what muscles are twitching, look at what muscles are twitching, where is where is the face moving in where is where is the face moving in where is where is the face moving in response to these stimula. So those response to these stimula. So those response to these stimula. So those types of studies have found that types of studies have found that types of studies have found that you know when you when a dog is exposed you know when you when a dog is exposed you know when you when a dog is exposed to let's say thunder or firework sounds to let's say thunder or firework sounds to let's say thunder or firework sounds they will show a certain facial they will show a certain facial they will show a certain facial configuration when uh their owner configuration when uh their owner configuration when uh their owner returns home after not being seen for returns home after not being seen for returns home after not being seen for several hours. They will show a several hours. They will show a several hours. They will show a different facial configuration and so different facial configuration and so different facial configuration and so on. So it seems that they do show facial on. So it seems that they do show facial on. So it seems that they do show facial expressions. It's just that some of expressions. It's just that some of expressions. It's just that some of those facial expressions are it's not those facial expressions are it's not those facial expressions are it's not the same muscles that we show in the same muscles that we show in the same muscles that we show in the corresponding emotional state. So that corresponding emotional state. So that corresponding emotional state. So that would I think bias us to misreading dogs would I think bias us to misreading dogs would I think bias us to misreading dogs facial expressions facial expressions facial expressions uh from that perspective. But then again uh from that perspective. But then again uh from that perspective. But then again if we live with dogs we start we if we live with dogs we start we if we live with dogs we start we won't observe just the facial won't observe just the facial won't observe just the facial expression. We will observe the entire expression. We will observe the entire expression. We will observe the entire dog. And we're often better off reading dog. And we're often better off reading dog. And we're often better off reading their body language than we are reading their body language than we are reading their body language than we are reading their facial expression. Even though I their facial expression. Even though I their facial expression. Even though I think that studies also show that the think that studies also show that the think that studies also show that the face is where we look first. Which face is where we look first. Which face is where we look first. Which behaviors in dogs uh are maintained from behaviors in dogs uh are maintained from behaviors in dogs uh are maintained from interactions with other dogs uh when interactions with other dogs uh when interactions with other dogs uh when they interact with humans. For instance, they interact with humans. For instance, they interact with humans. For instance, um if uh one is going to like take a dog um if uh one is going to like take a dog um if uh one is going to like take a dog out on a walk and it's familiar with the out on a walk and it's familiar with the out on a walk and it's familiar with the sound of the leash coming off the sound of the leash coming off the sound of the leash coming off the hook or something like that, it's not hook or something like that, it's not hook or something like that, it's not uncommon for a dog to go into that long uncommon for a dog to go into that long uncommon for a dog to go into that long full um you know, front leg stretch that full um you know, front leg stretch that full um you know, front leg stretch that people call down dog, you know, in yoga. people call down dog, you know, in yoga. people call down dog, you know, in yoga. So, um and some people will say that's a So, um and some people will say that's a So, um and some people will say that's a kind of remnant of the puppy play um kind of remnant of the puppy play um kind of remnant of the puppy play um kind of stance. Again, people say this kind of stance. Again, people say this kind of stance. Again, people say this stuff. people are often stuff. people are often stuff. people are often selfappointed dog experts. This is kind selfappointed dog experts. This is kind selfappointed dog experts. This is kind of interesting like that. And the and of interesting like that. And the and of interesting like that. And the and I've learned this from researching it I've learned this from researching it I've learned this from researching it online that the various camps of online that the various camps of online that the various camps of quote unquote dog experts disagree quote unquote dog experts disagree quote unquote dog experts disagree vehemently with each other. I mean they vehemently with each other. I mean they vehemently with each other. I mean they write to me saying you know they're they write to me saying you know they're they write to me saying you know they're evil, this person is cruel that you know evil, this person is cruel that you know evil, this person is cruel that you know they blame each other of animal they blame each other of animal they blame each other of animal cruelty for different training um cruelty for different training um cruelty for different training um different training tools. We'll talk different training tools. We'll talk different training tools. We'll talk about that a little bit later. about that a little bit later. about that a little bit later. Um, dogs will do this uh down dog type uh dogs will do this uh down dog type uh dogs will do this uh down dog type uh movement, whatever it means, with other movement, whatever it means, with other movement, whatever it means, with other dogs and they'll do it with humans. Do dogs and they'll do it with humans. Do dogs and they'll do it with humans. Do you think it means the same thing in you think it means the same thing in you think it means the same thing in those two different contexts? Most those two different contexts? Most those two different contexts? Most probably does. That play bow that you're probably does. That play bow that you're probably does. That play bow that you're describing is what's referred to as a describing is what's referred to as a describing is what's referred to as a meta signal for play. So, it's typically meta signal for play. So, it's typically meta signal for play. So, it's typically shown in a play context. And I haven't shown in a play context. And I haven't shown in a play context. And I haven't seen it described, but then again, I'm seen it described, but then again, I'm seen it described, but then again, I'm not a dog owner. Uh, but I haven't seen not a dog owner. Uh, but I haven't seen not a dog owner. Uh, but I haven't seen it described in the context of let's it described in the context of let's it described in the context of let's go for a walk. But certainly in the play go for a walk. But certainly in the play go for a walk. But certainly in the play context, um, as far as I know, dogs play context, um, as far as I know, dogs play context, um, as far as I know, dogs play a bit differently with humans than they a bit differently with humans than they a bit differently with humans than they do with other dogs, but they do enjoy do with other dogs, but they do enjoy do with other dogs, but they do enjoy playing with humans. Uh and playing with humans. Uh and playing with humans. Uh and sometimes I think we humans have a hard sometimes I think we humans have a hard sometimes I think we humans have a hard time knowing whether what we're seeing time knowing whether what we're seeing time knowing whether what we're seeing is play or aggression because there will is play or aggression because there will is play or aggression because there will be elements from the aggressive be elements from the aggressive be elements from the aggressive repertoire within a play bow. But repertoire within a play bow. But repertoire within a play bow. But typically what we can do then is look typically what we can do then is look typically what we can do then is look for what's referred to as Mars MS. So M for what's referred to as Mars MS. So M for what's referred to as Mars MS. So M being the meta signals. So those play being the meta signals. So those play being the meta signals. So those play boughs or in other species it will be boughs or in other species it will be boughs or in other species it will be other behaviors that are sort of other behaviors that are sort of other behaviors that are sort of indicating that I want to play. Uh I indicating that I want to play. Uh I indicating that I want to play. Uh I know chimpanzees have like 30 or 50 know chimpanzees have like 30 or 50 know chimpanzees have like 30 or 50 different meta signals for play. Um M A different meta signals for play. Um M A different meta signals for play. Um M A is for activity shift. So we will see is for activity shift. So we will see is for activity shift. So we will see different behaviors. They might be different behaviors. They might be different behaviors. They might be chasing, they might be pouncing, they chasing, they might be pouncing, they chasing, they might be pouncing, they might be wrestling, biting each other. might be wrestling, biting each other. might be wrestling, biting each other. Uh but you'll see these activity shifts Uh but you'll see these activity shifts Uh but you'll see these activity shifts and it's not in the same order as it and it's not in the same order as it and it's not in the same order as it would be if they were truly fighting. would be if they were truly fighting. would be if they were truly fighting. uh M A R is for roll reversals. So uh M A R is for roll reversals. So uh M A R is for roll reversals. So you'll see that the dog uh the dogs you'll see that the dog uh the dogs you'll see that the dog uh the dogs if they're of different sizes or if they're of different sizes or if they're of different sizes or different um sort of stamina or how big different um sort of stamina or how big different um sort of stamina or how big they are or how um competent fighters they are or how um competent fighters they are or how um competent fighters they are would be that they'll take they are would be that they'll take they are would be that they'll take turns winning and losing. Yeah, I've turns winning and losing. Yeah, I've turns winning and losing. Yeah, I've seen that. Yeah, because they it's not seen that. Yeah, because they it's not seen that. Yeah, because they it's not fun playing if you lose all the time. So fun playing if you lose all the time. So fun playing if you lose all the time. So in order to keep playing, the bigger dog in order to keep playing, the bigger dog in order to keep playing, the bigger dog needs to lose sometimes. So they needs to lose sometimes. So they needs to lose sometimes. So they need to in order to keep this need to in order to keep this need to in order to keep this interaction going uh that's the way to interaction going uh that's the way to interaction going uh that's the way to do that. And the last one S is self- do that. And the last one S is self- do that. And the last one S is self- handicap. So the larger dog will handicap. So the larger dog will handicap. So the larger dog will self-handicap themselves. You might see self-handicap themselves. You might see self-handicap themselves. You might see them doing a tugofwar and the large them doing a tugofwar and the large them doing a tugofwar and the large dog is just standing there and large dog is just standing there and large dog is just standing there and holding the thing and the small dog is holding the thing and the small dog is holding the thing and the small dog is like pulling and really trying to like pulling and really trying to like pulling and really trying to get the thing and the big dog is just get the thing and the big dog is just get the thing and the big dog is just standing there doing nothing. But then standing there doing nothing. But then standing there doing nothing. But then if a human takes over the toy and starts if a human takes over the toy and starts if a human takes over the toy and starts pulling, then the big dog will engage pulling, then the big dog will engage pulling, then the big dog will engage and start showing more of his strength and start showing more of his strength and start showing more of his strength and escalate that behavior. That's a and escalate that behavior. That's a and escalate that behavior. That's a beautiful thing when you see animals beautiful thing when you see animals beautiful thing when you see animals adjusting their level of kind of vigor adjusting their level of kind of vigor adjusting their level of kind of vigor in play so that the play can continue. in play so that the play can continue. in play so that the play can continue. It's very sweet. I mean, it speaks to It's very sweet. I mean, it speaks to It's very sweet. I mean, it speaks to a bigger question, which is uh do dogs a bigger question, which is uh do dogs a bigger question, which is uh do dogs have empathy? Oh, I think so. have empathy? Oh, I think so. have empathy? Oh, I think so. Absolutely. I can't say I've seen any studies I can't say I've seen any studies I can't say I've seen any studies on it, but just uh yeah, I mean, I on it, but just uh yeah, I mean, I on it, but just uh yeah, I mean, I think I think so. Many uh dog owners are think I think so. Many uh dog owners are think I think so. Many uh dog owners are familiar with when uh we're grieving. Um familiar with when uh we're grieving. Um familiar with when uh we're grieving. Um a dog will often come closer as opposed a dog will often come closer as opposed a dog will often come closer as opposed to moving further away. Um I mean, I've to moving further away. Um I mean, I've to moving further away. Um I mean, I've seen some incredible moments. You know, seen some incredible moments. You know, seen some incredible moments. You know, we interpret these things, right? We we interpret these things, right? We we interpret these things, right? We anthropomorphize, but I had someone in anthropomorphize, but I had someone in anthropomorphize, but I had someone in my home years ago who was grieving a my home years ago who was grieving a my home years ago who was grieving a death in her family and costel him a death in her family and costel him a death in her family and costel him and you know put a paw on her knee and you know put a paw on her knee and you know put a paw on her knee and it's hard to not interpret that um as a it's hard to not interpret that um as a it's hard to not interpret that um as a meaningful moment of empathy and who a meaningful moment of empathy and who a meaningful moment of empathy and who knows what he was experiencing. Maybe he knows what he was experiencing. Maybe he knows what he was experiencing. Maybe he was experiencing distress for all I know was experiencing distress for all I know was experiencing distress for all I know but it the more pleasant but it the more pleasant but it the more pleasant interpretation is that he wanted to interpretation is that he wanted to interpretation is that he wanted to extend comfort. I think it makes sense extend comfort. I think it makes sense extend comfort. I think it makes sense from the evolutionary perspective that from the evolutionary perspective that from the evolutionary perspective that social animals who live in a co cohesive social animals who live in a co cohesive social animals who live in a co cohesive social group uh are good at reading each social group uh are good at reading each social group uh are good at reading each other's uh emotional state and also uh other's uh emotional state and also uh other's uh emotional state and also uh good at sort of trying to buffer good at sort of trying to buffer good at sort of trying to buffer negative emotions if it's possible to negative emotions if it's possible to negative emotions if it's possible to do that. And so I would expect it with do that. And so I would expect it with do that. And so I would expect it with the any of the sort of more cognitively the any of the sort of more cognitively the any of the sort of more cognitively advanced species, I would expect some advanced species, I would expect some advanced species, I would expect some type of empathy. I'd like to take a type of empathy. I'd like to take a type of empathy. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also contains adaptogens. I drink that also contains adaptogens. I drink that also contains adaptogens. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, started taking AG1 way back in 2012, started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I even knew what a podcast long before I even knew what a podcast long before I even knew what a podcast was. I started taking it and I still was. I started taking it and I still was. I started taking it and I still take it every single day because it take it every single day because it take it every single day because it ensures that I meet my quota for daily ensures that I meet my quota for daily ensures that I meet my quota for daily vitamins and minerals and it helps make vitamins and minerals and it helps make vitamins and minerals and it helps make sure that I get enough prebiotics and sure that I get enough prebiotics and sure that I get enough prebiotics and probiotics to support my gut health. probiotics to support my gut health. probiotics to support my gut health. Over the past 10 years, gut health has Over the past 10 years, gut health has Over the past 10 years, gut health has emerged as something that we realize is emerged as something that we realize is emerged as something that we realize is important not only for the health of our important not only for the health of our important not only for the health of our digestion, but also for our immune digestion, but also for our immune digestion, but also for our immune system and for the production of system and for the production of system and for the production of neurotransmitters and neurom modulators, neurotransmitters and neurom modulators, neurotransmitters and neurom modulators, things like dopamine and serotonin. In things like dopamine and serotonin. In things like dopamine and serotonin. In other words, gut health is critical for other words, gut health is critical for other words, gut health is critical for proper brain function. Now, of course, I proper brain function. Now, of course, I proper brain function. Now, of course, I strive to eat healthy whole foods from strive to eat healthy whole foods from strive to eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed sources for the majority of unprocessed sources for the majority of unprocessed sources for the majority of my nutritional intake. But there are a my nutritional intake. But there are a my nutritional intake. But there are a number of things in AG1, including number of things in AG1, including number of things in AG1, including specific micronutrients that are hard or specific micronutrients that are hard or specific micronutrients that are hard or impossible to get from whole foods. So, impossible to get from whole foods. So, impossible to get from whole foods. So, by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins and minerals that I need along with the and minerals that I need along with the and minerals that I need along with the probiotics and prebiotics for gut health probiotics and prebiotics for gut health probiotics and prebiotics for gut health and in turn brain and immune system and in turn brain and immune system and in turn brain and immune system health and the adaptogens and critical health and the adaptogens and critical health and the adaptogens and critical micronutrients that are essential for micronutrients that are essential for micronutrients that are essential for all organs and tissues of the body. So, all organs and tissues of the body. So, all organs and tissues of the body. So, anytime somebody asks me if they were to anytime somebody asks me if they were to anytime somebody asks me if they were to only take one supplement, what that only take one supplement, what that only take one supplement, what that supplement should be, I always say AG1 supplement should be, I always say AG1 supplement should be, I always say AG1 because AG1 supports so many different because AG1 supports so many different because AG1 supports so many different systems in the brain and body that systems in the brain and body that systems in the brain and body that relate to our mental health, physical relate to our mental health, physical relate to our mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drink to try AG1, you can go to drink to try AG1, you can go to drink AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before in this podcast, I've highlighted before in this podcast, I've highlighted before in this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 have been shown to help with everything have been shown to help with everything have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to heart from mood and brain health to heart from mood and brain health to heart health and healthy hormone production health and healthy hormone production health and healthy hormone production and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also subscription. Today's episode is also subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by JWV. JWV makes medical brought to us by JWV. JWV makes medical brought to us by JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if grade red light therapy devices. Now, if grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have there's one thing that I have there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light it is the incredible impact that light it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in can have on our biology. Now, in can have on our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near addition to sunlight, red light and near addition to sunlight, red light and near infrared light sources have been shown infrared light sources have been shown infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving to have positive effects on improving to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellar and organ numerous aspects of cellar and organ numerous aspects of cellar and organ health, including faster muscle health, including faster muscle health, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound recovery, improved skin health and wound recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced healing, improvements in acne, reduced healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even pain and inflammation, even pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving mitochondrial function, and improving mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. What sets THW lights vision itself. What sets THW lights vision itself. What sets THW lights apart and why they're my preferred red apart and why they're my preferred red apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use light therapy device is that they use light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and specific wavelengths of red light and specific wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to near infrared light in combination to near infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week panel about three to four times a week panel about three to four times a week and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to try JWV, you can go to JV spelled jvv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an jvv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an jvv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off JUF listeners with up to $400 off JUF listeners with up to $400 off JUF products. Again, that's JWV spelled products. Again, that's JWV spelled products. Again, that's JWV spelled JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. I've always been I've always been I've always been um delighted and um delighted and um delighted and uh curious about the fact that if two uh curious about the fact that if two uh curious about the fact that if two animals of the same species both receive animals of the same species both receive animals of the same species both receive food or a treat. It seems I don't know food or a treat. It seems I don't know food or a treat. It seems I don't know but uh it seems that they are paying but uh it seems that they are paying but uh it seems that they are paying attention to how much treat the other is attention to how much treat the other is attention to how much treat the other is getting. And as a sibling, I have an getting. And as a sibling, I have an getting. And as a sibling, I have an older sister who I get along very well older sister who I get along very well older sister who I get along very well with um and always have, but when we with um and always have, but when we with um and always have, but when we were kids, I'll never forget like um if were kids, I'll never forget like um if were kids, I'll never forget like um if there was a treat like a milkshake or there was a treat like a milkshake or there was a treat like a milkshake or something, she would point out that she something, she would point out that she something, she would point out that she had slightly more than I did. Um if had slightly more than I did. Um if had slightly more than I did. Um if there was a slice of cake or something, there was a slice of cake or something, there was a slice of cake or something, it was as much as we would look at the it was as much as we would look at the it was as much as we would look at the slice of cake being served to us, we the slice of cake being served to us, we the slice of cake being served to us, we were looking to see how much uh the were looking to see how much uh the were looking to see how much uh the other one got. And this was a reflexive other one got. And this was a reflexive other one got. And this was a reflexive thing. And we're not competitive in thing. And we're not competitive in thing. And we're not competitive in any dimension really. Uh we've always any dimension really. Uh we've always any dimension really. Uh we've always respected each other's strengths and respected each other's strengths and respected each other's strengths and weaknesses in a way that's very and weaknesses in a way that's very and weaknesses in a way that's very uh complimentary. But when it comes to uh complimentary. But when it comes to uh complimentary. But when it comes to treats, humans and dogs pay a lot of attention humans and dogs pay a lot of attention humans and dogs pay a lot of attention Oh yeah. to who's getting what. Oh yeah. to who's getting what. Oh yeah. to who's getting what. Fairness. Yeah. There was this uh Fairness. Yeah. There was this uh Fairness. Yeah. There was this uh experiment done on capuchin monkeys by experiment done on capuchin monkeys by experiment done on capuchin monkeys by France Dval and his team. Um and France Dval and his team. Um and France Dval and his team. Um and apparently they did it and they apparently they did it and they apparently they did it and they published a paper on it and you know published a paper on it and you know published a paper on it and you know nobody read it and then like a decade nobody read it and then like a decade nobody read it and then like a decade later uh in preparation for a presentation uh in preparation for a presentation uh in preparation for a presentation they redid some of the experiment and they redid some of the experiment and they redid some of the experiment and filmed it and he shared that on and filmed it and he shared that on and filmed it and he shared that on the presentation. I don't know if you've the presentation. I don't know if you've the presentation. I don't know if you've seen it, but essentially it's two seen it, but essentially it's two seen it, but essentially it's two capuchin monkeys and they're next to one capuchin monkeys and they're next to one capuchin monkeys and they're next to one another so they can each see what the another so they can each see what the another so they can each see what the other is getting and they're asked to do other is getting and they're asked to do other is getting and they're asked to do a task like give a the researcher hands a task like give a the researcher hands a task like give a the researcher hands them a rock and they hand it back to the them a rock and they hand it back to the them a rock and they hand it back to the researcher and then they get a researcher and then they get a researcher and then they get a reinforcer so a treat as payment for reinforcer so a treat as payment for reinforcer so a treat as payment for that behavior. And so the first uh that behavior. And so the first uh that behavior. And so the first uh monkey uh gets a piece of cucumber and monkey uh gets a piece of cucumber and monkey uh gets a piece of cucumber and he's happy. He eats that cucumber and he's happy. He eats that cucumber and he's happy. He eats that cucumber and then the researcher turns towards then the researcher turns towards then the researcher turns towards the second um monkey and requests the second um monkey and requests the second um monkey and requests the same behavior, gets the same behavior same behavior, gets the same behavior same behavior, gets the same behavior and feeds that animal a and feeds that animal a and feeds that animal a grape and capuchins grape and capuchins grape and capuchins uh are not too enthusiastic about uh are not too enthusiastic about uh are not too enthusiastic about cucumbers, but they really love grapes. cucumbers, but they really love grapes. cucumbers, but they really love grapes. So when she then turns back to the first So when she then turns back to the first So when she then turns back to the first monkey again and repeats the monkey again and repeats the monkey again and repeats the behavior and again feeds that one a behavior and again feeds that one a behavior and again feeds that one a cucumber that he was happy to eat like cucumber that he was happy to eat like cucumber that he was happy to eat like 30 seconds ago. He actually throws a 30 seconds ago. He actually throws a 30 seconds ago. He actually throws a tantrum and throws it back at the tantrum and throws it back at the tantrum and throws it back at the researcher sort of going, I saw that you researcher sort of going, I saw that you researcher sort of going, I saw that you fed the other guy a grape. Uh and the fed the other guy a grape. Uh and the fed the other guy a grape. Uh and the audience is laughing. So it's like audience is laughing. So it's like audience is laughing. So it's like I think we all recognize that situation I think we all recognize that situation I think we all recognize that situation that we take a front to somebody else that we take a front to somebody else that we take a front to somebody else getting paid better for the same quality getting paid better for the same quality getting paid better for the same quality of work. Yeah. I'm always interested in of work. Yeah. I'm always interested in of work. Yeah. I'm always interested in these studies um that every few years these studies um that every few years these studies um that every few years something I didn't know that one so something I didn't know that one so something I didn't know that one so thank you for sharing that where there's thank you for sharing that where there's thank you for sharing that where there's something about resource allocation something about resource allocation something about resource allocation that's revealed and then for every one that's revealed and then for every one that's revealed and then for every one of those there will be a study that of those there will be a study that of those there will be a study that shows for instance uh I'm not going to shows for instance uh I'm not going to shows for instance uh I'm not going to get the details right here but um that get the details right here but um that get the details right here but um that crows uh will um teach each other ways crows uh will um teach each other ways crows uh will um teach each other ways to open boxes so that another one can to open boxes so that another one can to open boxes so that another one can get food even if they don't have access get food even if they don't have access get food even if they don't have access to that food um just it seems like an to that food um just it seems like an to that food um just it seems like an act of altruism So we'll see fairness. act of altruism So we'll see fairness. act of altruism So we'll see fairness. We'll see altruism. Oh yes. And every member of a species is just And every member of a species is just And every member of a species is just trying to get the most that they trying to get the most that they trying to get the most that they possibly can even at the expense of possibly can even at the expense of possibly can even at the expense of others. It's it's beautiful in a way and others. It's it's beautiful in a way and others. It's it's beautiful in a way and we again have to be careful not to we again have to be careful not to we again have to be careful not to anthropomorphize to not assume that anthropomorphize to not assume that anthropomorphize to not assume that members of a species are doing this members of a species are doing this members of a species are doing this because they're benevolent. That's a because they're benevolent. That's a because they're benevolent. That's a nice I like that interpretation. But nice I like that interpretation. But nice I like that interpretation. But maybe as you pointed out before that maybe as you pointed out before that maybe as you pointed out before that having a happy group makes having a happy group makes having a happy group makes for more happiness for oneself. for more happiness for oneself. for more happiness for oneself. Absolutely. I think if the if the group Absolutely. I think if the if the group Absolutely. I think if the if the group is doing well then everybody is better is doing well then everybody is better is doing well then everybody is better off. So there's we used to off. So there's we used to off. So there's we used to think that there was just sort of think that there was just sort of think that there was just sort of individual selection but there is a individual selection but there is a individual selection but there is a certain amount of group selection also. certain amount of group selection also. certain amount of group selection also. The individual selection is stronger but The individual selection is stronger but The individual selection is stronger but certainly if there's a group that certainly if there's a group that certainly if there's a group that collaborates better that will do better collaborates better that will do better collaborates better that will do better than the group that isn't collaborating than the group that isn't collaborating than the group that isn't collaborating as well. as well. as well. And it's interesting you've mentioned a And it's interesting you've mentioned a And it's interesting you've mentioned a few times now the risk of few times now the risk of few times now the risk of anthropomorphism. And I think that the if we look at that And I think that the if we look at that And I think that the if we look at that as a sort of um a continuum from as a sort of um a continuum from as a sort of um a continuum from anthropomorphism which we might then anthropomorphism which we might then anthropomorphism which we might then define as you know thinking that animals define as you know thinking that animals define as you know thinking that animals are just the same as humans. It's only are just the same as humans. It's only are just the same as humans. It's only just that they have some fur. So they're just that they have some fur. So they're just that they have some fur. So they're a bit different but more or less the a bit different but more or less the a bit different but more or less the same. And on the other side is what we same. And on the other side is what we same. And on the other side is what we might refer to as anthropo denial. That might refer to as anthropo denial. That might refer to as anthropo denial. That was a term coined also by France Dval, was a term coined also by France Dval, was a term coined also by France Dval, the one with the capuchin the one with the capuchin the one with the capuchin experiment. Uh where we don't experiment. Uh where we don't experiment. Uh where we don't recognize that in fact there are recognize that in fact there are recognize that in fact there are commonalities between humans and other commonalities between humans and other commonalities between humans and other animal species. And I think that we in animal species. And I think that we in animal species. And I think that we in our sort of fear of anthropomorphism, we our sort of fear of anthropomorphism, we our sort of fear of anthropomorphism, we have fallen into anthropo denial. And I have fallen into anthropo denial. And I have fallen into anthropo denial. And I think that the answer is probably think that the answer is probably think that the answer is probably somewhere in the middle that we do share somewhere in the middle that we do share somewhere in the middle that we do share lots of commonalities with animals. I lots of commonalities with animals. I lots of commonalities with animals. I think that for instance, even though our think that for instance, even though our think that for instance, even though our perception of the world might be really perception of the world might be really perception of the world might be really different, how we process that different, how we process that different, how we process that information and the types of information and the types of information and the types of emotional and mood emotional and mood emotional and mood um responses, the changes in mood that um responses, the changes in mood that um responses, the changes in mood that we get in response to the environment we get in response to the environment we get in response to the environment are very much the same. Although it will are very much the same. Although it will are very much the same. Although it will be different stimula that be different stimula that be different stimula that um that different animal species pay um that different animal species pay um that different animal species pay attention to that are more or less attention to that are more or less attention to that are more or less relevant to them depending on which relevant to them depending on which relevant to them depending on which species it is. But I think that we've species it is. But I think that we've species it is. But I think that we've fallen into we've so avoided we've fallen into we've so avoided we've fallen into we've so avoided this topic of this topic of this topic of anthropomorphism. We've been so afraid anthropomorphism. We've been so afraid anthropomorphism. We've been so afraid of it that we've fallen into the other of it that we've fallen into the other of it that we've fallen into the other trap which is sort of denying that they trap which is sort of denying that they trap which is sort of denying that they have anything to do with us. have anything to do with us. have anything to do with us. Let's talk about a species that um can Let's talk about a species that um can Let's talk about a species that um can be divisive. Cats. Oh, my sister has cats divisive. Cats. Oh, my sister has cats divisive. Cats. Oh, my sister has cats and I don't mind them. I can't say I and I don't mind them. I can't say I and I don't mind them. I can't say I gravitate toward them, but I don't gravitate toward them, but I don't gravitate toward them, but I don't dislike them. You do own a cat. Y and dislike them. You do own a cat. Y and dislike them. You do own a cat. Y and you're an animal ethologist. you're an animal ethologist. you're an animal ethologist. Tell us about cats from the perspective Tell us about cats from the perspective Tell us about cats from the perspective of an animal ethologist. When you look of an animal ethologist. When you look of an animal ethologist. When you look at a cat, what do you what are you at a cat, what do you what are you at a cat, what do you what are you looking for to tell you something about looking for to tell you something about looking for to tell you something about whether or not it's a friendly cat? I whether or not it's a friendly cat? I whether or not it's a friendly cat? I mean, obviously, if it's hair standing mean, obviously, if it's hair standing mean, obviously, if it's hair standing up on its back and it's arching and it's up on its back and it's arching and it's up on its back and it's arching and it's hissing, that's obvious, but what are hissing, that's obvious, but what are hissing, that's obvious, but what are you looking at in the context of the way you looking at in the context of the way you looking at in the context of the way that cats um evolved and their that cats um evolved and their that cats um evolved and their species in general? M so the common species in general? M so the common species in general? M so the common house cat that we have today as a pet um house cat that we have today as a pet um house cat that we have today as a pet um evolved as a solitary hunter um evolved as a solitary hunter um evolved as a solitary hunter uh but that aggregates in social groups uh but that aggregates in social groups uh but that aggregates in social groups um loose social group. So they sort of um loose social group. So they sort of um loose social group. So they sort of hang out together but it's not this hang out together but it's not this hang out together but it's not this really uh cohesive group and they hunt uh cohesive group and they hunt uh cohesive group and they hunt on their own so they'll eat on their own on their own so they'll eat on their own on their own so they'll eat on their own also. And me as an mythologist, what I also. And me as an mythologist, what I also. And me as an mythologist, what I tend to do when I look at an animal tend to do when I look at an animal tend to do when I look at an animal species is I look at three things. I species is I look at three things. I species is I look at three things. I look at their social look at their social look at their social environment. So typically with cats, I environment. So typically with cats, I environment. So typically with cats, I would then say that they, you know, um would then say that they, you know, um would then say that they, you know, um they should if they are raised well, so they should if they are raised well, so they should if they are raised well, so they've had the opportunity of they've had the opportunity of they've had the opportunity of spending enough time with mom, typically spending enough time with mom, typically spending enough time with mom, typically it should be up to 14 weeks, which I it should be up to 14 weeks, which I it should be up to 14 weeks, which I think that we see that in Sweden think that we see that in Sweden think that we see that in Sweden nowadays. I don't know how it is here in nowadays. I don't know how it is here in nowadays. I don't know how it is here in the US, but that seems to be uh long the US, but that seems to be uh long the US, but that seems to be uh long enough for the animal to actually learn enough for the animal to actually learn enough for the animal to actually learn how to be a cat so that they don't get how to be a cat so that they don't get how to be a cat so that they don't get too emotionally disturbed by the too emotionally disturbed by the too emotionally disturbed by the separation once we wean them and separation once we wean them and separation once we wean them and sort of put them in a new environment. sort of put them in a new environment. sort of put them in a new environment. So, so just looking at the social bit is So, so just looking at the social bit is So, so just looking at the social bit is one thing that I do. The first thing one thing that I do. The first thing one thing that I do. The first thing that I do, the second thing that I do is that I do, the second thing that I do is that I do, the second thing that I do is I look at how do they get food. I look at how do they get food. I look at how do they get food. So again, cats are solitary hunters. So again, cats are solitary hunters. So again, cats are solitary hunters. So I would look into ways of and they I would look into ways of and they I would look into ways of and they as opposed to dogs, cats typically as opposed to dogs, cats typically as opposed to dogs, cats typically retain the whole hunting sequence. Uh retain the whole hunting sequence. Uh retain the whole hunting sequence. Uh sometimes the killing bite isn't quite sometimes the killing bite isn't quite sometimes the killing bite isn't quite there, but certainly the grab bite. And there, but certainly the grab bite. And there, but certainly the grab bite. And the fact that some cats will if they're the fact that some cats will if they're the fact that some cats will if they're it's an outdoor cat that they might it's an outdoor cat that they might it's an outdoor cat that they might bring their prey back home is to me is bring their prey back home is to me is bring their prey back home is to me is simply it's not that they want to gift simply it's not that they want to gift simply it's not that they want to gift you with uh their uh their kill, but you with uh their uh their kill, but you with uh their uh their kill, but rather that they feel safe in so they're rather that they feel safe in so they're rather that they feel safe in so they're simply bringing their uh um their prey simply bringing their uh um their prey simply bringing their uh um their prey to a place where they feel safe. So it's to a place where they feel safe. So it's to a place where they feel safe. So it's not a gift. We can put that one to rest. not a gift. We can put that one to rest. not a gift. We can put that one to rest. I wouldn't say I would not call that a I wouldn't say I would not call that a I wouldn't say I would not call that a gift. I had a girlfriend in graduate gift. I had a girlfriend in graduate gift. I had a girlfriend in graduate school and her cat would catch these school and her cat would catch these school and her cat would catch these very large mice and put them in our very large mice and put them in our very large mice and put them in our shoes at night. It was dreadful. Would shoes at night. It was dreadful. Would shoes at night. It was dreadful. Would the cat put them in the shoes or would the cat put them in the shoes or would the cat put them in the shoes or would the mice hide in the shoes? Well, they the mice hide in the shoes? Well, they the mice hide in the shoes? Well, they were dead when we found them. So, I'm were dead when we found them. So, I'm were dead when we found them. So, I'm assuming that the cat the cat would put assuming that the cat the cat would put assuming that the cat the cat would put them in the shoes. The cat also loved to them in the shoes. The cat also loved to them in the shoes. The cat also loved to retrieve tin foil balls. Little tin foil retrieve tin foil balls. Little tin foil retrieve tin foil balls. Little tin foil balls. I've never seen a cat retrieve. balls. I've never seen a cat retrieve. balls. I've never seen a cat retrieve. Oh, yeah. Yeah. At first, I didn't learn Oh, yeah. Yeah. At first, I didn't learn Oh, yeah. Yeah. At first, I didn't learn that. I wasn't too enthusiastic about that. I wasn't too enthusiastic about that. I wasn't too enthusiastic about the cat and then I developed a really the cat and then I developed a really the cat and then I developed a really close relationship with it. At least close relationship with it. At least close relationship with it. At least from my side, I thought it was a close from my side, I thought it was a close from my side, I thought it was a close relationship. Um, and he would catch relationship. Um, and he would catch relationship. Um, and he would catch mice, put them in our shoes at night mice, put them in our shoes at night mice, put them in our shoes at night while we slept. It was pretty while we slept. It was pretty while we slept. It was pretty unpleasant. You had to check your shoes unpleasant. You had to check your shoes unpleasant. You had to check your shoes in the morning. So, those weren't gifts. in the morning. So, those weren't gifts. in the morning. So, those weren't gifts. I would not assume that they were gifts. I would not assume that they were gifts. I would not assume that they were gifts. No. I from what I know. And cats No. I from what I know. And cats No. I from what I know. And cats will sort of bring back what will sort of bring back what will sort of bring back what they what they um catch to a place where they what they um catch to a place where they what they um catch to a place where they feel safe. Then they often lose they feel safe. Then they often lose they feel safe. Then they often lose interest if it's not moving anymore. So interest if it's not moving anymore. So interest if it's not moving anymore. So and if obviously if your cat or So and if obviously if your cat or So and if obviously if your cat or that cat killed the mice, they had that cat killed the mice, they had that cat killed the mice, they had that cat had progressed to the actual killing cat had progressed to the actual killing cat had progressed to the actual killing bite. Many cats don't do that. They only bite. Many cats don't do that. They only bite. Many cats don't do that. They only had the grab bite. So they'll had the grab bite. So they'll had the grab bite. So they'll just let the little rodent go to run just let the little rodent go to run just let the little rodent go to run off. I've seen that where they'll play off. I've seen that where they'll play off. I've seen that where they'll play with them, right? Yeah. So, so they'll with them, right? Yeah. So, so they'll with them, right? Yeah. So, so they'll let it go and if the mouse is still, let it go and if the mouse is still, let it go and if the mouse is still, they can actually sort of escape they can actually sort of escape they can actually sort of escape attention because the animal the cat attention because the animal the cat attention because the animal the cat might grow bored and walk away. But the might grow bored and walk away. But the might grow bored and walk away. But the moment they start moving it again, then moment they start moving it again, then moment they start moving it again, then they're sort of restarting that they're sort of restarting that they're sort of restarting that whole um predatory sequence again. But whole um predatory sequence again. But whole um predatory sequence again. But back to your question about how to back to your question about how to back to your question about how to interact with cats or whether how to interact with cats or whether how to interact with cats or whether how to read them. So that would be the third read them. So that would be the third read them. So that would be the third thing that I'm looking at is how do the thing that I'm looking at is how do the thing that I'm looking at is how do the animal species in front of me, how do animal species in front of me, how do animal species in front of me, how do they respond to perceived threat? And they respond to perceived threat? And they respond to perceived threat? And I'm saying perceived threat here because I'm saying perceived threat here because I'm saying perceived threat here because sometimes we are well intended. We're sometimes we are well intended. We're sometimes we are well intended. We're like hi and we want to we want to hug like hi and we want to we want to hug like hi and we want to we want to hug them because we're primates and they them because we're primates and they them because we're primates and they really don't like that. So so they will really don't like that. So so they will really don't like that. So so they will respond to us as if we were a predator. respond to us as if we were a predator. respond to us as if we were a predator. And um I think that again comes down And um I think that again comes down And um I think that again comes down very much to the types of interaction, very much to the types of interaction, very much to the types of interaction, social interactions, the type of social interactions, the type of social interactions, the type of learning that the animal has had learning that the animal has had learning that the animal has had when they're really young. So for when they're really young. So for when they're really young. So for instance, there's a study showing that instance, there's a study showing that instance, there's a study showing that if you handle young kittens between the if you handle young kittens between the if you handle young kittens between the ages of like two and eight weeks for at ages of like two and eight weeks for at ages of like two and eight weeks for at least an hour a day. And and when I say least an hour a day. And and when I say least an hour a day. And and when I say handle, I just mean that sort of handle, I just mean that sort of handle, I just mean that sort of interact with them and play and have interact with them and play and have interact with them and play and have them sort of on your lap. and so on. them sort of on your lap. and so on. them sort of on your lap. and so on. They will become very social as adults. They will become very social as adults. They will become very social as adults. So, they will be the type of cat that So, they will be the type of cat that So, they will be the type of cat that will jump up into your lap and fall will jump up into your lap and fall will jump up into your lap and fall asleep purring. If you interact with asleep purring. If you interact with asleep purring. If you interact with that young kitten less than uh like 15 that young kitten less than uh like 15 that young kitten less than uh like 15 minutes a day, they won't be fearful of minutes a day, they won't be fearful of minutes a day, they won't be fearful of humans, but they'll be more like walking humans, but they'll be more like walking humans, but they'll be more like walking up to you and saying hi and then walking up to you and saying hi and then walking up to you and saying hi and then walking away. The aloof cat. The aloof cat. away. The aloof cat. The aloof cat. away. The aloof cat. The aloof cat. Yeah. So, so I think the early life Yeah. So, so I think the early life Yeah. So, so I think the early life experiences can really shape the type of experiences can really shape the type of experiences can really shape the type of temperament if you will or how sort of temperament if you will or how sort of temperament if you will or how sort of vigorously animals respond to changes in vigorously animals respond to changes in vigorously animals respond to changes in the environment. What is this behavior the environment. What is this behavior the environment. What is this behavior of bumping uh where the cat bumps its of bumping uh where the cat bumps its of bumping uh where the cat bumps its head against you or your arm? Uh is it head against you or your arm? Uh is it head against you or your arm? Uh is it to um spread smell? Yeah, I would say to um spread smell? Yeah, I would say to um spread smell? Yeah, I would say that is scent marking. Yeah. So, and that is scent marking. Yeah. So, and that is scent marking. Yeah. So, and when they're scent marking you Yeah. when they're scent marking you Yeah. when they're scent marking you Yeah. Why are they scent marking? I would Why are they scent marking? I would Why are they scent marking? I would think that it's like something you think that it's like something you think that it's like something you do in your group. You do mutual scent do in your group. You do mutual scent do in your group. You do mutual scent marking, which means that everybody in marking, which means that everybody in marking, which means that everybody in the group smells more or less the same. the group smells more or less the same. the group smells more or less the same. So, it's a it's a way of sort of So, it's a it's a way of sort of So, it's a it's a way of sort of greeting and incorporating the others in greeting and incorporating the others in greeting and incorporating the others in the group. So, there will be a lot of the group. So, there will be a lot of the group. So, there will be a lot of scent exchange within scent exchange within scent exchange within uh this type of species living in a uh this type of species living in a uh this type of species living in a group. That would be my guess as to why group. That would be my guess as to why group. That would be my guess as to why they do that. So, is scent marking about they do that. So, is scent marking about they do that. So, is scent marking about territory as well? like if a cat, you territory as well? like if a cat, you territory as well? like if a cat, you know, scent marks in corners and Oh, know, scent marks in corners and Oh, know, scent marks in corners and Oh, yeah. They But that's a different that's yeah. They But that's a different that's yeah. They But that's a different that's typically not the because they have like typically not the because they have like typically not the because they have like multiple scent glands in the face that multiple scent glands in the face that multiple scent glands in the face that are and one of them is used to scent are and one of them is used to scent are and one of them is used to scent mark sort of the inner mark sort of the inner mark sort of the inner territory and this is where they feel territory and this is where they feel territory and this is where they feel really safe. And then they usually have really safe. And then they usually have really safe. And then they usually have this urine scent marking which is in the this urine scent marking which is in the this urine scent marking which is in the out sort of um the outskirts of the out sort of um the outskirts of the out sort of um the outskirts of the territory. And you might see this if territory. And you might see this if territory. And you might see this if you if for instance you have an indoor you if for instance you have an indoor you if for instance you have an indoor cat and they start cat and they start cat and they start peeing and you bring out a piece of peeing and you bring out a piece of peeing and you bring out a piece of paper and a layout of your paper and a layout of your paper and a layout of your um your house or apartment and you start um your house or apartment and you start um your house or apartment and you start sort of putting a little ring to where sort of putting a little ring to where sort of putting a little ring to where you find the P that will give you a you find the P that will give you a you find the P that will give you a lot of information because if it's a lot of information because if it's a lot of information because if it's a territorial thing it will typically be territorial thing it will typically be territorial thing it will typically be at the edges of sort of at the windows at the edges of sort of at the windows at the edges of sort of at the windows or doors. If it's a an elimination or doors. If it's a an elimination or doors. If it's a an elimination problem that the cat has sort of maybe problem that the cat has sort of maybe problem that the cat has sort of maybe perhaps uh it hurts when he pees. So perhaps uh it hurts when he pees. So perhaps uh it hurts when he pees. So then he learns to associate pain with then he learns to associate pain with then he learns to associate pain with going in the box and so the box starts going in the box and so the box starts going in the box and so the box starts representing painful experiences. So he representing painful experiences. So he representing painful experiences. So he will start going outside of the box. But will start going outside of the box. But will start going outside of the box. But that type of behavior will be seen in that type of behavior will be seen in that type of behavior will be seen in that context instead. Interesting. Um, that context instead. Interesting. Um, that context instead. Interesting. Um, so if your cat is urinating inside, you so if your cat is urinating inside, you so if your cat is urinating inside, you know, have a an experiment to run. The know, have a an experiment to run. The know, have a an experiment to run. The use of a litter box is a pretty use of a litter box is a pretty use of a litter box is a pretty interesting one to me. It's not one I interesting one to me. It's not one I interesting one to me. It's not one I spent a lot of time thinking about, but spent a lot of time thinking about, but spent a lot of time thinking about, but if you sort of step back and you say, if you sort of step back and you say, if you sort of step back and you say, "Okay, here's this animal that we've "Okay, here's this animal that we've "Okay, here's this animal that we've domesticated. And it readily learns how domesticated. And it readily learns how domesticated. And it readily learns how to cover its waist. Um, which is very to cover its waist. Um, which is very to cover its waist. Um, which is very different than a dog, which can be different than a dog, which can be different than a dog, which can be trained to with withhold until you go trained to with withhold until you go trained to with withhold until you go out on a walk. That's basically the two out on a walk. That's basically the two out on a walk. That's basically the two different strategies there. Um, and I different strategies there. Um, and I different strategies there. Um, and I don't know what it is if you own a don't know what it is if you own a don't know what it is if you own a monkey um or something else. But monkey um or something else. But monkey um or something else. But what is it about the covering of waste what is it about the covering of waste what is it about the covering of waste behavior? Is that something in cats? Is behavior? Is that something in cats? Is behavior? Is that something in cats? Is that a natural behavior they do in the that a natural behavior they do in the that a natural behavior they do in the wild? And if they roam, why do they wild? And if they roam, why do they wild? And if they roam, why do they bother? Is it? Um, and then sort of bother? Is it? Um, and then sort of bother? Is it? Um, and then sort of tacked to this is that with dogs often tacked to this is that with dogs often tacked to this is that with dogs often times after they eliminate waste, times after they eliminate waste, times after they eliminate waste, they'll step away from it and kick dirt they'll step away from it and kick dirt they'll step away from it and kick dirt in the general direction. And I've heard in the general direction. And I've heard in the general direction. And I've heard it interpreted two ways. One is that it interpreted two ways. One is that it interpreted two ways. One is that they're trying to spread scent and the they're trying to spread scent and the they're trying to spread scent and the other is that they're trying to cover other is that they're trying to cover other is that they're trying to cover waste. So again, uh, this is why I was waste. So again, uh, this is why I was waste. So again, uh, this is why I was interested in talking to an animal interested in talking to an animal interested in talking to an animal ethologist as opposed to a pet uh, ethologist as opposed to a pet uh, ethologist as opposed to a pet uh, behavioral trainer, right? I'm also behavioral trainer, right? I'm also behavioral trainer, right? I'm also interested in that. But but I think we interested in that. But but I think we interested in that. But but I think we have to again acknowledge that much of have to again acknowledge that much of have to again acknowledge that much of the interpretation that we have about the interpretation that we have about the interpretation that we have about animals behavior is just human animals behavior is just human animals behavior is just human interpretation. So certainly so what is interpretation. So certainly so what is interpretation. So certainly so what is this uh covering of waste? Do we know this uh covering of waste? Do we know this uh covering of waste? Do we know what it's for in the wild in cats? The what it's for in the wild in cats? The what it's for in the wild in cats? The covering of waste um is a way to sort of covering of waste um is a way to sort of covering of waste um is a way to sort of reduce the risk of infection. I would reduce the risk of infection. I would reduce the risk of infection. I would assume that they also don't eliminate assume that they also don't eliminate assume that they also don't eliminate close to where they eat. So if we have a close to where they eat. So if we have a close to where they eat. So if we have a house a cat in our house, we shouldn't house a cat in our house, we shouldn't house a cat in our house, we shouldn't have the litter box next to the food, have the litter box next to the food, have the litter box next to the food, which I wish I had known where I had my which I wish I had known where I had my which I wish I had known where I had my first cat 20 years ago because she had first cat 20 years ago because she had first cat 20 years ago because she had that very setup with the food right next that very setup with the food right next that very setup with the food right next to the litter box. And I would also to the litter box. And I would also to the litter box. And I would also assume that the behavior of dogs when assume that the behavior of dogs when assume that the behavior of dogs when they sort of kick at they sort of kick at they sort of kick at their poop typically, right? Not uh pee. their poop typically, right? Not uh pee. their poop typically, right? Not uh pee. Uh that it's a way of spreading scent. Uh that it's a way of spreading scent. Uh that it's a way of spreading scent. uh because if it were covering center uh because if it were covering center uh because if it were covering center the behavior would look very different I the behavior would look very different I the behavior would look very different I think. Mhm. But I haven't seen any sort think. Mhm. But I haven't seen any sort think. Mhm. But I haven't seen any sort of any scientific study on that topic. of any scientific study on that topic. of any scientific study on that topic. Okay. So cat owners take note separate Okay. So cat owners take note separate Okay. So cat owners take note separate the food from the litter box by some the food from the litter box by some the food from the litter box by some distance. I was always distance. I was always distance. I was always um somewhat surprised uh although less um somewhat surprised uh although less um somewhat surprised uh although less so over time uh how much determination so over time uh how much determination so over time uh how much determination and effort my bulldog would put into and effort my bulldog would put into and effort my bulldog would put into peeing on things on walks. So I feel peeing on things on walks. So I feel peeing on things on walks. So I feel like it was one of his great joys in like it was one of his great joys in like it was one of his great joys in life. There I go again life. There I go again life. There I go again anthropomorphizing. But but to smell anthropomorphizing. But but to smell anthropomorphizing. But but to smell something and then pee there um he something and then pee there um he something and then pee there um he seemed to have an endless supply of seemed to have an endless supply of seemed to have an endless supply of urine for this. Um, it was really urine for this. Um, it was really urine for this. Um, it was really remarkable. Yeah. You know, as a remarkable. Yeah. You know, as a remarkable. Yeah. You know, as a scientist and someone who loves dogs and scientist and someone who loves dogs and scientist and someone who loves dogs and loved him, you know, more than words, I loved him, you know, more than words, I loved him, you know, more than words, I just was like, "This is amazing." Like just was like, "This is amazing." Like just was like, "This is amazing." Like like he loves this behavior. Yeah. And like he loves this behavior. Yeah. And like he loves this behavior. Yeah. And he's also reading the pee mail from the he's also reading the pee mail from the he's also reading the pee mail from the other dogs in the neighborhood. So other dogs in the neighborhood. So other dogs in the neighborhood. So the urine tells a lot of information to the urine tells a lot of information to the urine tells a lot of information to the other animals. It tells what the other animals. It tells what the other animals. It tells what gender, what, you know, reproductive gender, what, you know, reproductive gender, what, you know, reproductive state, perhaps also something about the state, perhaps also something about the state, perhaps also something about the animals emotional state or mental state. animals emotional state or mental state. animals emotional state or mental state. So I wouldn't hesitate to say that So I wouldn't hesitate to say that So I wouldn't hesitate to say that was one of the joys of life for that was one of the joys of life for that was one of the joys of life for dogs that they that's after all that's dogs that they that's after all that's dogs that they that's after all that's how they communicate. So it and they how they communicate. So it and they how they communicate. So it and they spend a lot of time doing it and they're spend a lot of time doing it and they're spend a lot of time doing it and they're willing to work to get access to that uh willing to work to get access to that uh willing to work to get access to that uh opportunity. So AB absolutely I would I opportunity. So AB absolutely I would I opportunity. So AB absolutely I would I would think that it gives them positive would think that it gives them positive would think that it gives them positive emotional experiences doing that. So emotional experiences doing that. So emotional experiences doing that. So there's some innate drive in dogs, it there's some innate drive in dogs, it there's some innate drive in dogs, it seems, to um read the emotional and seems, to um read the emotional and seems, to um read the emotional and hormonal states of other dogs that have hormonal states of other dogs that have hormonal states of other dogs that have been there. It to me it felt been there. It to me it felt been there. It to me it felt like their form of social media. Yeah. like their form of social media. Yeah. like their form of social media. Yeah. Like I'm going to post here. What Yeah. Like I'm going to post here. What Yeah. Like I'm going to post here. What are other people posting here? What's are other people posting here? What's are other people posting here? What's going on? Um I mean clearly there's some going on? Um I mean clearly there's some going on? Um I mean clearly there's some brain real estate devoted to this brain real estate devoted to this brain real estate devoted to this behavior. I'm not being behavior. I'm not being behavior. I'm not being facitious. I mean I look I look at aloc facitious. I mean I look I look at aloc facitious. I mean I look I look at aloc you know you look at a human brain 40% you know you look at a human brain 40% you know you look at a human brain 40% of that real estate is for vision. Mhm. of that real estate is for vision. Mhm. of that real estate is for vision. Mhm. Another 40% it's mixed in there with Another 40% it's mixed in there with Another 40% it's mixed in there with other stuff is for motor behavior. We other stuff is for motor behavior. We other stuff is for motor behavior. We have neural real estate for smelling and have neural real estate for smelling and have neural real estate for smelling and certainly for touch. But even if you're certainly for touch. But even if you're certainly for touch. But even if you're a massage therapist or you're a or you a massage therapist or you're a or you a massage therapist or you're a or you do, you know, touchbased work, you're uh do, you know, touchbased work, you're uh do, you know, touchbased work, you're uh even if you're a braille reader, um the even if you're a braille reader, um the even if you're a braille reader, um the amount of neural real estate for these amount of neural real estate for these amount of neural real estate for these other things is vastly larger except other things is vastly larger except other things is vastly larger except for the blind person where the visual for the blind person where the visual for the blind person where the visual stuff is taken over by the tactile stuff is taken over by the tactile stuff is taken over by the tactile stuff and auditory. So amount of real estate and auditory. So amount of real estate and auditory. So amount of real estate correlates. Um so when I see a behavior correlates. Um so when I see a behavior correlates. Um so when I see a behavior that's like this is what this is one of that's like this is what this is one of that's like this is what this is one of the main things dogs do. Yeah. the main things dogs do. Yeah. the main things dogs do. Yeah. It's pretty striking. So Yeah. It's pretty striking. So Yeah. It's pretty striking. So dogs descended from they were dogs descended from they were dogs descended from they were domesticated from wolves correctly. Did domesticated from wolves correctly. Did domesticated from wolves correctly. Did that happen at independent locations that happen at independent locations that happen at independent locations around the earth? Don't really know the around the earth? Don't really know the around the earth? Don't really know the answer to that question and but it seems answer to that question and but it seems answer to that question and but it seems that they domesticated themselves that they domesticated themselves that they domesticated themselves that it was sort of wolves that started it was sort of wolves that started it was sort of wolves that started hanging out next to human habitation and hanging out next to human habitation and hanging out next to human habitation and that it was sort of the least that it was sort of the least that it was sort of the least fearful and the sort of most fearful and the sort of most fearful and the sort of most uh explorative wolves that dared do uh explorative wolves that dared do uh explorative wolves that dared do this. So, so it was it was it wasn't this. So, so it was it was it wasn't this. So, so it was it was it wasn't that we caught wolves and said, "Aha, that we caught wolves and said, "Aha, that we caught wolves and said, "Aha, I'm going to breed you now." But it was I'm going to breed you now." But it was I'm going to breed you now." But it was rather that was it was like a rather that was it was like a rather that was it was like a symbiotic relationship that developed symbiotic relationship that developed symbiotic relationship that developed over time. Interesting. I don't know of over time. Interesting. I don't know of over time. Interesting. I don't know of any other species that does that except any other species that does that except any other species that does that except maybe uh like certain fish or dolphins maybe uh like certain fish or dolphins maybe uh like certain fish or dolphins that follow fishing boats so they can that follow fishing boats so they can that follow fishing boats so they can get some of the catch. But that's get some of the catch. But that's get some of the catch. But that's different because, you know, I see these different because, you know, I see these different because, you know, I see these Instagram videos of like an otter jump Instagram videos of like an otter jump Instagram videos of like an otter jump jumping on a kayak and there's some jumping on a kayak and there's some jumping on a kayak and there's some interaction uh that's regular. They, you know, that uh that's regular. They, you know, that uh that's regular. They, you know, that the person goes out on their kayak, they the person goes out on their kayak, they the person goes out on their kayak, they interact with this otter. So, they interact with this otter. So, they interact with this otter. So, animals will do this, but usually animals will do this, but usually animals will do this, but usually there's some sort of food. It just there's some sort of food. It just there's some sort of food. It just sounds like food payoff is and safety sounds like food payoff is and safety sounds like food payoff is and safety is really the key. Does that mean that is really the key. Does that mean that is really the key. Does that mean that animals at a very basic level are animals at a very basic level are animals at a very basic level are looking to optimize food intake and looking to optimize food intake and looking to optimize food intake and safety? And what does that tell us about safety? And what does that tell us about safety? And what does that tell us about zoos? I personally have a pretty zoos? I personally have a pretty zoos? I personally have a pretty strong um visceral reaction to zoos that strong um visceral reaction to zoos that strong um visceral reaction to zoos that um have large um have large um have large carnivores. I realize we could have a carnivores. I realize we could have a carnivores. I realize we could have a discussion about elephants, too, but I discussion about elephants, too, but I discussion about elephants, too, but I feel like large carnivores housed in feel like large carnivores housed in feel like large carnivores housed in zoos creates some issues for me. I won't zoos creates some issues for me. I won't zoos creates some issues for me. I won't go into what this is, but I'm also go into what this is, but I'm also go into what this is, but I'm also hear that zoos have um positive uh hear that zoos have um positive uh hear that zoos have um positive uh breeding programs, endangered species breeding programs, endangered species breeding programs, endangered species protection programs. What's your take on protection programs. What's your take on protection programs. What's your take on zoos? When we talk about zoos, it's zoos? When we talk about zoos, it's zoos? When we talk about zoos, it's perhaps good to talk about the evolution perhaps good to talk about the evolution perhaps good to talk about the evolution of zoos because back in the day, like of zoos because back in the day, like of zoos because back in the day, like 150 years ago, it used to be more or 150 years ago, it used to be more or 150 years ago, it used to be more or less a managerie that you know here's a less a managerie that you know here's a less a managerie that you know here's a lion and here's an elephant and here's a lion and here's an elephant and here's a lion and here's an elephant and here's a zebra and they were all in zebra and they were all in zebra and they were all in little small cages and the only thing little small cages and the only thing little small cages and the only thing that you did was see the animal really. that you did was see the animal really. that you did was see the animal really. Zoos today tend to have the purpose of doing today tend to have the purpose of doing today tend to have the purpose of doing a lot of conservation work. So there's a lot of conservation work. So there's a lot of conservation work. So there's um what's referred to as INC2 there's um what's referred to as INC2 there's um what's referred to as INC2 conservation where you work to preserve conservation where you work to preserve conservation where you work to preserve wild habitat and creating national parks wild habitat and creating national parks wild habitat and creating national parks etc and sort of giving the opportunities etc and sort of giving the opportunities etc and sort of giving the opportunities for reintroduction of species and so for reintroduction of species and so for reintroduction of species and so on. And there's XC2 conservation which on. And there's XC2 conservation which on. And there's XC2 conservation which is then housing those uh animal species is then housing those uh animal species is then housing those uh animal species that are threatened with extinction that are threatened with extinction that are threatened with extinction in an environment. And ideally that in an environment. And ideally that in an environment. And ideally that environment should then environment should then environment should then be good enough to promote uh um species be good enough to promote uh um species be good enough to promote uh um species typical behavior and so on. So I'm I typical behavior and so on. So I'm I typical behavior and so on. So I'm I mean I'm conflicted. I think that mean I'm conflicted. I think that mean I'm conflicted. I think that many zoos are sort of doing a lot of um many zoos are sort of doing a lot of um many zoos are sort of doing a lot of um a lot of good in this effort and a lot of good in this effort and a lot of good in this effort and also educating the public and many I also educating the public and many I also educating the public and many I think that many people who go to think that many people who go to think that many people who go to zoos that might awaken in them an zoos that might awaken in them an zoos that might awaken in them an interest in animals which I think is a interest in animals which I think is a interest in animals which I think is a good thing that we that good thing that we that good thing that we that we care about we care about we care about animals but also that sometimes the animals but also that sometimes the animals but also that sometimes the housing is isn't optimal and the housing is isn't optimal and the housing is isn't optimal and certainly some species are a lot more certainly some species are a lot more certainly some species are a lot more difficult to keep in difficult to keep in difficult to keep in captivity compared to others. So polar captivity compared to others. So polar captivity compared to others. So polar bears are really difficult to keep bears are really difficult to keep bears are really difficult to keep because they're ranging because they're ranging because they're ranging p um carnivores. They walk miles and p um carnivores. They walk miles and p um carnivores. They walk miles and miles and miles and it's really miles and miles and it's really miles and miles and it's really difficult to provide those species difficult to provide those species difficult to provide those species specific opportunities in captivity specific opportunities in captivity specific opportunities in captivity compared to other compared to other compared to other uh carnivores who have a more of uh carnivores who have a more of uh carnivores who have a more of a different type of approach to a different type of approach to a different type of approach to predation. One of the things that really predation. One of the things that really predation. One of the things that really turned me on to uh just how turned me on to uh just how turned me on to uh just how um more sophisticated um cat species are um more sophisticated um cat species are um more sophisticated um cat species are than I ever assumed was um something than I ever assumed was um something than I ever assumed was um something that happened when I was a posttock at that happened when I was a posttock at that happened when I was a posttock at also at Stanford. Uh I was a member of also at Stanford. Uh I was a member of also at Stanford. Uh I was a member of the San Francisco Zoo. The San Francisco the San Francisco Zoo. The San Francisco the San Francisco Zoo. The San Francisco Zoo is an outdoor zoo by comparison to Zoo is an outdoor zoo by comparison to Zoo is an outdoor zoo by comparison to most other zoos I've been to and I most other zoos I've been to and I most other zoos I've been to and I haven't been to that many but it's a haven't been to that many but it's a haven't been to that many but it's a pretty uh nice landscape. Um there's an pretty uh nice landscape. Um there's an pretty uh nice landscape. Um there's an outdoor lemur uh I call it an exhibit outdoor lemur uh I call it an exhibit outdoor lemur uh I call it an exhibit but you know indooroutdoor lemur thing but you know indooroutdoor lemur thing but you know indooroutdoor lemur thing that's really amazing. There's some that's really amazing. There's some that's really amazing. There's some giraffes all this. Well um around the giraffes all this. Well um around the giraffes all this. Well um around the time I was in when I was a posttock I time I was in when I was a posttock I time I was in when I was a posttock I just briefly tell this story. I was at just briefly tell this story. I was at just briefly tell this story. I was at the movies in San Francisco and I the movies in San Francisco and I the movies in San Francisco and I stepped out to get something to drink stepped out to get something to drink stepped out to get something to drink and the kid behind the counter said and the kid behind the counter said and the kid behind the counter said the a tiger escaped from the San the a tiger escaped from the San the a tiger escaped from the San Francisco zoo and is killing people. And Francisco zoo and is killing people. And Francisco zoo and is killing people. And I thought, what? Like that's crazy. I thought, what? Like that's crazy. I thought, what? Like that's crazy. Turns out that was only partially true. Turns out that was only partially true. Turns out that was only partially true. What had happened is there was a tiger What had happened is there was a tiger What had happened is there was a tiger there, Tatiana there, Tatiana there, Tatiana who um they used to have these moes who um they used to have these moes who um they used to have these moes around the tiger enclosure and it around the tiger enclosure and it around the tiger enclosure and it was very close to Christmas. People can was very close to Christmas. People can was very close to Christmas. People can look this up and get the details. And look this up and get the details. And look this up and get the details. And there were a couple of kids who were there were a couple of kids who were there were a couple of kids who were throwing either pine cones or throwing either pine cones or throwing either pine cones or throwing something at the tigers. Okay. throwing something at the tigers. Okay. throwing something at the tigers. Okay. The zoo was near shutting down. The zoo was near shutting down. The zoo was near shutting down. Tatiana either ran up or jumped the Tatiana either ran up or jumped the Tatiana either ran up or jumped the moat. I don't know how she did it. Um moat. I don't know how she did it. Um moat. I don't know how she did it. Um got out and moved through the crowd. got out and moved through the crowd. got out and moved through the crowd. This is the to me the interesting part. This is the to me the interesting part. This is the to me the interesting part. Moved through the crowd completely Moved through the crowd completely Moved through the crowd completely ignoring most of the people that were ignoring most of the people that were ignoring most of the people that were around. Centered in on and killed one of around. Centered in on and killed one of around. Centered in on and killed one of the kids. Then moved to the second the kids. Then moved to the second the kids. Then moved to the second kid. Worked him pretty well. the kid. Worked him pretty well. the kid. Worked him pretty well. the authorities showed up, killed Tatiana. authorities showed up, killed Tatiana. authorities showed up, killed Tatiana. This opened up a whole discussion in the This opened up a whole discussion in the This opened up a whole discussion in the zoo community. Um, raised a lot of uh zoo community. Um, raised a lot of uh zoo community. Um, raised a lot of uh kind of complicated questions about kind of complicated questions about kind of complicated questions about enclosures, etc. The enclosures there, enclosures, etc. The enclosures there, enclosures, etc. The enclosures there, by the way, now are very different. They by the way, now are very different. They by the way, now are very different. They have these high glass as well. And of have these high glass as well. And of have these high glass as well. And of course, the ending was sad for course, the ending was sad for course, the ending was sad for everybody. Um, I took a break from my everybody. Um, I took a break from my everybody. Um, I took a break from my membership there. I reactivated a few membership there. I reactivated a few membership there. I reactivated a few years later. They know I don't that years later. They know I don't that years later. They know I don't that tiger, you know, obviously is gone. But tiger, you know, obviously is gone. But tiger, you know, obviously is gone. But um I still am conflicted about um I still am conflicted about um I still am conflicted about um about this whole picture. What's about this whole picture. What's about this whole picture. What's interesting to me is the intentionality interesting to me is the intentionality interesting to me is the intentionality of the tiger. So this was not a of the tiger. So this was not a of the tiger. So this was not a bloodthirsty tiger that just wanted to bloodthirsty tiger that just wanted to bloodthirsty tiger that just wanted to kill humans or eat humans. It was those kill humans or eat humans. It was those kill humans or eat humans. It was those two humans that pissed her off and those two humans that pissed her off and those two humans that pissed her off and those two humans were going to pay and they two humans were going to pay and they two humans were going to pay and they paid. The family sued the zoo and then paid. The family sued the zoo and then paid. The family sued the zoo and then the then it was a whole thing. I don't the then it was a whole thing. I don't the then it was a whole thing. I don't know how it ended up with the law with know how it ended up with the law with know how it ended up with the law with the lawsuit, but it was a whole thing. the lawsuit, but it was a whole thing. the lawsuit, but it was a whole thing. So, people can look this up online. Um, So, people can look this up online. Um, So, people can look this up online. Um, when you hear that, that a tiger did when you hear that, that a tiger did when you hear that, that a tiger did that as opposed to that as opposed to that as opposed to just going into a frenzy the way humans just going into a frenzy the way humans just going into a frenzy the way humans sometimes go into a frenzy, attacking sometimes go into a frenzy, attacking sometimes go into a frenzy, attacking whoever and as many people as possible. whoever and as many people as possible. whoever and as many people as possible. What do you think? What does What do you think? What does What do you think? What does it tell us about tigers and their um it tell us about tigers and their um it tell us about tigers and their um consciousness? I think we often don't give animals I think we often don't give animals I think we often don't give animals enough credit. enough credit. enough credit. Uh to me it's not surprising that Uh to me it's not surprising that Uh to me it's not surprising that she experienced something really she experienced something really she experienced something really unpleasant that she came to associate unpleasant that she came to associate unpleasant that she came to associate with two individuals and that generated with two individuals and that generated with two individuals and that generated a negative emotional state and a negative emotional state and a negative emotional state and aggressive behavior that she then aggressive behavior that she then aggressive behavior that she then carried out directed towards those two carried out directed towards those two carried out directed towards those two people. Does it surprise you how people. Does it surprise you how people. Does it surprise you how directed it was? No. as opposed to just directed it was? No. as opposed to just directed it was? No. as opposed to just I mean there were plenty of people I mean there were plenty of people I mean there were plenty of people around that were an easier around that were an easier around that were an easier um you know easier kill. I would think um you know easier kill. I would think um you know easier kill. I would think that a fearful animal might lash out at that a fearful animal might lash out at that a fearful animal might lash out at anyone but an animal that anyone but an animal that anyone but an animal that is angry tends to be more premeditated is angry tends to be more premeditated is angry tends to be more premeditated in a way calculated in a way. in a way calculated in a way. in a way calculated in a way. So I would expect that if you had So I would expect that if you had So I would expect that if you had scared the tiger, she might show scared the tiger, she might show scared the tiger, she might show defensive aggression, which is just defensive aggression, which is just defensive aggression, which is just lashing out at whoever is closest. But lashing out at whoever is closest. But lashing out at whoever is closest. But this was offense offensive aggression. this was offense offensive aggression. this was offense offensive aggression. And so that is that is premeditated. And so that is that is premeditated. And so that is that is premeditated. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function functionhealth.com/huberman. Function functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of over currently has a wait list of over currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're offering 250,000 people, but they're offering 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman podcast early access to Huberman podcast early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. Could we talk a access to Function. Could we talk a access to Function. Could we talk a little bit about the um the prey and little bit about the um the prey and little bit about the um the prey and stalking and capture and killing stalking and capture and killing stalking and capture and killing sequence? One of the things that um I'm sequence? One of the things that um I'm sequence? One of the things that um I'm always been fascinated by is when a always been fascinated by is when a always been fascinated by is when a let's just use a cat as an example, let's just use a cat as an example, let's just use a cat as an example, could be large cat, could be small cat, could be large cat, could be small cat, could be large cat, could be small cat, is in its stalking mode that it is in its stalking mode that it is in its stalking mode that it essentially gets one ballistic strike essentially gets one ballistic strike essentially gets one ballistic strike opportunity before the before the opportunity before the before the opportunity before the before the chase is on or the animal gets away chase is on or the animal gets away chase is on or the animal gets away or it gets caught, right? And we we'll or it gets caught, right? And we we'll or it gets caught, right? And we we'll see the um we had a cat when I was a kid see the um we had a cat when I was a kid see the um we had a cat when I was a kid um that um that um that would like stalk and you know so would like stalk and you know so would like stalk and you know so obviously like creep up and then right obviously like creep up and then right obviously like creep up and then right before it would leap at the prey it before it would leap at the prey it before it would leap at the prey it would it would start shattering its teeth. Um it would start shattering its teeth. Um it would start shattering its teeth. Um I'm assuming that was behavioral I'm assuming that was behavioral I'm assuming that was behavioral suppression or something leaking suppression or something leaking suppression or something leaking through. What what's going on when through. What what's going on when through. What what's going on when a animal does that very deliberate a animal does that very deliberate a animal does that very deliberate stalking that calculation um and the stalking that calculation um and the stalking that calculation um and the like teeth chatters or like twitching like teeth chatters or like twitching like teeth chatters or like twitching is starting to occur? What is that? My is starting to occur? What is that? My is starting to occur? What is that? My guess would be perhaps some sort of sort guess would be perhaps some sort of sort guess would be perhaps some sort of sort of displacement behavior that there's of displacement behavior that there's of displacement behavior that there's motivation to move on in the sequence of motivation to move on in the sequence of motivation to move on in the sequence of behaviors to the next behavior, but it's behaviors to the next behavior, but it's behaviors to the next behavior, but it's not quite time yet. And so that sort of not quite time yet. And so that sort of not quite time yet. And so that sort of activation then gets an outlet through that then gets an outlet through that then gets an outlet through that behavior. But I really don't know. I behavior. But I really don't know. I behavior. But I really don't know. I don't know. I haven't seen this don't know. I haven't seen this don't know. I haven't seen this discussed. So, it's almost like a like a discussed. So, it's almost like a like a discussed. So, it's almost like a like a hydraulic pressure or something building hydraulic pressure or something building hydraulic pressure or something building up. Yeah. Interesting. Um, up. Yeah. Interesting. Um, up. Yeah. Interesting. Um, we've talked about dogs. We've talked we've talked about dogs. We've talked we've talked about dogs. We've talked about cats. Let's talk about birds. about cats. Let's talk about birds. about cats. Let's talk about birds. Okay. I had parrots when I was a kid. Okay. I had parrots when I was a kid. Okay. I had parrots when I was a kid. They were domestically bred little cheek They were domestically bred little cheek They were domestically bred little cheek dwarf parrots. It didn't turn out dwarf parrots. It didn't turn out dwarf parrots. It didn't turn out poorly. It didn't turn out great. They poorly. It didn't turn out great. They poorly. It didn't turn out great. They they were um I didn't clip their wings they were um I didn't clip their wings they were um I didn't clip their wings cuz I couldn't bring myself to. and they cuz I couldn't bring myself to. and they cuz I couldn't bring myself to. and they flew around my room a lot and flew around my room a lot and flew around my room a lot and around the room a lot and threw a lot of around the room a lot and threw a lot of around the room a lot and threw a lot of food on the ground a lot and eventually food on the ground a lot and eventually food on the ground a lot and eventually made sense to give them to somebody who made sense to give them to somebody who made sense to give them to somebody who had an aviary. Mhm. Um parrots are had an aviary. Mhm. Um parrots are had an aviary. Mhm. Um parrots are smart. Yeah. What are parrots smart. Yeah. What are parrots smart. Yeah. What are parrots thinking about? I think what all thinking about? I think what all thinking about? I think what all animals are thinking about where their animals are thinking about where their animals are thinking about where their next meal is come going to come from uh next meal is come going to come from uh next meal is come going to come from uh social interactions and whether there's social interactions and whether there's social interactions and whether there's any threat anywhere. Is that really any threat anywhere. Is that really any threat anywhere. Is that really their like 90% of their conscious life? their like 90% of their conscious life? their like 90% of their conscious life? say I would say that um say I would say that um say I would say that um uh if the animal doesn't feel safe then uh if the animal doesn't feel safe then uh if the animal doesn't feel safe then it's very hard to engage the animal in it's very hard to engage the animal in it's very hard to engage the animal in any type of sort of if you if an animal any type of sort of if you if an animal any type of sort of if you if an animal is fearful and you try to feed them they is fearful and you try to feed them they is fearful and you try to feed them they often won't take food for instance. So often won't take food for instance. So often won't take food for instance. So the sense of safety has a very high the sense of safety has a very high the sense of safety has a very high priority because if you don't feel safe priority because if you don't feel safe priority because if you don't feel safe you could die essentially. So if you're you could die essentially. So if you're you could die essentially. So if you're in a situation where you don't feel safe in a situation where you don't feel safe in a situation where you don't feel safe it's because that situation is it's because that situation is it's because that situation is potentially dangerous. There could be potentially dangerous. There could be potentially dangerous. There could be predators around and then you must focus predators around and then you must focus predators around and then you must focus your attention on those predators your attention on those predators your attention on those predators because otherwise you're going to die. because otherwise you're going to die. because otherwise you're going to die. And that of course depends on the And that of course depends on the And that of course depends on the species that some species are sort of species that some species are sort of species that some species are sort of aggregate in big flocks if we're talking aggregate in big flocks if we're talking aggregate in big flocks if we're talking birds and some are um pair bonding birds and some are um pair bonding birds and some are um pair bonding species. But the social environment is species. But the social environment is species. But the social environment is really important both with regards to uh really important both with regards to uh really important both with regards to uh you know um parenting behavior. So uh you know um parenting behavior. So uh you know um parenting behavior. So sexual behavior, parenting behavior, sexual behavior, parenting behavior, sexual behavior, parenting behavior, raising young and so on, all of that raising young and so on, all of that raising young and so on, all of that also has high priority because it's also has high priority because it's also has high priority because it's essentially about um furthering your essentially about um furthering your essentially about um furthering your genes into the next genes into the next genes into the next generation. Um and then uh and then generation. Um and then uh and then generation. Um and then uh and then foraging behaviors, where am I going to foraging behaviors, where am I going to foraging behaviors, where am I going to get my next meal? We feed them on a get my next meal? We feed them on a get my next meal? We feed them on a plate. We're thinking like we think plate. We're thinking like we think plate. We're thinking like we think that we're doing them a service like that we're doing them a service like that we're doing them a service like here's your food on the plate. here's your food on the plate. here's your food on the plate. You don't have to do anything. You don't have to do anything. You don't have to do anything. But they come equipped to actually show But they come equipped to actually show But they come equipped to actually show their food getting repertoire of their food getting repertoire of their food getting repertoire of behaviors. So typically if we don't behaviors. So typically if we don't behaviors. So typically if we don't allow them to show those behaviors, we allow them to show those behaviors, we allow them to show those behaviors, we might see some problem behaviors popping might see some problem behaviors popping might see some problem behaviors popping up instead because they will redirect up instead because they will redirect up instead because they will redirect that energy that um intention that energy that um intention that energy that um intention into I don't know. Did you have any into I don't know. Did you have any into I don't know. Did you have any problems with the animals sort of the problems with the animals sort of the problems with the animals sort of the birds you know ripping your carpet or birds you know ripping your carpet or birds you know ripping your carpet or Oh, they destroyed everything. I mean Oh, they destroyed everything. I mean Oh, they destroyed everything. I mean they destroyed I mean that they took they destroyed I mean that they took they destroyed I mean that they took great pleasure in ripping everything great pleasure in ripping everything great pleasure in ripping everything books. I would cover the foraging books. I would cover the foraging books. I would cover the foraging behavior directed towards the wrong behavior directed towards the wrong behavior directed towards the wrong thing. Yeah. I don't recommend thing. Yeah. I don't recommend thing. Yeah. I don't recommend anyone own parrots frankly. That was an anyone own parrots frankly. That was an anyone own parrots frankly. That was an experiment gone wrong. Uh luckily experiment gone wrong. Uh luckily experiment gone wrong. Uh luckily they're I think they're still alive. they're I think they're still alive. they're I think they're still alive. They live a very long time. Oh. And They live a very long time. Oh. And They live a very long time. Oh. And people can look up the Ecuadorian jay people can look up the Ecuadorian jay people can look up the Ecuadorian jay cheek uh dwarf parrots. They have this cheek uh dwarf parrots. They have this cheek uh dwarf parrots. They have this beautiful um orange under their wings. beautiful um orange under their wings. beautiful um orange under their wings. They have little gray cheeks. and they They have little gray cheeks. and they They have little gray cheeks. and they were called pocket parrots at you they were called pocket parrots at you they were called pocket parrots at you know that the excitement for me at know that the excitement for me at know that the excitement for me at that I was young I was probably 11 was that I was young I was probably 11 was that I was young I was probably 11 was that I'd be able to like carry them that I'd be able to like carry them that I'd be able to like carry them around in my pocket. They didn't want to around in my pocket. They didn't want to around in my pocket. They didn't want to do that at all. Um anyway um it's do that at all. Um anyway um it's do that at all. Um anyway um it's interesting to think about this need for interesting to think about this need for interesting to think about this need for animals to express their natural animals to express their natural animals to express their natural repertoire of behaviors for dog owners. repertoire of behaviors for dog owners. repertoire of behaviors for dog owners. Um I think the common practice is to Um I think the common practice is to Um I think the common practice is to you know put out a bowl of food. Uh you know put out a bowl of food. Uh you know put out a bowl of food. Uh would we be better off bringing the food would we be better off bringing the food would we be better off bringing the food to a park and going to the park and to a park and going to the park and to a park and going to the park and then having them eat there? Um or then having them eat there? Um or then having them eat there? Um or somehow incorporating the somehow incorporating the somehow incorporating the roaming and um prey seeeking uh roaming and um prey seeeking uh roaming and um prey seeeking uh behavior. I mean, how would one behavior. I mean, how would one behavior. I mean, how would one incorporate that into a more uh incorporate that into a more uh incorporate that into a more uh pleasant experience for the dog? Cuz pleasant experience for the dog? Cuz pleasant experience for the dog? Cuz what you're saying makes total sense. what you're saying makes total sense. what you're saying makes total sense. They need to express these behaviors. They need to express these behaviors. They need to express these behaviors. They're not if they're if they can't um They're not if they're if they can't um They're not if they're if they can't um it's going to come out some other way, it's going to come out some other way, it's going to come out some other way, maybe destructive to them or the maybe destructive to them or the maybe destructive to them or the environment. Yeah. Essentially, I think environment. Yeah. Essentially, I think environment. Yeah. Essentially, I think that for dog owners that what we can do that for dog owners that what we can do that for dog owners that what we can do is we can try to promote the different is we can try to promote the different is we can try to promote the different aspects of the predatory sequence that aspects of the predatory sequence that aspects of the predatory sequence that particular dog in front of us that particular dog in front of us that particular dog in front of us enjoys doing. Uh I mentioned nose work as doing. Uh I mentioned nose work as doing. Uh I mentioned nose work as being one of the things that many being one of the things that many being one of the things that many dogs really enjoy. Interestingly, and dogs really enjoy. Interestingly, and dogs really enjoy. Interestingly, and this is this is just sort of the early this is this is just sort of the early this is this is just sort of the early days of scientific studies on the days of scientific studies on the days of scientific studies on the effects of nose work uh are really effects of nose work uh are really effects of nose work uh are really promising that one of the effects promising that one of the effects promising that one of the effects of nose work seems to be so if you if of nose work seems to be so if you if of nose work seems to be so if you if you're not familiar with it, it's you're not familiar with it, it's you're not familiar with it, it's essentially that the animal has learned essentially that the animal has learned essentially that the animal has learned that he needs to find a specific scent that he needs to find a specific scent that he needs to find a specific scent in an area. And so he sniffs the area, in an area. And so he sniffs the area, in an area. And so he sniffs the area, he roams the area, and he follows the he roams the area, and he follows the he roams the area, and he follows the scent, and he'll stop and mark scent, and he'll stop and mark scent, and he'll stop and mark when he finds the scent. And then he when he finds the scent. And then he when he finds the scent. And then he gets a reinforcer. So he gets rewarded gets a reinforcer. So he gets rewarded gets a reinforcer. So he gets rewarded for doing that. So that's for doing that. So that's for doing that. So that's essentially more or less a essentially more or less a essentially more or less a setup. And it seems that it helps setup. And it seems that it helps setup. And it seems that it helps regulate arousal so that animals who are regulate arousal so that animals who are regulate arousal so that animals who are sort of highly strong and almost uh um sort of highly strong and almost uh um sort of highly strong and almost uh um have generalized anxiety get calm down have generalized anxiety get calm down have generalized anxiety get calm down and the ones that are sort of uh and the ones that are sort of uh and the ones that are sort of uh semi-depressed get sort of uh more um semi-depressed get sort of uh more um semi-depressed get sort of uh more um more enthusiastic about life. and more enthusiastic about life. and more enthusiastic about life. and also and um if we're back in core also and um if we're back in core also and um if we're back in core effect space again we have the shift to effect space again we have the shift to effect space again we have the shift to the right hand side of the core effect the right hand side of the core effect the right hand side of the core effect space so we have positive veilance space so we have positive veilance space so we have positive veilance associated with that uh and it seems associated with that uh and it seems associated with that uh and it seems really interesting um early days still really interesting um early days still really interesting um early days still because this um dog sport is like because this um dog sport is like because this um dog sport is like just I don't know 15 years old or just I don't know 15 years old or just I don't know 15 years old or something it's not very not very old so something it's not very not very old so something it's not very not very old so essentially what we can do is we can um essentially what we can do is we can um essentially what we can do is we can um every dog could do nose work I think every dog could do nose work I think every dog could do nose work I think that would be an interesting sort of an that would be an interesting sort of an that would be an interesting sort of an outlet for that very first part of an outlet for that very first part of an outlet for that very first part of the behavioral sequence. And then I know the behavioral sequence. And then I know the behavioral sequence. And then I know that some that some that some um trainers are working specifically to um trainers are working specifically to um trainers are working specifically to help dogs who chase wildlife for to help dogs who chase wildlife for to help dogs who chase wildlife for instance. And it's about teaching the instance. And it's about teaching the instance. And it's about teaching the dog to stay in the first parts of the dog to stay in the first parts of the dog to stay in the first parts of the predatory sequence to do the sniffing, predatory sequence to do the sniffing, predatory sequence to do the sniffing, the uh the pointing and the um the uh the pointing and the um the uh the pointing and the um the eyeing behavior and then getting the eyeing behavior and then getting the eyeing behavior and then getting reinforced for that so many times so reinforced for that so many times so reinforced for that so many times so that it becomes like a feedback loop that it becomes like a feedback loop that it becomes like a feedback loop that they see a they see a deer that they see a they see a deer that they see a they see a deer running across the road and they go, running across the road and they go, running across the road and they go, "Mom, I saw a deer." And they get "Mom, I saw a deer." And they get "Mom, I saw a deer." And they get reinforced for that. So, and other dogs reinforced for that. So, and other dogs reinforced for that. So, and other dogs like greyhounds that love chasing that like greyhounds that love chasing that like greyhounds that love chasing that you allow them to do that. And then uh you allow them to do that. And then uh you allow them to do that. And then uh other dogs that really allow sort of uh other dogs that really allow sort of uh other dogs that really allow sort of uh um that really enjoy uh carrying things um that really enjoy uh carrying things um that really enjoy uh carrying things that you allow them to do that. And then that you allow them to do that. And then that you allow them to do that. And then give your poodle a an old um something give your poodle a an old um something give your poodle a an old um something to rip apart, you know. Is that what to rip apart, you know. Is that what to rip apart, you know. Is that what poodles like to do? Dismbow things. poodles like to do? Dismbow things. poodles like to do? Dismbow things. Yeah. Poodles like to do to kill and to Yeah. Poodles like to do to kill and to Yeah. Poodles like to do to kill and to the post kill ripping apart. Yeah. to the post kill ripping apart. Yeah. to the post kill ripping apart. Yeah. ripping apart. Gosh, the name and ripping apart. Gosh, the name and ripping apart. Gosh, the name and the look of a poodle suggests a much a the look of a poodle suggests a much a the look of a poodle suggests a much a much more docile animal. So, they really much more docile animal. So, they really much more docile animal. So, they really like to rip bodies apart. Yeah, as far like to rip bodies apart. Yeah, as far like to rip bodies apart. Yeah, as far as I understand. Yes, that makes sense. as I understand. Yes, that makes sense. as I understand. Yes, that makes sense. Um, given what I understand about the Um, given what I understand about the Um, given what I understand about the dosing of different and then also I dosing of different and then also I dosing of different and then also I would, you know, rather than serving would, you know, rather than serving would, you know, rather than serving food on a plate, you might try scatter food on a plate, you might try scatter food on a plate, you might try scatter feeding. So, just uh or feeding it in feeding. So, just uh or feeding it in feeding. So, just uh or feeding it in a way that the animal actually has to a way that the animal actually has to a way that the animal actually has to work for it. So, do some behavior like work for it. So, do some behavior like work for it. So, do some behavior like um one of these snuffle mats. You hide um one of these snuffle mats. You hide um one of these snuffle mats. You hide the food in there. So they have to the food in there. So they have to the food in there. So they have to actually spend some actually spend some actually spend some time looking for the food before time looking for the food before time looking for the food before consuming it because otherwise if you consuming it because otherwise if you consuming it because otherwise if you serve it in a bowl the some animals serve it in a bowl the some animals serve it in a bowl the some animals simply you know they inhale it. It takes simply you know they inhale it. It takes simply you know they inhale it. It takes like 30 seconds and they're done. like 30 seconds and they're done. like 30 seconds and they're done. Costello ate like a seagull. Yeah. Costello ate like a seagull. Yeah. Costello ate like a seagull. Yeah. Really? He wouldn't chew his food. Yeah. Really? He wouldn't chew his food. Yeah. Really? He wouldn't chew his food. Yeah. It's interesting. The um the dog It's interesting. The um the dog It's interesting. The um the dog food uh training uh animal health world food uh training uh animal health world food uh training uh animal health world sells lots of things where you can put sells lots of things where you can put sells lots of things where you can put food inside of an object where they have food inside of an object where they have food inside of an object where they have to really work hard at it. I had mixed to really work hard at it. I had mixed to really work hard at it. I had mixed uh you know sort of mixed results with uh you know sort of mixed results with uh you know sort of mixed results with that because I have heard that in that because I have heard that in that because I have heard that in addition to exercise and wanting your addition to exercise and wanting your addition to exercise and wanting your proximity that animals, dogs in proximity that animals, dogs in proximity that animals, dogs in particular perhaps really need that particular perhaps really need that particular perhaps really need that cognitive work that they get bored cognitive work that they get bored cognitive work that they get bored and they really need the challenge of and they really need the challenge of and they really need the challenge of working their mind. So much so that on working their mind. So much so that on working their mind. So much so that on rainy days when you like if weather's rainy days when you like if weather's rainy days when you like if weather's really bad and you can't go out that really bad and you can't go out that really bad and you can't go out that they need an immense amount of kind of they need an immense amount of kind of they need an immense amount of kind of like search and forage type behavior. So like search and forage type behavior. So like search and forage type behavior. So I would I strive to do that. Um and I would I strive to do that. Um and I would I strive to do that. Um and I know some people might hear this and know some people might hear this and know some people might hear this and just think this is crazy like my dog just think this is crazy like my dog just think this is crazy like my dog just wants to curl up at my feet and it just wants to curl up at my feet and it just wants to curl up at my feet and it just wants to fetch the ball. But that's just wants to fetch the ball. But that's just wants to fetch the ball. But that's where fetching breeds. If I threw a where fetching breeds. If I threw a where fetching breeds. If I threw a ball to Costello, he would go to it and ball to Costello, he would go to it and ball to Costello, he would go to it and then just sit on top of it. He had no then just sit on top of it. He had no then just sit on top of it. He had no interest whatsoever in doing anything interest whatsoever in doing anything interest whatsoever in doing anything with that in terms of retrieving it. But with that in terms of retrieving it. But with that in terms of retrieving it. But he loved to just love to tug. So just he loved to just love to tug. So just he loved to just love to tug. So just you know if I tied a rope to a tree you know if I tied a rope to a tree you know if I tied a rope to a tree for instance, he would jump on there for instance, he would jump on there for instance, he would jump on there and hold on and I could swing him by his and hold on and I could swing him by his and hold on and I could swing him by his body weight, you know, 90 lbs and he'd body weight, you know, 90 lbs and he'd body weight, you know, 90 lbs and he'd stay up there for 10 minutes. Yeah. Like stay up there for 10 minutes. Yeah. Like stay up there for 10 minutes. Yeah. Like the pleasure of chewing was clearly the pleasure of chewing was clearly the pleasure of chewing was clearly the strongest innate drive. So I the strongest innate drive. So I the strongest innate drive. So I think what I'm realizing is that think what I'm realizing is that think what I'm realizing is that understanding the sequence of natural understanding the sequence of natural understanding the sequence of natural behaviors, but also where in that behaviors, but also where in that behaviors, but also where in that sequence a particular breed really leans sequence a particular breed really leans sequence a particular breed really leans to. Absolutely. Yeah. So sometimes it to. Absolutely. Yeah. So sometimes it to. Absolutely. Yeah. So sometimes it can be hard to know where your dog is on can be hard to know where your dog is on can be hard to know where your dog is on that scale, especially if it's like a that scale, especially if it's like a that scale, especially if it's like a mixed breed of some type. And then you mixed breed of some type. And then you mixed breed of some type. And then you can often actually just look at the can often actually just look at the can often actually just look at the confirmation of the dog. So those very confirmation of the dog. So those very confirmation of the dog. So those very lean uh I'm thinking greyhound now, the lean uh I'm thinking greyhound now, the lean uh I'm thinking greyhound now, the lean dog with not much muscle the lean dog with not much muscle the lean dog with not much muscle and very pointy snout tends to be the and very pointy snout tends to be the and very pointy snout tends to be the chasers. And um the ones with more chasers. And um the ones with more chasers. And um the ones with more muscles, front muscles and bigger muscles, front muscles and bigger muscles, front muscles and bigger jaws tend to be the ones that rip jaws tend to be the ones that rip jaws tend to be the ones that rip things apart. Bulldogs, Rottweilers, things apart. Bulldogs, Rottweilers, things apart. Bulldogs, Rottweilers, mastiffs. Yeah. And some of the smaller mastiffs. Yeah. And some of the smaller mastiffs. Yeah. And some of the smaller ones, the pugs, the French bulldogs. I ones, the pugs, the French bulldogs. I ones, the pugs, the French bulldogs. I think people don't appreciate how the think people don't appreciate how the think people don't appreciate how the breeding down because people now, the breeding down because people now, the breeding down because people now, you know, a lot of people have dogs who you know, a lot of people have dogs who you know, a lot of people have dogs who live in apartments, you know, smaller live in apartments, you know, smaller live in apartments, you know, smaller dogs. Although there's this weird thing, dogs. Although there's this weird thing, dogs. Although there's this weird thing, uh you know, you talk to a vet. I have a uh you know, you talk to a vet. I have a uh you know, you talk to a vet. I have a family member who's a vet. You say, family member who's a vet. You say, family member who's a vet. You say, "What's a great like apartment dog?" And "What's a great like apartment dog?" And "What's a great like apartment dog?" And they'll say, "Great Dane because they they'll say, "Great Dane because they they'll say, "Great Dane because they don't need a ton of space to roam, but don't need a ton of space to roam, but don't need a ton of space to roam, but you have to walk them, but they don't you have to walk them, but they don't you have to walk them, but they don't need long walks compared to like a need long walks compared to like a need long walks compared to like a little terrier sometimes needs to just little terrier sometimes needs to just little terrier sometimes needs to just go go. I mean, needs two hours or go go. I mean, needs two hours or go go. I mean, needs two hours or more of activity." I think you need to more of activity." I think you need to more of activity." I think you need to pay a lot of attention to the type of pay a lot of attention to the type of pay a lot of attention to the type of life that you're going to offer. Whether life that you're going to offer. Whether life that you're going to offer. Whether it's, you know, living in an apartment it's, you know, living in an apartment it's, you know, living in an apartment in a busy city or whether it's uh, you in a busy city or whether it's uh, you in a busy city or whether it's uh, you know, you on a farm somewhere, which know, you on a farm somewhere, which know, you on a farm somewhere, which breed of dog is going to adapt which breed of dog is going to adapt which breed of dog is going to adapt best to that lifestyle? Do you think best to that lifestyle? Do you think best to that lifestyle? Do you think dogs like cities? I think many dogs get dogs like cities? I think many dogs get dogs like cities? I think many dogs get very stressed in cities because of the very stressed in cities because of the very stressed in cities because of the constant bombardment of sensory constant bombardment of sensory constant bombardment of sensory information. So, there's noise. There's information. So, there's noise. There's information. So, there's noise. There's dogs. So if you're out walking on the dogs. So if you're out walking on the dogs. So if you're out walking on the street, there's constantly meeting street, there's constantly meeting street, there's constantly meeting strangers. And for many animal species, strangers. And for many animal species, strangers. And for many animal species, meeting strangers a doesn't happen very meeting strangers a doesn't happen very meeting strangers a doesn't happen very often and b causes um uh an increase in often and b causes um uh an increase in often and b causes um uh an increase in arousal because it could be, you arousal because it could be, you arousal because it could be, you know, friend or foe. It could be some know, friend or foe. It could be some know, friend or foe. It could be some someone that you want to fight with. It someone that you want to fight with. It someone that you want to fight with. It could be someone you want to have could be someone you want to have could be someone you want to have sex with. You need to assess the sex with. You need to assess the sex with. You need to assess the situation. And I think that dogs situation. And I think that dogs situation. And I think that dogs are quite unique in that respect and are quite unique in that respect and are quite unique in that respect and that they have a high tolerance for that they have a high tolerance for that they have a high tolerance for strangers because many other animal strangers because many other animal strangers because many other animal species do not. And I think that we tend species do not. And I think that we tend species do not. And I think that we tend to forget that sometimes that we to forget that sometimes that we to forget that sometimes that we introduce animals to animals that introduce animals to animals that introduce animals to animals that they don't know. We expect them to get they don't know. We expect them to get they don't know. We expect them to get along and they don't. That that type of along and they don't. That that type of along and they don't. That that type of introduction needs to be done really introduction needs to be done really introduction needs to be done really carefully. Typically we might start with carefully. Typically we might start with carefully. Typically we might start with um with uh just ex exchanging sense. So um with uh just ex exchanging sense. So um with uh just ex exchanging sense. So if you're if you have one cat and want if you're if you have one cat and want if you're if you have one cat and want to get a second cat for instance, they to get a second cat for instance, they to get a second cat for instance, they typically won't just accept the other typically won't just accept the other typically won't just accept the other the way that two dogs might do for the way that two dogs might do for the way that two dogs might do for instance. So then you might have them in instance. So then you might have them in instance. So then you might have them in different rooms and you might rub one different rooms and you might rub one different rooms and you might rub one cat with one towel and rub one the other cat with one towel and rub one the other cat with one towel and rub one the other cat with another towel and then exchange cat with another towel and then exchange cat with another towel and then exchange towels and then you might want to towels and then you might want to towels and then you might want to gradually incorporate other sensory gradually incorporate other sensory gradually incorporate other sensory modalities too so that they'll start modalities too so that they'll start modalities too so that they'll start hearing each other and finally that they hearing each other and finally that they hearing each other and finally that they start seeing each other and then at the start seeing each other and then at the start seeing each other and then at the end the tactile so the actual physical end the tactile so the actual physical end the tactile so the actual physical contact and if you do it that way you contact and if you do it that way you contact and if you do it that way you reduce the risk that they'll actually reduce the risk that they'll actually reduce the risk that they'll actually start fighting when you do the start fighting when you do the start fighting when you do the introduction because if you just put introduction because if you just put introduction because if you just put them together they might just escalate them together they might just escalate them together they might just escalate to aggression right away. But if you do to aggression right away. But if you do to aggression right away. But if you do it gradually, they that exchange of it gradually, they that exchange of it gradually, they that exchange of information will help them sort of information will help them sort of information will help them sort of figure out who the other is and reduce figure out who the other is and reduce figure out who the other is and reduce the risk of aggression. One thing I've the risk of aggression. One thing I've the risk of aggression. One thing I've always been fascinated by and there's a always been fascinated by and there's a always been fascinated by and there's a little bit of data starting to emerge on little bit of data starting to emerge on little bit of data starting to emerge on this as to what the mechanisms might be this as to what the mechanisms might be this as to what the mechanisms might be is self versus other species is self versus other species is self versus other species recognition. most notably that dogs, unless it's a most notably that dogs, unless it's a most notably that dogs, unless it's a dominance behavior, don't try to mate dominance behavior, don't try to mate dominance behavior, don't try to mate with cats, for instance. They might with cats, for instance. They might with cats, for instance. They might hump, but that's a separate thing. hump, but that's a separate thing. hump, but that's a separate thing. They're actually separate circuits. Uh They're actually separate circuits. Uh They're actually separate circuits. Uh my um uh colleague David Anderson at my um uh colleague David Anderson at my um uh colleague David Anderson at Caltech um did a really beautiful study. Caltech um did a really beautiful study. Caltech um did a really beautiful study. Can I just The takeaway shows that there Can I just The takeaway shows that there Can I just The takeaway shows that there are separate circuits in the brain for are separate circuits in the brain for are separate circuits in the brain for mounting behavior for sex versus mounting behavior for sex versus mounting behavior for sex versus mounting behavior for dominance. Oh, mounting behavior for dominance. Oh, mounting behavior for dominance. Oh, interesting. And the mounting behavior interesting. And the mounting behavior interesting. And the mounting behavior for dominance circuits exist in males for dominance circuits exist in males for dominance circuits exist in males and females of a species where only the and females of a species where only the and females of a species where only the male mounts for purposes of male mounts for purposes of male mounts for purposes of reproduction. So this notion of mounting reproduction. So this notion of mounting reproduction. So this notion of mounting as a dominance behavior is a very real as a dominance behavior is a very real as a dominance behavior is a very real thing even in mice. Um in any case thing even in mice. Um in any case thing even in mice. Um in any case setting mounting for dominance behavior setting mounting for dominance behavior setting mounting for dominance behavior aside, aka humping, it's remarkable like aside, aka humping, it's remarkable like aside, aka humping, it's remarkable like a horse doesn't try and mate with a dog. a horse doesn't try and mate with a dog. a horse doesn't try and mate with a dog. Different species of animals seem to Different species of animals seem to Different species of animals seem to know self versus other. Yeah. They don't know self versus other. Yeah. They don't know self versus other. Yeah. They don't have to learn it from their mom. Yeah. have to learn it from their mom. Yeah. have to learn it from their mom. Yeah. Or dad or us. It's innate. It's innate. Or dad or us. It's innate. It's innate. Or dad or us. It's innate. It's innate. Yeah. For most species. There's actually Yeah. For most species. There's actually Yeah. For most species. There's actually a few uh exceptions being uh what a few uh exceptions being uh what a few uh exceptions being uh what comes to mind is um uh certain water comes to mind is um uh certain water comes to mind is um uh certain water fowl birds where a female and I can't say which where a female and I can't say which where a female and I can't say which species now but some species of water species now but some species of water species now but some species of water bird the female recognizes the male bird the female recognizes the male bird the female recognizes the male innately but the male learns through innately but the male learns through innately but the male learns through sexual imprinting when they're young to sexual imprinting when they're young to sexual imprinting when they're young to sort of be attracted to females that sort of be attracted to females that sort of be attracted to females that resemble the female that reared them. resemble the female that reared them. resemble the female that reared them. And essentially this is because um And essentially this is because um And essentially this is because um in those species the males are in those species the males are in those species the males are typically very ornamented and sort of typically very ornamented and sort of typically very ornamented and sort of really fabulous looking and the females really fabulous looking and the females really fabulous looking and the females are um cryptic. They're like are um cryptic. They're like are um cryptic. They're like camouflaged. So they'll they're like camouflaged. So they'll they're like camouflaged. So they'll they're like brown. So the males need to learn what brown. So the males need to learn what brown. So the males need to learn what mom looks like. And when they grow up, mom looks like. And when they grow up, mom looks like. And when they grow up, they'll start um they'll start um they'll start um courting females that look like mom. And courting females that look like mom. And courting females that look like mom. And so if you raise such a male with the so if you raise such a male with the so if you raise such a male with the wrong species, they'll start courting wrong species, they'll start courting wrong species, they'll start courting the wrong female. And of course, she the wrong female. And of course, she the wrong female. And of course, she won't be interested because she he won't be interested because she he won't be interested because she he doesn't look like the her golden doesn't look like the her golden doesn't look like the her golden standard of what a male of that species standard of what a male of that species standard of what a male of that species is supposed to look like. It's so is supposed to look like. It's so is supposed to look like. It's so interesting. As a kid who had aquaria, interesting. As a kid who had aquaria, interesting. As a kid who had aquaria, you can tell I've had a lot of different you can tell I've had a lot of different you can tell I've had a lot of different animals. Um, you know, I would I never animals. Um, you know, I would I never animals. Um, you know, I would I never successfully uh bred um fish in successfully uh bred um fish in successfully uh bred um fish in captivity. Um uh I tried to breed captivity. Um uh I tried to breed captivity. Um uh I tried to breed cuttlefish in captivity in my lab. That cuttlefish in captivity in my lab. That cuttlefish in captivity in my lab. That didn't work. Although I successfully didn't work. Although I successfully didn't work. Although I successfully raised them, but I got really into raised them, but I got really into raised them, but I got really into freshwater discus for a while. Okay. And freshwater discus for a while. Okay. And freshwater discus for a while. Okay. And tried very hard to get a breeding tank tried very hard to get a breeding tank tried very hard to get a breeding tank going. It's very difficult. Um but going. It's very difficult. Um but going. It's very difficult. Um but occasionally, you know, someone in the occasionally, you know, someone in the occasionally, you know, someone in the aquarium community that I was a part of aquarium community that I was a part of aquarium community that I was a part of would succeed in getting, you know, would succeed in getting, you know, would succeed in getting, you know, breeding between uh discus fish, but you breeding between uh discus fish, but you breeding between uh discus fish, but you never ever see an instance of like never ever see an instance of like never ever see an instance of like a discus fish trying to uh fertilize the a discus fish trying to uh fertilize the a discus fish trying to uh fertilize the eggs of a uh of a different species of eggs of a uh of a different species of eggs of a uh of a different species of fish. They just know. Yeah. And it's got fish. They just know. Yeah. And it's got fish. They just know. Yeah. And it's got to be for them odorant or presumably to be for them odorant or presumably to be for them odorant or presumably mixed sensory. um is it's really a mixed sensory. um is it's really a mixed sensory. um is it's really a striking aspect of even in speak but I striking aspect of even in speak but I striking aspect of even in speak but I have friends who study flies. So if they have friends who study flies. So if they have friends who study flies. So if they study um drosophila uh of one particular study um drosophila uh of one particular study um drosophila uh of one particular type that the one type of fruitly type that the one type of fruitly type that the one type of fruitly will not try to mate with another type will not try to mate with another type will not try to mate with another type of fruit fly and they look very similar of fruit fly and they look very similar of fruit fly and they look very similar to you and me. So there's to you and me. So there's to you and me. So there's something really powerful there that something really powerful there that something really powerful there that sort of um there's imbreeding avoidance sort of um there's imbreeding avoidance sort of um there's imbreeding avoidance is sort of uh a mechanism that is sort of uh a mechanism that is sort of uh a mechanism that prevents many animal species from prevents many animal species from prevents many animal species from mating with someone who's too mating with someone who's too mating with someone who's too genetically similar to yourself since we genetically similar to yourself since we genetically similar to yourself since we get this inbreeding depression. But get this inbreeding depression. But get this inbreeding depression. But there's also sort of don't waste there's also sort of don't waste there's also sort of don't waste your time mating with someone that's your time mating with someone that's your time mating with someone that's like you can't even produce offspring. like you can't even produce offspring. like you can't even produce offspring. However, one other exception that However, one other exception that However, one other exception that came to mind was unullet. sometimes uh came to mind was unullet. sometimes uh came to mind was unullet. sometimes uh and I have this memory of being I was in and I have this memory of being I was in and I have this memory of being I was in Africa about back in 1995 um at the Africa about back in 1995 um at the Africa about back in 1995 um at the Chimunji Wildlife Orphanage um walking Chimunji Wildlife Orphanage um walking Chimunji Wildlife Orphanage um walking chimps into the forest to sort of chimps into the forest to sort of chimps into the forest to sort of rehabilitate them and that they had rehabilitate them and that they had rehabilitate them and that they had a young dyker there which is a very a young dyker there which is a very a young dyker there which is a very small like yayh high um antelope kind of small like yayh high um antelope kind of small like yayh high um antelope kind of thing who had been orphaned and raised thing who had been orphaned and raised thing who had been orphaned and raised bottle raised and sexually imprinted on bottle raised and sexually imprinted on bottle raised and sexually imprinted on humans. Whoa. So he came up and started, humans. Whoa. So he came up and started, humans. Whoa. So he came up and started, you know, humping me more or less you know, humping me more or less you know, humping me more or less thinking that I was his kind. So thinking that I was his kind. So thinking that I was his kind. So that type of sexual imprinting is when that type of sexual imprinting is when that type of sexual imprinting is when predominantly I think males learn, when predominantly I think males learn, when predominantly I think males learn, they imprint sexually on the type of they imprint sexually on the type of they imprint sexually on the type of individual that raised them. So that's individual that raised them. So that's individual that raised them. So that's the type of individual that they will the type of individual that they will the type of individual that they will then later also try to court. I think then later also try to court. I think then later also try to court. I think Conrad Lawrence had a also in his one of Conrad Lawrence had a also in his one of Conrad Lawrence had a also in his one of his books he described some sort of his books he described some sort of his books he described some sort of corvid species who he also raised from corvid species who he also raised from corvid species who he also raised from young and who started courting his uh young and who started courting his uh young and who started courting his uh like a secretary or someone and the a secretary or someone and the a secretary or someone and the interesting story there was the courting interesting story there was the courting interesting story there was the courting behavior in this bird is behavior in this bird is behavior in this bird is um vomiting um you know leaving like a um vomiting um you know leaving like a um vomiting um you know leaving like a present and offering food in any open present and offering food in any open present and offering food in any open surface. So or orifice. So he would try surface. So or orifice. So he would try surface. So or orifice. So he would try he would try to sort of get her to open he would try to sort of get her to open he would try to sort of get her to open her mouth and when she didn't he would her mouth and when she didn't he would her mouth and when she didn't he would go and leave the present in her go and leave the present in her go and leave the present in her ear instead. Disgusting. people can ear instead. Disgusting. people can ear instead. Disgusting. people can offset their disgust by we'll provide a offset their disgust by we'll provide a offset their disgust by we'll provide a link to the now very famous picture of link to the now very famous picture of link to the now very famous picture of con of Conrad Loren who won the Nobel con of Conrad Loren who won the Nobel con of Conrad Loren who won the Nobel Prize I believe um for uh his Prize I believe um for uh his Prize I believe um for uh his discoveries of about imprinting where discoveries of about imprinting where discoveries of about imprinting where the geese would imprint on him. It's him the geese would imprint on him. It's him the geese would imprint on him. It's him swimming in a lake with the with the swimming in a lake with the with the swimming in a lake with the with the trail of baby geese behind him the trail of baby geese behind him the trail of baby geese behind him the glings behind him. So that's the glings behind him. So that's the glings behind him. So that's the other type of imprinting you're other type of imprinting you're other type of imprinting you're talking about. That's filial imprinting. talking about. That's filial imprinting. talking about. That's filial imprinting. So there are two types. There's the So there are two types. There's the So there are two types. There's the sexual imprinting where you learn who to sexual imprinting where you learn who to sexual imprinting where you learn who to make with and there's the filial make with and there's the filial make with and there's the filial imprinting where you sort of learn who imprinting where you sort of learn who imprinting where you sort of learn who to feel safe with and they start to feel safe with and they start to feel safe with and they start following that individual which is what following that individual which is what following that individual which is what dogs do with us. dogs do with us. dogs do with us. Actually, I would say that dogs don't Actually, I would say that dogs don't Actually, I would say that dogs don't imprint on humans. They grow attachment imprint on humans. They grow attachment imprint on humans. They grow attachment bonds to humans. What's the difference? bonds to humans. What's the difference? bonds to humans. What's the difference? So imprinting is typically a very fast So imprinting is typically a very fast So imprinting is typically a very fast process. It occurs within you know process. It occurs within you know process. It occurs within you know minutes or hours. attachment takes minutes or hours. attachment takes minutes or hours. attachment takes longer and involves more senses. So longer and involves more senses. So longer and involves more senses. So imprinting tends to be I think visual if imprinting tends to be I think visual if imprinting tends to be I think visual if I'm not mistaken perhaps alactory in I'm not mistaken perhaps alactory in I'm not mistaken perhaps alactory in some species some species some species uh and attachment has previously uh and attachment has previously uh and attachment has previously mostly been studied in humans. So this mostly been studied in humans. So this mostly been studied in humans. So this bond that grows between uh caregiver and bond that grows between uh caregiver and bond that grows between uh caregiver and offspring. Um what's interesting also is offspring. Um what's interesting also is offspring. Um what's interesting also is that attach that attachment bond um will that attach that attachment bond um will that attach that attachment bond um will grow in different ways depending on how grow in different ways depending on how grow in different ways depending on how the caregiver responds to the young the caregiver responds to the young the caregiver responds to the young one's um needs essentially. So you can one's um needs essentially. So you can one's um needs essentially. So you can have um a secure attachment bond where have um a secure attachment bond where have um a secure attachment bond where the caregiver is very uh reliably the caregiver is very uh reliably the caregiver is very uh reliably responds to the needs of the of the responds to the needs of the of the responds to the needs of the of the young one so that if they find young one so that if they find young one so that if they find themselves alone, they can they can self-regulate alone, they can they can self-regulate alone, they can they can self-regulate better. So they can their nervous system better. So they can their nervous system better. So they can their nervous system can more easily calm down again after a can more easily calm down again after a can more easily calm down again after a stressor than if they are insecurely stressor than if they are insecurely stressor than if they are insecurely attached. And so it seems that dogs form attached. And so it seems that dogs form attached. And so it seems that dogs form rather than imprinting on humans, they rather than imprinting on humans, they rather than imprinting on humans, they form a type of attachment bond and they form a type of attachment bond and they form a type of attachment bond and they can also be securely or insecurely can also be securely or insecurely can also be securely or insecurely attached to their persons. that's going attached to their persons. that's going attached to their persons. that's going to open up a whole set of ideas for to open up a whole set of ideas for to open up a whole set of ideas for people because this whole notion of people because this whole notion of people because this whole notion of secure insecure and um and then the secure insecure and um and then the secure insecure and um and then the D-babies and the classic Bulby D-babies and the classic Bulby D-babies and the classic Bulby experiments that we've talked about experiments that we've talked about experiments that we've talked about before on this podcast where um this before on this podcast where um this before on this podcast where um this kind of disorganized um response is kind of disorganized um response is kind of disorganized um response is something that is thrown around a lot something that is thrown around a lot something that is thrown around a lot nowadays in uh dating culture, nowadays in uh dating culture, nowadays in uh dating culture, relationship psychology culture like our relationship psychology culture like our relationship psychology culture like our people is he or she securely attached is people is he or she securely attached is people is he or she securely attached is he or she avoidant? Is he or she anxious he or she avoidant? Is he or she anxious he or she avoidant? Is he or she anxious attached? Guess what folks? It's also in attached? Guess what folks? It's also in attached? Guess what folks? It's also in your pets. So now you can start to in your pets. So now you can start to in your pets. So now you can start to get into that in those classic get into that in those classic get into that in those classic experiments of bulby just to summarize experiments of bulby just to summarize experiments of bulby just to summarize very briefly um mother and it was very briefly um mother and it was very briefly um mother and it was typically mother although other typically mother although other typically mother although other caretakers now have been tested but caretakers now have been tested but caretakers now have been tested but mother and child are separated there's mother and child are separated there's mother and child are separated there's an a predictable understandable and an a predictable understandable and an a predictable understandable and healthy anxiety response that occurs. If healthy anxiety response that occurs. If healthy anxiety response that occurs. If the conditions are right the kid the conditions are right the kid the conditions are right the kid eventually comes to play and relax a eventually comes to play and relax a eventually comes to play and relax a bit. If the conditions aren't right they bit. If the conditions aren't right they bit. If the conditions aren't right they don't. That's all healthy. But the real don't. That's all healthy. But the real don't. That's all healthy. But the real test is on reunion with mom. Yeah. And test is on reunion with mom. Yeah. And test is on reunion with mom. Yeah. And also how they respond to a stranger, also how they respond to a stranger, also how they respond to a stranger, right? The strange situation test, right? The strange situation test, right? The strange situation test, right? Do they feel comforted? And how right? Do they feel comforted? And how right? Do they feel comforted? And how do they approach mom when mom comes do they approach mom when mom comes do they approach mom when mom comes back? Is it eager to see and back? Is it eager to see and back? Is it eager to see and relaxed? Is it uncertain? Is it uh relaxed? Is it uncertain? Is it uh relaxed? Is it uncertain? Is it uh avoidant? That's what the this test is avoidant? That's what the this test is avoidant? That's what the this test is about. Yeah. Or clingy also. Yeah. about. Yeah. Or clingy also. Yeah. about. Yeah. Or clingy also. Yeah. So the same types of experiments have So the same types of experiments have So the same types of experiments have been done on dogs and it's been found been done on dogs and it's been found been done on dogs and it's been found that certain dogs are sort of that certain dogs are sort of that certain dogs are sort of insecurely attached. They'll be clingy insecurely attached. They'll be clingy insecurely attached. They'll be clingy uh or avoidant and uh or and some are uh or avoidant and uh or and some are uh or avoidant and uh or and some are securely attached. So they'll be sort of securely attached. So they'll be sort of securely attached. So they'll be sort of more explorative more explorative more explorative uh they'll recover quicker uh from this uh they'll recover quicker uh from this uh they'll recover quicker uh from this separation. So this is great. So if separation. So this is great. So if separation. So this is great. So if people uh drop off their dog at the dog people uh drop off their dog at the dog people uh drop off their dog at the dog sitter when they travel and then come sitter when they travel and then come sitter when they travel and then come back, the reunion tells you a lot about back, the reunion tells you a lot about back, the reunion tells you a lot about how that dog feels. Yeah. Sadly, I think how that dog feels. Yeah. Sadly, I think how that dog feels. Yeah. Sadly, I think that uh and I'm not sure that I have any uh and I'm not sure that I have any uh and I'm not sure that I have any backup in any scientific studies here, backup in any scientific studies here, backup in any scientific studies here, but I suspect at least that but I suspect at least that but I suspect at least that probably early weaning predispose dogs probably early weaning predispose dogs probably early weaning predispose dogs to insecure attachment. In this country, to insecure attachment. In this country, to insecure attachment. In this country, the typical um idea is that puppies can the typical um idea is that puppies can the typical um idea is that puppies can be separated from their mother at about be separated from their mother at about be separated from their mother at about 8 weeks. Uh do you feel that's too 8 weeks. Uh do you feel that's too 8 weeks. Uh do you feel that's too early? Yeah. As an ethologist, sort of early? Yeah. As an ethologist, sort of early? Yeah. As an ethologist, sort of looking at how the species live looking at how the species live looking at how the species live in the wild, what type of social in the wild, what type of social in the wild, what type of social interactions they have, and how can we interactions they have, and how can we interactions they have, and how can we best provide an environment to sort of best provide an environment to sort of best provide an environment to sort of promote natural promote natural promote natural behavior. For me, 8 weeks is way too behavior. For me, 8 weeks is way too behavior. For me, 8 weeks is way too early. So we have some studies from the early. So we have some studies from the early. So we have some studies from the I don't know 60s or something uh where I don't know 60s or something uh where I don't know 60s or something uh where I think two researchers called Scott and think two researchers called Scott and think two researchers called Scott and Fuller did some separation studies but Fuller did some separation studies but Fuller did some separation studies but that was with dogs aged like 3 four that was with dogs aged like 3 four that was with dogs aged like 3 four five six weeks and they found that five six weeks and they found that five six weeks and they found that type of early separation was really type of early separation was really type of early separation was really detrimental. Sure. uh but I as far as I detrimental. Sure. uh but I as far as I detrimental. Sure. uh but I as far as I know there's been very few studies done know there's been very few studies done know there's been very few studies done beyond 8 weeks and of course many done beyond 8 weeks and of course many done beyond 8 weeks and of course many people would then say that okay well we people would then say that okay well we people would then say that okay well we have to do all that all that have to do all that all that have to do all that all that socialization stuff where the animal socialization stuff where the animal socialization stuff where the animal learns to sort of accept life with learns to sort of accept life with learns to sort of accept life with humans that would then have to occur at humans that would then have to occur at humans that would then have to occur at the breeders rather than in the new uh the breeders rather than in the new uh the breeders rather than in the new uh in the new environment but actually I'm in the new environment but actually I'm in the new environment but actually I'm not so sure because it seems that if you not so sure because it seems that if you not so sure because it seems that if you have secure attachment you're better able to self-regulate you're better able to self-regulate you're better able to self-regulate after, you know, being exposed to after, you know, being exposed to after, you know, being exposed to something that will disregulate you. So, something that will disregulate you. So, something that will disregulate you. So, so some you have an event happening, you so some you have an event happening, you so some you have an event happening, you get anxious and sort of uh fearful get anxious and sort of uh fearful get anxious and sort of uh fearful and that then your nervous system is and that then your nervous system is and that then your nervous system is able to calm down again. And so I think able to calm down again. And so I think able to calm down again. And so I think that if we are if we simply allow dogs that if we are if we simply allow dogs that if we are if we simply allow dogs to have secure attachment then perhaps to have secure attachment then perhaps to have secure attachment then perhaps the need for this sometimes this um the need for this sometimes this um the need for this sometimes this um the socialization procedures are very socialization procedures are very socialization procedures are very elaborate. There's like a list of a elaborate. There's like a list of a elaborate. There's like a list of a hundred things that the dog needs to be hundred things that the dog needs to be hundred things that the dog needs to be exposed to. you know, men with beards exposed to. you know, men with beards exposed to. you know, men with beards and children uh age 12 and people and children uh age 12 and people and children uh age 12 and people with uh shoes, you know, certain types with uh shoes, you know, certain types with uh shoes, you know, certain types of shoes and um you know, the of shoes and um you know, the of shoes and um you know, the vacuum cleaner and so on and so on. vacuum cleaner and so on and so on. vacuum cleaner and so on and so on. There's a whole list of things that you There's a whole list of things that you There's a whole list of things that you need to expose an animal to. And I need to expose an animal to. And I need to expose an animal to. And I would think that if the animal is would think that if the animal is would think that if the animal is securely attached so that they have securely attached so that they have securely attached so that they have learned selfie regulation, being exposed learned selfie regulation, being exposed learned selfie regulation, being exposed to those things will not be such a big to those things will not be such a big to those things will not be such a big deal. But I don't think that we have the deal. But I don't think that we have the deal. But I don't think that we have the research to back up that assertion quite research to back up that assertion quite research to back up that assertion quite yet. I love this notion because um we yet. I love this notion because um we yet. I love this notion because um we can't prepare humans, including can't prepare humans, including can't prepare humans, including ourselves or animals, for every ourselves or animals, for every ourselves or animals, for every circumstance, but we can um train up circumstance, but we can um train up circumstance, but we can um train up neural circuits. I'm a neural circuits. I'm a neural circuits. I'm a neurobiologist after all. And so I neurobiologist after all. And so I neurobiologist after all. And so I like to think of this more as opposed like to think of this more as opposed like to think of this more as opposed to preparing for events, you prepare for to preparing for events, you prepare for to preparing for events, you prepare for processes. So, uh, you know, much has been said on So, uh, you know, much has been said on So, uh, you know, much has been said on this podcast and others about like this podcast and others about like this podcast and others about like deliberate cold exposure. You know, why deliberate cold exposure. You know, why deliberate cold exposure. You know, why take a cold shower? It's it's not about take a cold shower? It's it's not about take a cold shower? It's it's not about the specific benefits of the cold the specific benefits of the cold the specific benefits of the cold shower. It's it teaches you how to shower. It's it teaches you how to shower. It's it teaches you how to navigate having high adrenaline in your navigate having high adrenaline in your navigate having high adrenaline in your body, which is the universal generic body, which is the universal generic body, which is the universal generic response to stress. So, um, you can response to stress. So, um, you can response to stress. So, um, you can export self-regulation from one export self-regulation from one export self-regulation from one situation to the other. Um, what you're situation to the other. Um, what you're situation to the other. Um, what you're describing is a much more, um, important describing is a much more, um, important describing is a much more, um, important life stage example than deliberate cold life stage example than deliberate cold life stage example than deliberate cold exposure. It's about, as you said, being exposure. It's about, as you said, being exposure. It's about, as you said, being able to navigate uh attachments that are able to navigate uh attachments that are able to navigate uh attachments that are there, then gone, then there. Again, there, then gone, then there. Again, there, then gone, then there. Again, this is one of my major concerns. We this is one of my major concerns. We this is one of my major concerns. We don't want to um go off on a on a don't want to um go off on a on a don't want to um go off on a on a tangent too far here, but since humans tangent too far here, but since humans tangent too far here, but since humans are animals, as you pointed out about um are animals, as you pointed out about um are animals, as you pointed out about um texting, you know, it often times texting, you know, it often times texting, you know, it often times texting can be a wonderful tool. It also texting can be a wonderful tool. It also texting can be a wonderful tool. It also can be a way that people um don't learn can be a way that people um don't learn can be a way that people um don't learn to ever deal with to self-regulate. to ever deal with to self-regulate. to ever deal with to self-regulate. Yeah. Um, you see this as the plane Yeah. Um, you see this as the plane Yeah. Um, you see this as the plane lands or the plane's taking off, people, lands or the plane's taking off, people, lands or the plane's taking off, people, you know, frantically uh texting, which you know, frantically uh texting, which you know, frantically uh texting, which can be about, hey, my plane just can be about, hey, my plane just can be about, hey, my plane just arrived. It can also be about an arrived. It can also be about an arrived. It can also be about an inability to just deal with the uh the inability to just deal with the uh the inability to just deal with the uh the real life uncertainty that you're not in real life uncertainty that you're not in real life uncertainty that you're not in charge up there. The the pilots and the charge up there. The the pilots and the charge up there. The the pilots and the weather conditions are. So, in any case, weather conditions are. So, in any case, weather conditions are. So, in any case, I have a probably controversial I have a probably controversial I have a probably controversial question, okay? But we've opened up some question, okay? But we've opened up some question, okay? But we've opened up some Pandora's boxes, so why not? Um, I opted Pandora's boxes, so why not? Um, I opted Pandora's boxes, so why not? Um, I opted to neuter my dog. Yeah. Uh, I did that to neuter my dog. Yeah. Uh, I did that to neuter my dog. Yeah. Uh, I did that when he was about six months old. I did when he was about six months old. I did when he was about six months old. I did that honestly reluctantly. Mhm. People that honestly reluctantly. Mhm. People that honestly reluctantly. Mhm. People say, well, you know, men with their dogs say, well, you know, men with their dogs say, well, you know, men with their dogs and they don't want to ne their dogs and they don't want to ne their dogs and they don't want to ne their dogs and it's for these, you know, whatever Y it's for these, you know, whatever Y it's for these, you know, whatever Y chromosome related reasons or something. chromosome related reasons or something. chromosome related reasons or something. Perhaps it is. Um, but really the reason Perhaps it is. Um, but really the reason Perhaps it is. Um, but really the reason I was reluctant was a I thought I was reluctant was a I thought I was reluctant was a I thought I might want to um breed Costello at some might want to um breed Costello at some might want to um breed Costello at some point. The other is I spent two years of point. The other is I spent two years of point. The other is I spent two years of my life uh studying and researching and my life uh studying and researching and my life uh studying and researching and um eventually publishing uh papers on um eventually publishing uh papers on um eventually publishing uh papers on the effects of uh early androgens on I the effects of uh early androgens on I the effects of uh early androgens on I had a minor role in that study but um had a minor role in that study but um had a minor role in that study but um effects of early androgens on brain effects of early androgens on brain effects of early androgens on brain development and you don't have to spend development and you don't have to spend development and you don't have to spend long in that field of hormones and long in that field of hormones and long in that field of hormones and development to know that hormones development to know that hormones development to know that hormones testosterone and estrogen have a testosterone and estrogen have a testosterone and estrogen have a powerful organizing effect on powerful organizing effect on powerful organizing effect on the brain of males and females. the brain of males and females. the brain of males and females. So, and that also occurs during So, and that also occurs during So, and that also occurs during adolescence, right? And then there's the adolescence, right? And then there's the adolescence, right? And then there's the surge of hormone that comes so right surge of hormone that comes so right surge of hormone that comes so right there happens in uterero and then and there happens in uterero and then and there happens in uterero and then and then those are the organizing effects then those are the organizing effects then those are the organizing effects and then there are the activating and then there are the activating and then there are the activating effects as you're pointing out of effects as you're pointing out of effects as you're pointing out of hormones that then during puberty the hormones that then during puberty the hormones that then during puberty the ovaries in females or the testes in ovaries in females or the testes in ovaries in females or the testes in males produce hormones that then act on males produce hormones that then act on males produce hormones that then act on this kind of template that was laid this kind of template that was laid this kind of template that was laid down. And so I knew that whatever down. And so I knew that whatever down. And so I knew that whatever testosterone, estrogen, etc. Costello testosterone, estrogen, etc. Costello testosterone, estrogen, etc. Costello had seen in utero, he'd seen. Mhm. And had seen in utero, he'd seen. Mhm. And had seen in utero, he'd seen. Mhm. And that by removing his testicles, let's be that by removing his testicles, let's be that by removing his testicles, let's be honest, what neutering is, all the men honest, what neutering is, all the men honest, what neutering is, all the men are cringing and the women are like, are cringing and the women are like, are cringing and the women are like, "Okay, got it." Um, but if I said remove "Okay, got it." Um, but if I said remove "Okay, got it." Um, but if I said remove ovaries, they might have a different ovaries, they might have a different ovaries, they might have a different response. So, by removing his testes response. So, by removing his testes response. So, by removing his testes that he would not experience the um that he would not experience the um that he would not experience the um activating effects of hormones. Okay. Uh activating effects of hormones. Okay. Uh activating effects of hormones. Okay. Uh to make a long story short, um it seemed to make a long story short, um it seemed to make a long story short, um it seemed he had a great life. He was a wonderful he had a great life. He was a wonderful he had a great life. He was a wonderful dog. when he got to be about 9 years dog. when he got to be about 9 years dog. when he got to be about 9 years old, he had a lot of joint aching and old, he had a lot of joint aching and old, he had a lot of joint aching and pain. He had some extensive nail growth pain. He had some extensive nail growth pain. He had some extensive nail growth that was really fast. Some things that was really fast. Some things that was really fast. Some things were odd. Um I opted to do um an were odd. Um I opted to do um an were odd. Um I opted to do um an experiment. Um and I started injecting experiment. Um and I started injecting experiment. Um and I started injecting him with 50 milligrams of testosterone him with 50 milligrams of testosterone him with 50 milligrams of testosterone per week. The response was incredible. per week. The response was incredible. per week. The response was incredible. His vigor returned. His joint pain, at His vigor returned. His joint pain, at His vigor returned. His joint pain, at least in terms of his willingness to go least in terms of his willingness to go least in terms of his willingness to go down the stairs quickly, to stand up down the stairs quickly, to stand up down the stairs quickly, to stand up quickly. incredible. He um got two more years of incredible. He um got two more years of incredible. He um got two more years of what I thought was a great life. I hope what I thought was a great life. I hope what I thought was a great life. I hope it was. Um and what's interesting is it was. Um and what's interesting is it was. Um and what's interesting is that when I talked about this publicly that when I talked about this publicly that when I talked about this publicly on a few other podcasts, I injected my on a few other podcasts, I injected my on a few other podcasts, I injected my bulldog with testosterone after bulldog with testosterone after bulldog with testosterone after neutering him. I thought I was going to neutering him. I thought I was going to neutering him. I thought I was going to get a tsunami of criticism from the get a tsunami of criticism from the get a tsunami of criticism from the veterary community. Okay. Instead, I veterary community. Okay. Instead, I veterary community. Okay. Instead, I received hundreds of emails saying, received hundreds of emails saying, received hundreds of emails saying, "Thank you. "Thank you. "Thank you. We actually actively discourage people We actually actively discourage people We actually actively discourage people from neutering their animals unless from neutering their animals unless from neutering their animals unless they're in a circumstance where that dog they're in a circumstance where that dog they're in a circumstance where that dog can get out and mate because we don't can get out and mate because we don't can get out and mate because we don't need more strays. need more strays. need more strays. And there are a number of health And there are a number of health And there are a number of health positive health benefits to keeping positive health benefits to keeping positive health benefits to keeping hormones intact. hormones intact. hormones intact. And I'm going to start doing what you And I'm going to start doing what you And I'm going to start doing what you did with some of my uh with some of did with some of my uh with some of did with some of my uh with some of my patient dogs. Not one vet, mind you, my patient dogs. Not one vet, mind you, my patient dogs. Not one vet, mind you, I have no training as a vet. Not one vet I have no training as a vet. Not one vet I have no training as a vet. Not one vet said, "Hey, you were out of line doing said, "Hey, you were out of line doing said, "Hey, you were out of line doing that. you shouldn't have been doing that. you shouldn't have been doing that. you shouldn't have been doing that. And I'll tell you, if I get that. And I'll tell you, if I get that. And I'll tell you, if I get another dog and it's a male dog, I'll be another dog and it's a male dog, I'll be another dog and it's a male dog, I'll be very careful to not let him out and I'll very careful to not let him out and I'll very careful to not let him out and I'll be very careful with the training so be very careful with the training so be very careful with the training so he's not excessively aggressive, but um he's not excessively aggressive, but um he's not excessively aggressive, but um I'm not going to neuter him. Yeah. I'm not going to neuter him. Yeah. I'm not going to neuter him. Yeah. And I know this is going to activate And I know this is going to activate And I know this is going to activate some people, some people, some people, but I'd love your thoughts on neutering but I'd love your thoughts on neutering but I'd love your thoughts on neutering in male and female dogs in particular, in male and female dogs in particular, in male and female dogs in particular, um given everything that you and I know um given everything that you and I know um given everything that you and I know about hormones and what we just talked about hormones and what we just talked about hormones and what we just talked about. Yeah, you're touching on several about. Yeah, you're touching on several about. Yeah, you're touching on several different things that I think are different things that I think are different things that I think are interesting. one that it's a very much a interesting. one that it's a very much a interesting. one that it's a very much a cultural phenomena that in Norway I cultural phenomena that in Norway I cultural phenomena that in Norway I know that you're not allowed to neuter know that you're not allowed to neuter know that you're not allowed to neuter dogs unless for medical reasons. Really? dogs unless for medical reasons. Really? dogs unless for medical reasons. Really? Yeah. And in Western Australia, you're Yeah. And in Western Australia, you're Yeah. And in Western Australia, you're not allowed not to neuter dogs unless not allowed not to neuter dogs unless not allowed not to neuter dogs unless for medical reason or if you want to for medical reason or if you want to for medical reason or if you want to breed them. So, it's like very breed them. So, it's like very breed them. So, it's like very cultural whether neutering is something cultural whether neutering is something cultural whether neutering is something that you do or not in any given that you do or not in any given that you do or not in any given location. That's one. The second thing location. That's one. The second thing location. That's one. The second thing is that you said that neutering is about is that you said that neutering is about is that you said that neutering is about removing test uh testicles. Actually removing test uh testicles. Actually removing test uh testicles. Actually there's other procedures that there's other procedures that there's other procedures that can be done which is essentially uh can be done which is essentially uh can be done which is essentially uh just snipping the connection. So not just snipping the connection. So not just snipping the connection. So not removing testicles so that they continue removing testicles so that they continue removing testicles so that they continue producing uh all producing uh all producing uh all the stuff that they produce but they the stuff that they produce but they the stuff that they produce but they um they can't uh produ reproduce um they can't uh produ reproduce um they can't uh produ reproduce sexually. Yeah. Why don't we just give sexually. Yeah. Why don't we just give sexually. Yeah. Why don't we just give them basectomies? when I Yeah. So, them basectomies? when I Yeah. So, them basectomies? when I Yeah. So, the second and for females, the second and for females, the second and for females, the corresponding procedure would then be to corresponding procedure would then be to corresponding procedure would then be to sort of to sort of to sort of whatever it is tie to Yeah. Tie the whatever it is tie to Yeah. Tie the whatever it is tie to Yeah. Tie the whatever it is. And there's also a third whatever it is. And there's also a third whatever it is. And there's also a third option which is um chemical castration. option which is um chemical castration. option which is um chemical castration. That's that's reversible that you can That's that's reversible that you can That's that's reversible that you can try to see what behavioral effects you try to see what behavioral effects you try to see what behavioral effects you get from a change of get from a change of get from a change of uh hormonal status. There's also this uh hormonal status. There's also this uh hormonal status. There's also this interesting thing that the interesting thing that the interesting thing that the knowledge of the effects of castration knowledge of the effects of castration knowledge of the effects of castration or of neutering has really changed a lot or of neutering has really changed a lot or of neutering has really changed a lot in the last 20 years or so. It used to in the last 20 years or so. It used to in the last 20 years or so. It used to be in the 1990s that be in the 1990s that be in the 1990s that it used to be recommended because that it used to be recommended because that it used to be recommended because uh you know they wouldn't reproduce and uh you know they wouldn't reproduce and uh you know they wouldn't reproduce and there'd be less humping and some there'd be less humping and some there'd be less humping and some so it was sort of so it was sort of so it was sort of promoted with regards to certain promoted with regards to certain promoted with regards to certain behavioral changes. behavioral changes. behavioral changes. Later studies have shown and there's Later studies have shown and there's Later studies have shown and there's like more than 20 in the last 20 years like more than 20 in the last 20 years like more than 20 in the last 20 years or so have shown that quite consistently or so have shown that quite consistently or so have shown that quite consistently that some of the effects of neutering that some of the effects of neutering that some of the effects of neutering might be particularly in males might be particularly in males might be particularly in males apparently and it depends on the age at apparently and it depends on the age at apparently and it depends on the age at which this is done also and it has to do which this is done also and it has to do which this is done also and it has to do with this the activation process of with this the activation process of with this the activation process of course is that you'll see an increase in course is that you'll see an increase in course is that you'll see an increase in fear uh an increase in reactivity fear uh an increase in reactivity fear uh an increase in reactivity aggressive behavior you might see an aggressive behavior you might see an aggressive behavior you might see an increase in increase in increase in um uh noise uh sensitivity and so on. So um uh noise uh sensitivity and so on. So um uh noise uh sensitivity and so on. So it seems that as you were touching on it seems that as you were touching on it seems that as you were touching on the change in hormonal status not only the change in hormonal status not only the change in hormonal status not only has this physiological effect on the has this physiological effect on the has this physiological effect on the body but also behavioral effects. Now body but also behavioral effects. Now body but also behavioral effects. Now there's also an increase in the risk of there's also an increase in the risk of there's also an increase in the risk of certain cancers or certain cancers or certain cancers or certain uh physical uh physical uh physical um problems and a decrease in others. So um problems and a decrease in others. So um problems and a decrease in others. So I would I would suggest that once you do I would I would suggest that once you do I would I would suggest that once you do get your other your next dog that you get your other your next dog that you get your other your next dog that you discuss with a veterinarian the best discuss with a veterinarian the best discuss with a veterinarian the best option for that particular breed and option for that particular breed and option for that particular breed and that particular individual because it's that particular individual because it's that particular individual because it's going to be very breed specific. it's going to be very breed specific. it's going to be very breed specific. It's gender specific and it's also the It's gender specific and it's also the It's gender specific and it's also the age at which these procedures are done. age at which these procedures are done. age at which these procedures are done. Okay. So to me it's very interesting Okay. So to me it's very interesting Okay. So to me it's very interesting that in Norway dogs are not allowed to that in Norway dogs are not allowed to that in Norway dogs are not allowed to be fixed except for medical reasons. In be fixed except for medical reasons. In be fixed except for medical reasons. In Australia they have to be at least in Australia they have to be at least in Australia they have to be at least in Western Australia. Um so this idea of Western Australia. Um so this idea of Western Australia. Um so this idea of keeping dogs intact so to speak um is keeping dogs intact so to speak um is keeping dogs intact so to speak um is not such a heretical one. Um but I think not such a heretical one. Um but I think not such a heretical one. Um but I think in the United States a lot of this is in the United States a lot of this is in the United States a lot of this is still getting worked out. And I think still getting worked out. And I think still getting worked out. And I think that the statistics say that the number that the statistics say that the number that the statistics say that the number of people with pets in the home now in of people with pets in the home now in of people with pets in the home now in the United States is like almost the United States is like almost the United States is like almost every home. Yeah. I think it's a 40% of every home. Yeah. I think it's a 40% of every home. Yeah. I think it's a 40% of Americans own a dog and I think in Americans own a dog and I think in Americans own a dog and I think in Norway it's like 15. So, and I Norway it's like 15. So, and I Norway it's like 15. So, and I probably this ties in a lot to why the probably this ties in a lot to why the probably this ties in a lot to why the cultures have emerged so differently the cultures have emerged so differently the cultures have emerged so differently because there's a lot less sort of because there's a lot less sort of because there's a lot less sort of backyard breeding and so on and backyard breeding and so on and backyard breeding and so on and feral populations in Scandinavia of feral populations in Scandinavia of feral populations in Scandinavia of dogs. So, we don't have this huge dogs. So, we don't have this huge dogs. So, we don't have this huge problem with overpopulation uh that you'll see in some other uh that you'll see in some other uh that you'll see in some other countries. So, and I think that countries. So, and I think that countries. So, and I think that here a lot of the neutering is done here a lot of the neutering is done here a lot of the neutering is done to control the population uh to control the population uh to control the population uh predominantly as a way to sort of try to predominantly as a way to sort of try to predominantly as a way to sort of try to reduce the number of animals uh sort reduce the number of animals uh sort reduce the number of animals uh sort of go into shelters and so on. Well, of go into shelters and so on. Well, of go into shelters and so on. Well, certainly there are a lot of dogs in certainly there are a lot of dogs in certainly there are a lot of dogs in shelters now. During the pandemic, shelters now. During the pandemic, shelters now. During the pandemic, people were adopting them like crazy. people were adopting them like crazy. people were adopting them like crazy. So, it was actually hard to get dogs and So, it was actually hard to get dogs and So, it was actually hard to get dogs and cats during that time. I don't know what cats during that time. I don't know what cats during that time. I don't know what the state of things is now. Someone can the state of things is now. Someone can the state of things is now. Someone can put that in the comments. put that in the comments. put that in the comments. I really have one last category of I really have one last category of I really have one last category of questions, but it's a it's one that questions, but it's a it's one that questions, but it's a it's one that you've sort of touched on from various you've sort of touched on from various you've sort of touched on from various sides throughout today's conversation, sides throughout today's conversation, sides throughout today's conversation, and that relates to humans as animals. and that relates to humans as animals. and that relates to humans as animals. Mhm. You know, I don't think one can be Mhm. You know, I don't think one can be Mhm. You know, I don't think one can be an animal ethologist or a neurobiologist an animal ethologist or a neurobiologist an animal ethologist or a neurobiologist for that matter um who, you know, reads for that matter um who, you know, reads for that matter um who, you know, reads papers and does studies and uh on other papers and does studies and uh on other papers and does studies and uh on other animals um without at some point animals um without at some point animals um without at some point stepping back and making this stepping back and making this stepping back and making this realization like we're old world realization like we're old world realization like we're old world primates. We're the best at techn primates. We're the best at techn primates. We're the best at techn technology development, you know, among all the development, you know, among all the development, you know, among all the species. I mean, I don't think that's species. I mean, I don't think that's species. I mean, I don't think that's too much of a leap. Um, we're certainly too much of a leap. Um, we're certainly too much of a leap. Um, we're certainly not as good at natural camouflage, not as good at natural camouflage, not as good at natural camouflage, um, catching and killing things with our um, catching and killing things with our um, catching and killing things with our hands. We need tools to do this. So, we hands. We need tools to do this. So, we hands. We need tools to do this. So, we have our strengths, we have our have our strengths, we have our have our strengths, we have our limitations with respect to the other limitations with respect to the other limitations with respect to the other species. Is there anything in your species. Is there anything in your species. Is there anything in your training as an animal ethologist that training as an animal ethologist that training as an animal ethologist that um you know causes you to reflect on um you know causes you to reflect on um you know causes you to reflect on human beings as you know human beings as you know human beings as you know particularly I don't know spectacular particularly I don't know spectacular particularly I don't know spectacular and particularly deficient in some way and particularly deficient in some way and particularly deficient in some way like or any just any kind of musings like or any just any kind of musings like or any just any kind of musings about the human species because that's a about the human species because that's a about the human species because that's a species we haven't talked about today species we haven't talked about today species we haven't talked about today but I think a lot of what you're but I think a lot of what you're but I think a lot of what you're describing in terms of the breakdown of describing in terms of the breakdown of describing in terms of the breakdown of these sequence of behaviors what these sequence of behaviors what these sequence of behaviors what makes us feel safe um you know one can't makes us feel safe um you know one can't makes us feel safe um you know one can't help but wonder like What what are some help but wonder like What what are some help but wonder like What what are some aspects of ourselves that perhaps if we aspects of ourselves that perhaps if we aspects of ourselves that perhaps if we thought about a little bit more deeply thought about a little bit more deeply thought about a little bit more deeply we could really benefit from? One thing we could really benefit from? One thing we could really benefit from? One thing that leaps to mind is the extent to that leaps to mind is the extent to that leaps to mind is the extent to which cultural learning occurs in which cultural learning occurs in which cultural learning occurs in humans. For other animal species they humans. For other animal species they humans. For other animal species they learn from uh you know trial and they learn from uh you know trial and they learn from uh you know trial and error. If I do this that happens first error. If I do this that happens first error. If I do this that happens first that happens then that other thing that happens then that other thing that happens then that other thing happens. So classical conditioning and happens. So classical conditioning and happens. So classical conditioning and operant conditioning uh tie into and operant conditioning uh tie into and operant conditioning uh tie into sort of forming the animals behavior. sort of forming the animals behavior. sort of forming the animals behavior. They also have social learning. They also have social learning. They also have social learning. They watch someone else and look at what they watch someone else and look at what they watch someone else and look at what they do. You know, in this situation, I'm do. You know, in this situation, I'm do. You know, in this situation, I'm feeling a bit concern disconcerted feeling a bit concern disconcerted feeling a bit concern disconcerted watching you to see how you react. Oh, watching you to see how you react. Oh, watching you to see how you react. Oh, you don't seem to be that upset. Okay, I you don't seem to be that upset. Okay, I you don't seem to be that upset. Okay, I guess I don't have to be that either. Or guess I don't have to be that either. Or guess I don't have to be that either. Or you're interacting with that thing in you're interacting with that thing in you're interacting with that thing in that way. I'll guess I'll do the same. that way. I'll guess I'll do the same. that way. I'll guess I'll do the same. But it's like the influence is from the But it's like the influence is from the But it's like the influence is from the animals that are closest to you and the animals that are closest to you and the animals that are closest to you and from your own personal experience. Uh from your own personal experience. Uh from your own personal experience. Uh and we sort of stand on the shoulders of and we sort of stand on the shoulders of and we sort of stand on the shoulders of gi giants. We humans because we can we gi giants. We humans because we can we gi giants. We humans because we can we can read people's thoughts that are can read people's thoughts that are can read people's thoughts that are thousands of years old literally. And so thousands of years old literally. And so thousands of years old literally. And so I think that's one of the biggest I think that's one of the biggest I think that's one of the biggest differences I think in our learning is differences I think in our learning is differences I think in our learning is that we used to be called man the that we used to be called man the that we used to be called man the toolmaker as if tool making would be the toolmaker as if tool making would be the toolmaker as if tool making would be the thing that set us apart from the thing that set us apart from the thing that set us apart from other animals until Jane Goodall other animals until Jane Goodall other animals until Jane Goodall reported that she'd seen chimpanzees reported that she'd seen chimpanzees reported that she'd seen chimpanzees making tools uh to you that ter fishing making tools uh to you that ter fishing making tools uh to you that ter fishing behavior that she saw where they would behavior that she saw where they would behavior that she saw where they would break off a twig and take all the break off a twig and take all the break off a twig and take all the leaves off and then sharpen it and so leaves off and then sharpen it and so leaves off and then sharpen it and so that they could insert into a that they could insert into a that they could insert into a termite mound and the termites would termite mound and the termites would termite mound and the termites would climb onto it and they could carefully climb onto it and they could carefully climb onto it and they could carefully extract it and eat the extract it and eat the extract it and eat the termites. So they made these tools. Uh termites. So they made these tools. Uh termites. So they made these tools. Uh so um yeah that would be I guess my so um yeah that would be I guess my so um yeah that would be I guess my refle my first spontaneous reflection to refle my first spontaneous reflection to refle my first spontaneous reflection to your question. That's a great one. your question. That's a great one. your question. That's a great one. um frankly this idea that you know in um frankly this idea that you know in um frankly this idea that you know in addition to our ability to build addition to our ability to build addition to our ability to build sophisticated tools that our ability to sophisticated tools that our ability to sophisticated tools that our ability to um stamp down knowledge and I mean um stamp down knowledge and I mean um stamp down knowledge and I mean knowledge is always shifting. So some of knowledge is always shifting. So some of knowledge is always shifting. So some of the things that we've been discussing the things that we've been discussing the things that we've been discussing today and that I've seen said with great today and that I've seen said with great today and that I've seen said with great conviction might be proven completely conviction might be proven completely conviction might be proven completely false you know a year from now. So false you know a year from now. So false you know a year from now. So that's I think the that's I think the that's I think the interesting thing about science is that interesting thing about science is that interesting thing about science is that we're always having to question our we're always having to question our we're always having to question our assumptions. All right. I appreciate assumptions. All right. I appreciate assumptions. All right. I appreciate you reminding us of that this is you reminding us of that this is you reminding us of that this is all a dynamic process. You know, it's we all a dynamic process. You know, it's we all a dynamic process. You know, it's we can only do so much with this uh we can only do so much with this uh we can only do so much with this uh piece of meat in our skulls in terms of piece of meat in our skulls in terms of piece of meat in our skulls in terms of trying to decipher the world around us. trying to decipher the world around us. trying to decipher the world around us. But I do think that this idea of um But I do think that this idea of um But I do think that this idea of um this insight that we're unique in our this insight that we're unique in our this insight that we're unique in our ability to learn from things long ago, ability to learn from things long ago, ability to learn from things long ago, stamp down things now that people could stamp down things now that people could stamp down things now that people could potentially learn from um not just in potentially learn from um not just in potentially learn from um not just in the present but in the future is the present but in the future is the present but in the future is incredible. And um in many ways incredible. And um in many ways incredible. And um in many ways appropriate for where we're at now, appropriate for where we're at now, appropriate for where we're at now, which is um you sitting here educating which is um you sitting here educating which is um you sitting here educating us about the different species. And I us about the different species. And I us about the different species. And I want to um I really want to extend my want to um I really want to extend my want to um I really want to extend my gratitude for the work that you do gratitude for the work that you do gratitude for the work that you do is very unique. People by now will is very unique. People by now will is very unique. People by now will realize that you're animal realize that you're animal realize that you're animal ethologist, but you pay attention to ethologist, but you pay attention to ethologist, but you pay attention to real world experiments run in a diverse real world experiments run in a diverse real world experiments run in a diverse range of settings. Um and it's clear range of settings. Um and it's clear range of settings. Um and it's clear that you have great care for the all the that you have great care for the all the that you have great care for the all the species on the planet and how they species on the planet and how they species on the planet and how they interact. You've also offered us some interact. You've also offered us some interact. You've also offered us some wonderful tools of how to improve the wonderful tools of how to improve the wonderful tools of how to improve the lives of our cats, our dogs, and to lives of our cats, our dogs, and to lives of our cats, our dogs, and to really hopefully make people um somewhat really hopefully make people um somewhat really hopefully make people um somewhat of ethologists of themselves and of ethologists of themselves and of ethologists of themselves and of their interactions with animals. I think their interactions with animals. I think their interactions with animals. I think that's for me one of the biggest that's for me one of the biggest that's for me one of the biggest takeaways today is to really people takeaways today is to really people takeaways today is to really people listening to this and watching this listening to this and watching this listening to this and watching this should really reflect um not just on should really reflect um not just on should really reflect um not just on does the dog like to be pet here or does the dog like to be pet here or does the dog like to be pet here or there, but you know, how is it that um a there, but you know, how is it that um a there, but you know, how is it that um a certain behavior is showing up in an certain behavior is showing up in an certain behavior is showing up in an animal? what is that reflected because animal? what is that reflected because animal? what is that reflected because of its natural lineage and our own of its natural lineage and our own of its natural lineage and our own and to really think about those and to really think about those and to really think about those relationships and trying to improve relationships and trying to improve relationships and trying to improve them. So you've given us tremendous them. So you've given us tremendous them. So you've given us tremendous knowledge for its own sake, practical knowledge for its own sake, practical knowledge for its own sake, practical knowledge and again there's just so much knowledge and again there's just so much knowledge and again there's just so much uh care woven into everything you do uh care woven into everything you do uh care woven into everything you do that you've shared. So thank you for that you've shared. So thank you for that you've shared. So thank you for traveling such a long way to share traveling such a long way to share traveling such a long way to share with us. Thank you for having me. It's with us. Thank you for having me. It's with us. Thank you for having me. It's been a great discussion I think. Thank been a great discussion I think. Thank been a great discussion I think. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you for you so much. Thank you. Thank you for you so much. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Carolina Westland. To learn more Dr. Carolina Westland. To learn more Dr. Carolina Westland. To learn more about her work and to find links to the about her work and to find links to the about her work and to find links to the various resources discussed during various resources discussed during various resources discussed during today's episode, please see the show today's episode, please see the show today's episode, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from note captions. If you're learning from note captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please andor enjoying this podcast, please andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Karolina today's discussion with Dr. Karolina today's discussion with Dr. Karolina Westland. And last, but certainly not Westland. And last, but certainly not Westland. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]