Someone says I want to quit smoking. A Someone says I want to quit smoking. A Someone says I want to quit smoking. A good clinician will say why would good clinician will say why would good clinician will say why would you want to do that? So say so tell me you want to do that? So say so tell me you want to do that? So say so tell me why would you want what do you want to why would you want what do you want to why would you want what do you want to get out of this because it's work. I get out of this because it's work. I get out of this because it's work. I mean I'm happy to work with you but you mean I'm happy to work with you but you mean I'm happy to work with you but you know what is it? What are your what are know what is it? What are your what are know what is it? What are your what are your motives? And and sort of helping your motives? And and sort of helping your motives? And and sort of helping them build up you know in their own mind them build up you know in their own mind them build up you know in their own mind because again this is about them not because again this is about them not because again this is about them not you. What do you get? And that's what you. What do you get? And that's what you. What do you get? And that's what the therapist does. The other thing the therapist does. The other thing the therapist does. The other thing that's really important is that like any that's really important is that like any that's really important is that like any other anytime you're making a behavior other anytime you're making a behavior other anytime you're making a behavior change hang out with other people who change hang out with other people who change hang out with other people who are trying to make the same change. You are trying to make the same change. You are trying to make the same change. You want to start jogging? Join a jogging want to start jogging? Join a jogging want to start jogging? Join a jogging group. you want to stop drinking, I group. you want to stop drinking, I group. you want to stop drinking, I would, you know, suggest go check into would, you know, suggest go check into would, you know, suggest go check into an AA meeting or one of the other an AA meeting or one of the other an AA meeting or one of the other fellowships we have. Having other people fellowships we have. Having other people fellowships we have. Having other people on the same journey is good for us. It I on the same journey is good for us. It I on the same journey is good for us. It I mean everything shows that no matter mean everything shows that no matter mean everything shows that no matter what you're doing, I'm losing weight. what you're doing, I'm losing weight. what you're doing, I'm losing weight. I'm exercising. I'm more whatever. I'm exercising. I'm more whatever. I'm exercising. I'm more whatever. I'm quitting smoking because it gives you quitting smoking because it gives you quitting smoking because it gives you two things. It gives you support, but it two things. It gives you support, but it two things. It gives you support, but it also gives you some accountability. It's also gives you some accountability. It's also gives you some accountability. It's like, hey, you were going jogging and uh like, hey, you were going jogging and uh like, hey, you were going jogging and uh Tuesday, you weren't there. What's up? Tuesday, you weren't there. What's up? Tuesday, you weren't there. What's up? Are you going to be part of this group Are you going to be part of this group Are you going to be part of this group or not? And that is uh helpful for or not? And that is uh helpful for or not? And that is uh helpful for people. Welcome to the Huberman Lab people. Welcome to the Huberman Lab people. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science [music] podcast where we discuss science [music] podcast where we discuss science [music] and science-based tools for everyday and science-based tools for everyday and science-based tools for everyday life. [music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Keith Humphre. Dr. today is Dr. Keith Humphre. Dr. today is Dr. Keith Humphre. Dr. Keith Humphre is a professor of Keith Humphre is a professor of Keith Humphre is a professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at psychiatry and behavioral sciences at psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Stamford School of Medicine. And he is Stamford School of Medicine. And he is Stamford School of Medicine. And he is one of the world's foremost experts on one of the world's foremost experts on one of the world's foremost experts on addictive substances and behaviors and addictive substances and behaviors and addictive substances and behaviors and how to overcome addictions of all kinds. how to overcome addictions of all kinds. how to overcome addictions of all kinds. He is also an expert on how science, He is also an expert on how science, He is also an expert on how science, commercial marketing, lobbying, and the commercial marketing, lobbying, and the commercial marketing, lobbying, and the legal system interact to create what are legal system interact to create what are legal system interact to create what are called addiction for-profit businesses. called addiction for-profit businesses. called addiction for-profit businesses. The alcohol, food, and opioid industries The alcohol, food, and opioid industries The alcohol, food, and opioid industries come to mind as just a few examples of come to mind as just a few examples of come to mind as just a few examples of these, and he's an expert on how all of these, and he's an expert on how all of these, and he's an expert on how all of that shapes things like legal policy. that shapes things like legal policy. that shapes things like legal policy. Today we discuss all the major Today we discuss all the major Today we discuss all the major addictions to give you the most addictions to give you the most addictions to give you the most up-to-date information on alcohol, up-to-date information on alcohol, up-to-date information on alcohol, cannabis, opioids, gambling, and much cannabis, opioids, gambling, and much cannabis, opioids, gambling, and much more. Dr. Humphre gives us the unbiased more. Dr. Humphre gives us the unbiased more. Dr. Humphre gives us the unbiased facts, and more importantly, he explains facts, and more importantly, he explains facts, and more importantly, he explains how to think about the health risks of how to think about the health risks of how to think about the health risks of any substance or behavior in a logical any substance or behavior in a logical any substance or behavior in a logical way. For instance, while it may be true way. For instance, while it may be true way. For instance, while it may be true that a certain amount of alcohol could that a certain amount of alcohol could that a certain amount of alcohol could afford you some heart health benefits, afford you some heart health benefits, afford you some heart health benefits, we hear this, then we hear it's not we hear this, then we hear it's not we hear this, then we hear it's not true. It goes back and forth. He true. It goes back and forth. He true. It goes back and forth. He explains that any heart benefits that explains that any heart benefits that explains that any heart benefits that exist from alcohol are greatly offset by exist from alcohol are greatly offset by exist from alcohol are greatly offset by the increased cancer and other risks of the increased cancer and other risks of the increased cancer and other risks of alcohol. And with respect to cannabis, alcohol. And with respect to cannabis, alcohol. And with respect to cannabis, he explains who may be okay to use it, he explains who may be okay to use it, he explains who may be okay to use it, but who should absolutely not. We also but who should absolutely not. We also but who should absolutely not. We also discuss the most effective ways to get discuss the most effective ways to get discuss the most effective ways to get over any addiction. That includes over any addiction. That includes over any addiction. That includes alcohol, pornography, stimulants, and alcohol, pornography, stimulants, and alcohol, pornography, stimulants, and much more. As you'll soon see, Dr. Keith much more. As you'll soon see, Dr. Keith much more. As you'll soon see, Dr. Keith Humphre is no ordinary scientist or Humphre is no ordinary scientist or Humphre is no ordinary scientist or psychologist or addiction expert. He has psychologist or addiction expert. He has psychologist or addiction expert. He has the big picture on addiction and what it the big picture on addiction and what it the big picture on addiction and what it means to try and navigate life nowadays means to try and navigate life nowadays means to try and navigate life nowadays in an ocean of addiction forprofit in an ocean of addiction forprofit in an ocean of addiction forprofit marketing and confusing health marketing and confusing health marketing and confusing health information. I assure you that today he information. I assure you that today he information. I assure you that today he doesn't tell you what to think or what doesn't tell you what to think or what doesn't tell you what to think or what to do about various substances and to do about various substances and to do about various substances and addictive behaviors, but rather how to addictive behaviors, but rather how to addictive behaviors, but rather how to think about them and in doing so how to think about them and in doing so how to think about them and in doing so how to avoid and overcome essentially any avoid and overcome essentially any avoid and overcome essentially any addiction. It's a powerful conversation addiction. It's a powerful conversation addiction. It's a powerful conversation that I'm certain will help millions of that I'm certain will help millions of that I'm certain will help millions of people make better decisions. Before we people make better decisions. Before we people make better decisions. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Keith Humphre. Dr. Keith Humphre, Dr. Keith Humphre. Dr. Keith Humphre, Dr. Keith Humphre. Dr. Keith Humphre, welcome. &gt;&gt; Good to meet you, Andrew. Addiction is a &gt;&gt; Good to meet you, Andrew. Addiction is a &gt;&gt; Good to meet you, Andrew. Addiction is a big topic but I think for a lot of big topic but I think for a lot of big topic but I think for a lot of people it gets slotted into one small people it gets slotted into one small people it gets slotted into one small drawer. Uh but if we were to compare it drawer. Uh but if we were to compare it drawer. Uh but if we were to compare it to say mental illness many things to say mental illness many things to say mental illness many things depression manic bipolar OCD and on and depression manic bipolar OCD and on and depression manic bipolar OCD and on and on. How do you parse this thing that we on. How do you parse this thing that we on. How do you parse this thing that we call addiction in thinking about how call addiction in thinking about how call addiction in thinking about how best to possibly treat addiction best to possibly treat addiction best to possibly treat addiction especially when it comes to trying to especially when it comes to trying to especially when it comes to trying to treat addiction in mass at the level of treat addiction in mass at the level of treat addiction in mass at the level of policy which we'll also talk about policy which we'll also talk about policy which we'll also talk about today. So uh put simply how do you frame today. So uh put simply how do you frame today. So uh put simply how do you frame addiction uh and how should people think addiction uh and how should people think addiction uh and how should people think about it? about it? about it? &gt;&gt; Yeah it's hard because it's a word &gt;&gt; Yeah it's hard because it's a word &gt;&gt; Yeah it's hard because it's a word unlike say you know maybe it's a little unlike say you know maybe it's a little unlike say you know maybe it's a little like schizophrenia where people say like schizophrenia where people say like schizophrenia where people say like ah you know schizophrenic person what ah you know schizophrenic person what ah you know schizophrenic person what they actually mean is you know he's a they actually mean is you know he's a they actually mean is you know he's a person with different moods and that person with different moods and that person with different moods and that sort of thing. addiction is even more sort of thing. addiction is even more sort of thing. addiction is even more like that. It's in common parlance. like that. It's in common parlance. like that. It's in common parlance. People say, you know, I'm addicted to, People say, you know, I'm addicted to, People say, you know, I'm addicted to, you know, you know, uh, a TV show or I'm you know, you know, uh, a TV show or I'm you know, you know, uh, a TV show or I'm addicted to my phone or that sort of addicted to my phone or that sort of addicted to my phone or that sort of thing. But, you know, it's not just thing. But, you know, it's not just thing. But, you know, it's not just stuff you do a lot, uh, you know, which stuff you do a lot, uh, you know, which stuff you do a lot, uh, you know, which we sometimes, you know, colloally call we sometimes, you know, colloally call we sometimes, you know, colloally call addiction. It's the persistence of doing addiction. It's the persistence of doing addiction. It's the persistence of doing something that is harmful. So like the something that is harmful. So like the something that is harmful. So like the classic animal study, you know, is, you classic animal study, you know, is, you classic animal study, you know, is, you know, James's old study with rats done know, James's old study with rats done know, James's old study with rats done in the 50s showing that you could give a in the 50s showing that you could give a in the 50s showing that you could give a rat uh the opportunity to give a rat uh the opportunity to give a rat uh the opportunity to give itself brain stimulation, which they itself brain stimulation, which they itself brain stimulation, which they enjoy, and that they would continue to enjoy, and that they would continue to enjoy, and that they would continue to do that even as they were starving to do that even as they were starving to do that even as they were starving to death next to a pile of food pellets or death next to a pile of food pellets or death next to a pile of food pellets or run out of water while they were next or run out of water while they were next or run out of water while they were next to water. That is what it was. It's not to water. That is what it was. It's not to water. That is what it was. It's not the doing the things over and over or the doing the things over and over or the doing the things over and over or even being compulsive about things. It's even being compulsive about things. It's even being compulsive about things. It's doing them to the point of destruction doing them to the point of destruction doing them to the point of destruction when you would normally, you know, any when you would normally, you know, any when you would normally, you know, any other behavior you would think, well, other behavior you would think, well, other behavior you would think, well, you would just stop doing that. But you would just stop doing that. But you would just stop doing that. But people don't and that's the sinquan of people don't and that's the sinquan of people don't and that's the sinquan of addiction. &gt;&gt; I've tried to uh create a definition for &gt;&gt; I've tried to uh create a definition for &gt;&gt; I've tried to uh create a definition for addiction, which is that it's a addiction, which is that it's a addiction, which is that it's a progressive narrowing of the things that progressive narrowing of the things that progressive narrowing of the things that bring one pleasure that it doesn't bring one pleasure that it doesn't bring one pleasure that it doesn't happen all at once. Like someone doesn't happen all at once. Like someone doesn't happen all at once. Like someone doesn't take heroin once and then stop doing take heroin once and then stop doing take heroin once and then stop doing everything else. It's a tends to be everything else. It's a tends to be everything else. It's a tends to be progressive. I suppose it could be progressive. I suppose it could be progressive. I suppose it could be overnight, but um is that true? I'm overnight, but um is that true? I'm overnight, but um is that true? I'm happy to revise the definition. happy to revise the definition. happy to revise the definition. &gt;&gt; No, that is true. So, you see um &gt;&gt; No, that is true. So, you see um &gt;&gt; No, that is true. So, you see um the other types of rewards, particularly the other types of rewards, particularly the other types of rewards, particularly natural rewards, start to fall away from natural rewards, start to fall away from natural rewards, start to fall away from the person's life. So, I'll sacrifice, the person's life. So, I'll sacrifice, the person's life. So, I'll sacrifice, you know, my relationship with my you know, my relationship with my you know, my relationship with my parents or my spouse or my friends. I parents or my spouse or my friends. I parents or my spouse or my friends. I will stop going to work when I, you will stop going to work when I, you will stop going to work when I, you know, which uh would normally generate know, which uh would normally generate know, which uh would normally generate the things I needed to eat or I'll the things I needed to eat or I'll the things I needed to eat or I'll give up my housing for the sake of I'll give up my housing for the sake of I'll give up my housing for the sake of this substance. And then you become not this substance. And then you become not this substance. And then you become not only more physically dependent on it, only more physically dependent on it, only more physically dependent on it, but essentially you're psychologically but essentially you're psychologically but essentially you're psychologically dependent on it because it's the one dependent on it because it's the one dependent on it because it's the one thing left that is still rewarding. thing left that is still rewarding. thing left that is still rewarding. Everything else has been stripped away. Everything else has been stripped away. Everything else has been stripped away. And that makes it easier to understand And that makes it easier to understand And that makes it easier to understand why people would still hang on to it in why people would still hang on to it in why people would still hang on to it in that situation when it feels like it's that situation when it feels like it's that situation when it feels like it's look, it's the only time I feel good is look, it's the only time I feel good is look, it's the only time I feel good is that moment when I take that hit. that moment when I take that hit. that moment when I take that hit. These days there are a lot of industries These days there are a lot of industries These days there are a lot of industries that are um addiction for money that are um addiction for money that are um addiction for money basically industries and we're going to basically industries and we're going to basically industries and we're going to talk about all of them. talk about all of them. talk about all of them. &gt;&gt; Nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, social &gt;&gt; Nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, social &gt;&gt; Nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, social media, all of these. Um but for the time media, all of these. Um but for the time media, all of these. Um but for the time being, do you think that there is truly being, do you think that there is truly being, do you think that there is truly something to the quote unquote genetic something to the quote unquote genetic something to the quote unquote genetic bias for becoming an addict? And is it bias for becoming an addict? And is it bias for becoming an addict? And is it very substance or behavior specific? very substance or behavior specific? very substance or behavior specific? &gt;&gt; Um let's start with maybe alcohol for &gt;&gt; Um let's start with maybe alcohol for &gt;&gt; Um let's start with maybe alcohol for example. Yeah, that's a great question. example. Yeah, that's a great question. example. Yeah, that's a great question. So, let me start by just um getting So, let me start by just um getting So, let me start by just um getting rid of one myth where we say people are rid of one myth where we say people are rid of one myth where we say people are born addicted. You'll sometimes read, born addicted. You'll sometimes read, born addicted. You'll sometimes read, you know, uh if mom was addicted to you know, uh if mom was addicted to you know, uh if mom was addicted to fennel, then the baby is born addicted. fennel, then the baby is born addicted. fennel, then the baby is born addicted. That is not possible because, you know, That is not possible because, you know, That is not possible because, you know, a fetus has no association between a fetus has no association between a fetus has no association between their behavior and the exposure to the their behavior and the exposure to the their behavior and the exposure to the drug. So, they can be physically drug. So, they can be physically drug. So, they can be physically dependent, meaning they'll go through dependent, meaning they'll go through dependent, meaning they'll go through withdrawal upon birth, but they're not withdrawal upon birth, but they're not withdrawal upon birth, but they're not they're not addicted. But you can have they're not addicted. But you can have they're not addicted. But you can have risk from birth in your genes. And those risk from birth in your genes. And those risk from birth in your genes. And those shared the estimation of you know those shared the estimation of you know those shared the estimation of you know how much of that shared it's actually how much of that shared it's actually how much of that shared it's actually quite a bit. You know we look at studies quite a bit. You know we look at studies quite a bit. You know we look at studies where kids were adopted out of families where kids were adopted out of families where kids were adopted out of families with parents who you know were addicted with parents who you know were addicted with parents who you know were addicted to alcohol. Much higher likelihood of to alcohol. Much higher likelihood of to alcohol. Much higher likelihood of developing an alcohol problem even if developing an alcohol problem even if developing an alcohol problem even if they were raised by tea toters for they were raised by tea toters for they were raised by tea toters for example. How big is that? You know it example. How big is that? You know it example. How big is that? You know it varies across you know studies. It varies across you know studies. It varies across you know studies. It varies across uh substances but it's varies across uh substances but it's varies across uh substances but it's large. It might be like you know 3 large. It might be like you know 3 large. It might be like you know 3 point4.5 uh for most of them and you know you uh for most of them and you know you uh for most of them and you know you can imagine that the same gene some you can imagine that the same gene some you can imagine that the same gene some might be specific and some might be more might be specific and some might be more might be specific and some might be more general. So here's an example of a general. So here's an example of a general. So here's an example of a specific one. Um, if you are born into a specific one. Um, if you are born into a specific one. Um, if you are born into a group like Honchinese are and you lack group like Honchinese are and you lack group like Honchinese are and you lack the enzyme or don't have much of a the enzyme or don't have much of a the enzyme or don't have much of a particular enzyme that is used to particular enzyme that is used to particular enzyme that is used to metabolize alcohol, it is just a less metabolize alcohol, it is just a less metabolize alcohol, it is just a less enjoyable experience to drink. enjoyable experience to drink. enjoyable experience to drink. &gt;&gt; You, you know, you can't break it down &gt;&gt; You, you know, you can't break it down &gt;&gt; You, you know, you can't break it down acetal alahhide and acetic acid and all acetal alahhide and acetic acid and all acetal alahhide and acetic acid and all that sort of thing. And so that one is that sort of thing. And so that one is that sort of thing. And so that one is but that would lower your risk for but that would lower your risk for but that would lower your risk for anything else but at least specific for anything else but at least specific for anything else but at least specific for alcohol. But other genes for things like alcohol. But other genes for things like alcohol. But other genes for things like impulsivity um that would put you at risk for um that would put you at risk for um that would put you at risk for you know across substances being you know across substances being you know across substances being sensation seeking um you're going to try sensation seeking um you're going to try sensation seeking um you're going to try more drugs that means it's more likely more drugs that means it's more likely more drugs that means it's more likely that you know you're going to get that you know you're going to get that you know you're going to get exposed to one another thing we see exposed to one another thing we see exposed to one another thing we see happening which is really fascinating happening which is really fascinating happening which is really fascinating and poorly understood I've I of course and poorly understood I've I of course and poorly understood I've I of course know doing what I do lots of people are know doing what I do lots of people are know doing what I do lots of people are in recovery and I've uh known people and in recovery and I've uh known people and in recovery and I've uh known people and had people in my studies who have been had people in my studies who have been had people in my studies who have been say clean and sober in their you sense say clean and sober in their you sense say clean and sober in their you sense for 20 years and then all of a sudden for 20 years and then all of a sudden for 20 years and then all of a sudden they develop like a very strong sexual they develop like a very strong sexual they develop like a very strong sexual compulsion or they gain 30 pounds compulsion or they gain 30 pounds compulsion or they gain 30 pounds because they're just eating and eating because they're just eating and eating because they're just eating and eating and eating and it's like, you know, the and eating and it's like, you know, the and eating and it's like, you know, the underlying diiathesis, whatever it the underlying diiathesis, whatever it the underlying diiathesis, whatever it is, has found a new phenotypic is, has found a new phenotypic is, has found a new phenotypic expression because it was never actually expression because it was never actually expression because it was never actually resolved. What was resolved was the resolved. What was resolved was the resolved. What was resolved was the particular set of behaviors that went particular set of behaviors that went particular set of behaviors that went with the addictions they had when they with the addictions they had when they with the addictions they had when they got into recovery. When it comes to got into recovery. When it comes to got into recovery. When it comes to alcohol, I've heard it said that there's alcohol, I've heard it said that there's alcohol, I've heard it said that there's a subset of people with um I guess a subset of people with um I guess a subset of people with um I guess nowadays they call alcohol use disorder. nowadays they call alcohol use disorder. nowadays they call alcohol use disorder. Can we just call it alcoholism today? Can we just call it alcoholism today? Can we just call it alcoholism today? Sure. &gt;&gt; Okay. Sometimes people will lash back at &gt;&gt; Okay. Sometimes people will lash back at &gt;&gt; Okay. Sometimes people will lash back at me if I call refer to someone as an me if I call refer to someone as an me if I call refer to someone as an alcoholic. But I have enough friends who alcoholic. But I have enough friends who alcoholic. But I have enough friends who are alcoholics. That joke is only on are alcoholics. That joke is only on are alcoholics. That joke is only on them by the way who are recovered. So I them by the way who are recovered. So I them by the way who are recovered. So I can make the joke um because they're can make the joke um because they're can make the joke um because they're impressive recovery uh stories and they impressive recovery uh stories and they impressive recovery uh stories and they all just say just call it what it is all just say just call it what it is all just say just call it what it is which is alcoholism. There's just so which is alcoholism. There's just so which is alcoholism. There's just so much splitting of names now. Are you I much splitting of names now. Are you I much splitting of names now. Are you I don't want to put you in a position of don't want to put you in a position of don't want to put you in a position of saying something that's gonna offend saying something that's gonna offend saying something that's gonna offend anyone whereas I can do that. anyone whereas I can do that. anyone whereas I can do that. &gt;&gt; This is worth getting into. So use &gt;&gt; This is worth getting into. So use &gt;&gt; This is worth getting into. So use disorder is a much broader spectrum disorder is a much broader spectrum disorder is a much broader spectrum thing. So you know when you if you thing. So you know when you if you thing. So you know when you if you diagnose them with alcohol use disorder, diagnose them with alcohol use disorder, diagnose them with alcohol use disorder, it can be mild, moderate or severe. And it can be mild, moderate or severe. And it can be mild, moderate or severe. And the people at the mild end, everyone at the people at the mild end, everyone at the people at the mild end, everyone at AA would laugh at, you know, this is a AA would laugh at, you know, this is a AA would laugh at, you know, this is a person who occasionally drinks too much, person who occasionally drinks too much, person who occasionally drinks too much, has some harms, but basically life is has some harms, but basically life is has some harms, but basically life is still put together. They would, you still put together. They would, you still put together. They would, you know, and people would be like, you got know, and people would be like, you got know, and people would be like, you got to be kidding me. that's your to be kidding me. that's your to be kidding me. that's your problem. It's only when you get up to problem. It's only when you get up to problem. It's only when you get up to the severe end where we see the severe end where we see the severe end where we see the things that it looks like addiction. So, things that it looks like addiction. So, things that it looks like addiction. So, they aren't they aren't actually the they aren't they aren't actually the they aren't they aren't actually the same thing. Addiction and use disorder. same thing. Addiction and use disorder. same thing. Addiction and use disorder. Use disorders is broader. And it was it Use disorders is broader. And it was it Use disorders is broader. And it was it was there to sort of was there to sort of was there to sort of &gt;&gt; um move alcohol like other health &gt;&gt; um move alcohol like other health &gt;&gt; um move alcohol like other health behaviors that you might start behaviors that you might start behaviors that you might start addressing particularly in like primary addressing particularly in like primary addressing particularly in like primary care. So you know just like we would care. So you know just like we would care. So you know just like we would like you know doctors to intervene when like you know doctors to intervene when like you know doctors to intervene when someone is 15 pounds overweight and has someone is 15 pounds overweight and has someone is 15 pounds overweight and has moderate high blood pressure so that you moderate high blood pressure so that you moderate high blood pressure so that you they don't you know later you know they don't you know later you know they don't you know later you know develop a more serious problem. That was develop a more serious problem. That was develop a more serious problem. That was the idea well let's have you know a the idea well let's have you know a the idea well let's have you know a lower severity problem that a doctor lower severity problem that a doctor lower severity problem that a doctor might while the person still has a fair might while the person still has a fair might while the person still has a fair amount of control advise you hey you amount of control advise you hey you amount of control advise you hey you know if you could just cut back a bit know if you could just cut back a bit know if you could just cut back a bit now you could avoid a lot of suffering now you could avoid a lot of suffering now you could avoid a lot of suffering later. That's where that came from. But later. That's where that came from. But later. That's where that came from. But I'm comfortable talking about I'm comfortable talking about I'm comfortable talking about addiction. It's a good word. It's addiction. It's a good word. It's addiction. It's a good word. It's scientifically meaningful and it's scientifically meaningful and it's scientifically meaningful and it's something the public understands. something the public understands. something the public understands. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And if you go to an AA meeting, uh &gt;&gt; Yeah. And if you go to an AA meeting, uh &gt;&gt; Yeah. And if you go to an AA meeting, uh they go around the room saying, "I'm so they go around the room saying, "I'm so they go around the room saying, "I'm so and so and I'm an alcoholic." They don't and so and I'm an alcoholic." They don't and so and I'm an alcoholic." They don't say, "I'm so and so and I have alcohol say, "I'm so and so and I have alcohol say, "I'm so and so and I have alcohol use disorder." use disorder." use disorder." &gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. Yeah. So many people &gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. Yeah. So many people &gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. Yeah. So many people who have who are in recovery um define who have who are in recovery um define who have who are in recovery um define at some level of their identity, not at some level of their identity, not at some level of their identity, not their total identity, as an alcoholic. their total identity, as an alcoholic. their total identity, as an alcoholic. It's actually an important part of the It's actually an important part of the It's actually an important part of the 12step recovery process, which we'll 12step recovery process, which we'll 12step recovery process, which we'll talk about. In any case, not to split talk about. In any case, not to split talk about. In any case, not to split hairs here, but I'm grateful that you're hairs here, but I'm grateful that you're hairs here, but I'm grateful that you're willing to embrace that nomenclature. willing to embrace that nomenclature. willing to embrace that nomenclature. And thanks for clarifying that why it And thanks for clarifying that why it And thanks for clarifying that why it was split. Um, because sometimes these was split. Um, because sometimes these was split. Um, because sometimes these clinical uh and naming things are split clinical uh and naming things are split clinical uh and naming things are split because of quote unquote sensitivities. because of quote unquote sensitivities. because of quote unquote sensitivities. We don't want to offend etc. And we We don't want to offend etc. And we We don't want to offend etc. And we don't want to offend. Okay. So, alcohol. don't want to offend. Okay. So, alcohol. don't want to offend. Okay. So, alcohol. Um, I've heard it said that there's a Um, I've heard it said that there's a Um, I've heard it said that there's a subset of people somewhere around 8 to subset of people somewhere around 8 to subset of people somewhere around 8 to 10% for whom they drink alcohol and 10% for whom they drink alcohol and 10% for whom they drink alcohol and they experience it very differently. they experience it very differently. they experience it very differently. They experience it more as a, for lack They experience it more as a, for lack They experience it more as a, for lack of a better term, kind of a of a better term, kind of a of a better term, kind of a dopamineergic, you know, energizing dopamineergic, you know, energizing dopamineergic, you know, energizing experience for um, and this could relate experience for um, and this could relate experience for um, and this could relate to tolerance, but that they have a very to tolerance, but that they have a very to tolerance, but that they have a very different experience subjectively of different experience subjectively of different experience subjectively of alcohol than most everybody else who can alcohol than most everybody else who can alcohol than most everybody else who can build up tolerance. anyone can build up build up tolerance. anyone can build up build up tolerance. anyone can build up tolerance. Um, and then it takes longer tolerance. Um, and then it takes longer tolerance. Um, and then it takes longer to get into the sedative effects, the to get into the sedative effects, the to get into the sedative effects, the depressive effects of alcohol, but I've depressive effects of alcohol, but I've depressive effects of alcohol, but I've heard it said that this 8 to 10% are heard it said that this 8 to 10% are heard it said that this 8 to 10% are particularly susceptible to becoming particularly susceptible to becoming particularly susceptible to becoming alcoholics because they drink and they alcoholics because they drink and they alcoholics because they drink and they feel spectacularly good and they can feel spectacularly good and they can feel spectacularly good and they can keep drinking in a way that many other keep drinking in a way that many other keep drinking in a way that many other people either pass out, blackout, crash people either pass out, blackout, crash people either pass out, blackout, crash their car, end up in jail or dead. And their car, end up in jail or dead. And their car, end up in jail or dead. And so in some sense this 8 to 10 percent so in some sense this 8 to 10 percent so in some sense this 8 to 10 percent may be at greater risk than everyone may be at greater risk than everyone may be at greater risk than everyone else. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So uh Mark Shookett who's a superb &gt;&gt; Yeah. So uh Mark Shookett who's a superb &gt;&gt; Yeah. So uh Mark Shookett who's a superb psychiatrist was based in Southern psychiatrist was based in Southern psychiatrist was based in Southern California for most of his career did California for most of his career did California for most of his career did some wonderful studies of male uh some wonderful studies of male uh some wonderful studies of male uh children of alcoholic fathers. And one children of alcoholic fathers. And one children of alcoholic fathers. And one of the things he showed is that when of the things he showed is that when of the things he showed is that when given alcohol, their body sway is less given alcohol, their body sway is less given alcohol, their body sway is less at a level you can't even perceive, but at a level you can't even perceive, but at a level you can't even perceive, but he couldn't measure that, you know, he couldn't measure that, you know, he couldn't measure that, you know, yeah. Like how much they moved, like how yeah. Like how much they moved, like how yeah. Like how much they moved, like how hard the alcohol hit them. how hard the alcohol hit them. how hard the alcohol hit them. &gt;&gt; And they had uh fewer hangovers the next &gt;&gt; And they had uh fewer hangovers the next &gt;&gt; And they had uh fewer hangovers the next day. And then you might think, well, day. And then you might think, well, day. And then you might think, well, that's great. It doesn't hit you that that's great. It doesn't hit you that that's great. It doesn't hit you that hard, but you know, you can drink a lot. hard, but you know, you can drink a lot. hard, but you know, you can drink a lot. Like, no, that's the problem because Like, no, that's the problem because Like, no, that's the problem because someone else would get the signal of someone else would get the signal of someone else would get the signal of like, whoa, I you know, I'm feeling like, whoa, I you know, I'm feeling like, whoa, I you know, I'm feeling kind of dizzy here. I must have had too kind of dizzy here. I must have had too kind of dizzy here. I must have had too much to drink or the next morning they much to drink or the next morning they much to drink or the next morning they get up and go, "Oh god, I'm never doing get up and go, "Oh god, I'm never doing get up and go, "Oh god, I'm never doing that again." They don't get that signal. that again." They don't get that signal. that again." They don't get that signal. It's, you know, less punishing, It's, you know, less punishing, It's, you know, less punishing, more rewarding. And you see that across more rewarding. And you see that across more rewarding. And you see that across drugs. Uh, and this is almost surely drugs. Uh, and this is almost surely drugs. Uh, and this is almost surely genetic. Um, how much people like genetic. Um, how much people like genetic. Um, how much people like different drugs, you know, varies different drugs, you know, varies different drugs, you know, varies enormously. I I'll be personal about enormously. I I'll be personal about enormously. I I'll be personal about this. So, I uh, you know, had an injury. this. So, I uh, you know, had an injury. this. So, I uh, you know, had an injury. Uh, I broke my, you know, I had to Uh, I broke my, you know, I had to Uh, I broke my, you know, I had to take Vicodin for the pain afterwards. I take Vicodin for the pain afterwards. I take Vicodin for the pain afterwards. I find taking opioids so unpleasant. I find taking opioids so unpleasant. I find taking opioids so unpleasant. I feel bound up, you know, miserable, feel bound up, you know, miserable, feel bound up, you know, miserable, groggy that I just took one and said, groggy that I just took one and said, groggy that I just took one and said, "Pain is better than this." "Pain is better than this." "Pain is better than this." I have worked with people clinically who I have worked with people clinically who I have worked with people clinically who say the first time I had an opioid, it say the first time I had an opioid, it say the first time I had an opioid, it was like a hole in my chest that had was like a hole in my chest that had was like a hole in my chest that had been there my whole life filled up for been there my whole life filled up for been there my whole life filled up for the very first time. That has everything the very first time. That has everything the very first time. That has everything to do with genes. There's no, it's not to do with genes. There's no, it's not to do with genes. There's no, it's not due, there's no learning history there, due, there's no learning history there, due, there's no learning history there, right? But there's something, you know, right? But there's something, you know, right? But there's something, you know, I'm just wired differently for that I'm just wired differently for that I'm just wired differently for that particular drug than people who get in particular drug than people who get in particular drug than people who get in trouble uh with it is. And these don't trouble uh with it is. And these don't trouble uh with it is. And these don't necessarily go in groups. So someone necessarily go in groups. So someone necessarily go in groups. So someone can, you know, hate opioids, but you can, you know, hate opioids, but you can, you know, hate opioids, but you know, love cannabis or love alcohol. Um, know, love cannabis or love alcohol. Um, know, love cannabis or love alcohol. Um, and that of course is going to change and that of course is going to change and that of course is going to change their risk. How could it not? their risk. How could it not? their risk. How could it not? &gt;&gt; This is such an important point, and I &gt;&gt; This is such an important point, and I &gt;&gt; This is such an important point, and I didn't realize that it extended to didn't realize that it extended to didn't realize that it extended to things outside of alcohol. uh because things outside of alcohol. uh because things outside of alcohol. uh because oftentimes when a discussion starts to oftentimes when a discussion starts to oftentimes when a discussion starts to surface about addiction and whether or surface about addiction and whether or surface about addiction and whether or not zero is better than any, whether or not zero is better than any, whether or not zero is better than any, whether or not things can be done in moderation, I not things can be done in moderation, I not things can be done in moderation, I think this is actually a big um unspoken think this is actually a big um unspoken think this is actually a big um unspoken point of friction because some people point of friction because some people point of friction because some people really can drink five or six drinks. really can drink five or six drinks. really can drink five or six drinks. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. &gt;&gt; And then the next day they're at work &gt;&gt; And then the next day they're at work &gt;&gt; And then the next day they're at work hammering away and they're going to say, hammering away and they're going to say, hammering away and they're going to say, "Listen, my life's going great." "Listen, my life's going great." "Listen, my life's going great." &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And you know, liver markers are still &gt;&gt; And you know, liver markers are still &gt;&gt; And you know, liver markers are still within range. Eventually they'll within range. Eventually they'll within range. Eventually they'll decline. you know, they'll get worse, decline. you know, they'll get worse, decline. you know, they'll get worse, but the conversation becomes very but the conversation becomes very but the conversation becomes very difficult to have because it's high, it difficult to have because it's high, it difficult to have because it's high, it sounds like it's highly individual how sounds like it's highly individual how sounds like it's highly individual how people will react. And there are the people will react. And there are the people will react. And there are the behavioral impacts. Like for instance, behavioral impacts. Like for instance, behavioral impacts. Like for instance, um I've heard the statistic that one of um I've heard the statistic that one of um I've heard the statistic that one of the greatest risks for becoming an the greatest risks for becoming an the greatest risks for becoming an alcoholic is if your first drink is alcoholic is if your first drink is alcoholic is if your first drink is before the age of 14. So I find that before the age of 14. So I find that before the age of 14. So I find that some people will, you know, some people will, you know, some people will, you know, have their first drink like you said and have their first drink like you said and have their first drink like you said and it's like a magic elixir for their it's like a magic elixir for their it's like a magic elixir for their physiology. And there are very few physiology. And there are very few physiology. And there are very few things that can get somebody like that things that can get somebody like that things that can get somebody like that to stop drinking except the risk of to stop drinking except the risk of to stop drinking except the risk of losing everything and sometimes even losing everything and sometimes even losing everything and sometimes even then. &gt;&gt; Sometimes even then. &gt;&gt; Sometimes even then. &gt;&gt; Sometimes even then. &gt;&gt; And so maybe alcohol is the best, you &gt;&gt; And so maybe alcohol is the best, you &gt;&gt; And so maybe alcohol is the best, you know, template for talking about know, template for talking about know, template for talking about this because it's socially acceptable in this because it's socially acceptable in this because it's socially acceptable in most places for adults anyway. most places for adults anyway. most places for adults anyway. &gt;&gt; It's legal. It's marketed. &gt;&gt; It's legal. It's marketed. &gt;&gt; It's legal. It's marketed. &gt;&gt; It's legal. it's marketed and um and yet &gt;&gt; It's legal. it's marketed and um and yet &gt;&gt; It's legal. it's marketed and um and yet how does one know whether or not they how does one know whether or not they how does one know whether or not they have a predisposition have a predisposition have a predisposition um because those people might want to um because those people might want to um because those people might want to avoid using something because our avoid using something because our avoid using something because our colleague Anna LMK has said that um you colleague Anna LMK has said that um you colleague Anna LMK has said that um you can't get addicted to something that can't get addicted to something that can't get addicted to something that you've never done or taken. you've never done or taken. you've never done or taken. &gt;&gt; Yes, that is the most helpful &gt;&gt; Yes, that is the most helpful &gt;&gt; Yes, that is the most helpful advice, you know. So I can never tell advice, you know. So I can never tell advice, you know. So I can never tell you if you know in this game of Russian you if you know in this game of Russian you if you know in this game of Russian roulette, the bullet will not be in your roulette, the bullet will not be in your roulette, the bullet will not be in your chamber for sure. You know, I can say chamber for sure. You know, I can say chamber for sure. You know, I can say like you're less likely for this, more like you're less likely for this, more like you're less likely for this, more likely for that. But the only way to likely for that. But the only way to likely for that. But the only way to determine that a substance will not determine that a substance will not determine that a substance will not damage your life is to never use it in damage your life is to never use it in damage your life is to never use it in the first place. There's always going to the first place. There's always going to the first place. There's always going to be some risk. There's been a lot of be some risk. There's been a lot of be some risk. There's been a lot of work on like kind of genotyping to try work on like kind of genotyping to try work on like kind of genotyping to try to figure out could I tell you tell to figure out could I tell you tell to figure out could I tell you tell people, you know, what their genetic people, you know, what their genetic people, you know, what their genetic risk is for alcohol. And nothing is as risk is for alcohol. And nothing is as risk is for alcohol. And nothing is as good as just saying your parents good as just saying your parents good as just saying your parents alcoholic yeah or no. And if they were, alcoholic yeah or no. And if they were, alcoholic yeah or no. And if they were, that's like the most useful bit of that's like the most useful bit of that's like the most useful bit of information. or does you know does information. or does you know does information. or does you know does problem drinking run in your family? problem drinking run in your family? problem drinking run in your family? That kind of is crude to question as That kind of is crude to question as That kind of is crude to question as that is that's more useful than anything that is that's more useful than anything that is that's more useful than anything we have from snips or anything like we have from snips or anything like we have from snips or anything like that. &gt;&gt; Does it cross sex? So like if a &gt;&gt; Does it cross sex? So like if a &gt;&gt; Does it cross sex? So like if a daughter uh um has a father who's daughter uh um has a father who's daughter uh um has a father who's alcoholic, does it cross sex as readily alcoholic, does it cross sex as readily alcoholic, does it cross sex as readily as it goes from say father to son or as it goes from say father to son or as it goes from say father to son or mother to daughter? mother to daughter? mother to daughter? &gt;&gt; Uh no. I mean there is there is still &gt;&gt; Uh no. I mean there is there is still &gt;&gt; Uh no. I mean there is there is still risk there for sure, but the father to risk there for sure, but the father to risk there for sure, but the father to son link is the is the strongest one you son link is the is the strongest one you son link is the is the strongest one you see in genetic studies. Now, of see in genetic studies. Now, of see in genetic studies. Now, of course, there's in a sense it's hard, course, there's in a sense it's hard, course, there's in a sense it's hard, right? Because men drink more than women right? Because men drink more than women right? Because men drink more than women do. I mean, in our culture anyway. do. I mean, in our culture anyway. do. I mean, in our culture anyway. And and they drink to excess more than And and they drink to excess more than And and they drink to excess more than women do anyway, whether they've got an women do anyway, whether they've got an women do anyway, whether they've got an alcohol problem or not. So, if you think alcohol problem or not. So, if you think alcohol problem or not. So, if you think this is some sort of unfolding process, this is some sort of unfolding process, this is some sort of unfolding process, right, then men carrying risk would be right, then men carrying risk would be right, then men carrying risk would be more likely to have that risk realized more likely to have that risk realized more likely to have that risk realized through the behavior than a woman would. through the behavior than a woman would. through the behavior than a woman would. Well, there's still a fair amount of Well, there's still a fair amount of Well, there's still a fair amount of women who don't drink or drink, you women who don't drink or drink, you women who don't drink or drink, you know, hardly any. food. So, it's sort of know, hardly any. food. So, it's sort of know, hardly any. food. So, it's sort of like the thing if you, you know, if you like the thing if you, you know, if you like the thing if you, you know, if you had all the genetic loading for cocaine had all the genetic loading for cocaine had all the genetic loading for cocaine in 1800, it didn't matter. There was no in 1800, it didn't matter. There was no in 1800, it didn't matter. There was no cocaine. If you had all the genetic cocaine. If you had all the genetic cocaine. If you had all the genetic loading for alcohol and you've never loading for alcohol and you've never loading for alcohol and you've never drank, then it's really irrelevant. drank, then it's really irrelevant. drank, then it's really irrelevant. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 gram of protein and 75% of its right, 28 gram of protein and 75% of its right, 28 gram of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. That's 50% calories come from protein. That's 50% calories come from protein. That's 50% higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein bar. These bars from David also taste bar. These bars from David also taste bar. These bars from David also taste amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor amazing. Right now, my favorite flavor is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I is the new cinnamon roll flavor, but I also like the chocolate chip cookie also like the chocolate chip cookie also like the chocolate chip cookie dough flavor, and I also like the salted dough flavor, and I also like the salted dough flavor, and I also like the salted peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like peanut butter flavor. Basically, I like all the flavors. They're all delicious. all the flavors. They're all delicious. all the flavors. They're all delicious. Also, big news. David bars are now back Also, big news. David bars are now back Also, big news. David bars are now back in stock. They were sold out for several in stock. They were sold out for several in stock. They were sold out for several months because they are that popular, months because they are that popular, months because they are that popular, but they are now back in stock. By but they are now back in stock. By but they are now back in stock. By eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 eating a David bar, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a grams of protein in the calories of a grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it very easy for me snack, which makes it very easy for me snack, which makes it very easy for me to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of to meet my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per day protein per pound of body weight per day protein per pound of body weight per day and to do so without eating excess and to do so without eating excess and to do so without eating excess calories. I generally eat a David bar calories. I generally eat a David bar calories. I generally eat a David bar most afternoons and I always keep them most afternoons and I always keep them most afternoons and I always keep them with me when I'm away from home or with me when I'm away from home or with me when I'm away from home or traveling because they're incredibly traveling because they're incredibly traveling because they're incredibly convenient to get enough protein. As I convenient to get enough protein. As I convenient to get enough protein. As I mentioned, they're incredibly delicious mentioned, they're incredibly delicious mentioned, they're incredibly delicious and given that 28 grams of protein, and given that 28 grams of protein, and given that 28 grams of protein, they're pretty filling for just 150 they're pretty filling for just 150 they're pretty filling for just 150 calories. So, they're great between calories. So, they're great between calories. So, they're great between meals as well. If you'd like to try meals as well. If you'd like to try meals as well. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing therapy for many years I've been doing therapy for many years I've been doing therapy for many years now, and I can tell you that it's a lot now, and I can tell you that it's a lot now, and I can tell you that it's a lot like physical workouts. There are days like physical workouts. There are days like physical workouts. There are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I don't want to do it. But every when I don't want to do it. But every when I don't want to do it. But every time I finish a therapy session, I come time I finish a therapy session, I come time I finish a therapy session, I come away feeling much better and knowing away feeling much better and knowing away feeling much better and knowing that the time was very well spent. that the time was very well spent. that the time was very well spent. Typically, when I finish a therapy Typically, when I finish a therapy Typically, when I finish a therapy session, I come away with at least one session, I come away with at least one session, I come away with at least one valuable insight or perspective on valuable insight or perspective on valuable insight or perspective on something that I'm working through, something that I'm working through, something that I'm working through, whether that's with work, relationships, whether that's with work, relationships, whether that's with work, relationships, or my personal life, or just simply my or my personal life, or just simply my or my personal life, or just simply my relationship to myself. There's just so relationship to myself. There's just so relationship to myself. There's just so much benefit that comes through much benefit that comes through much benefit that comes through effective therapy. And with BetterHelp, effective therapy. And with BetterHelp, effective therapy. And with BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert they make it very easy to find an expert they make it very easy to find an expert therapist who can provide you with the therapist who can provide you with the therapist who can provide you with the benefits that come from effective benefits that come from effective benefits that come from effective therapy. With over 30,000 therapists, therapy. With over 30,000 therapists, therapy. With over 30,000 therapists, BetterHelp is one of the world's largest BetterHelp is one of the world's largest BetterHelp is one of the world's largest online therapy platforms, having served online therapy platforms, having served online therapy platforms, having served over five million people globally. And over five million people globally. And over five million people globally. And it works with an average rating of 4.9 it works with an average rating of 4.9 it works with an average rating of 4.9 out of five for a live session based on out of five for a live session based on out of five for a live session based on over 1.7 million client reviews. Also, over 1.7 million client reviews. Also, over 1.7 million client reviews. Also, because BetterHelp is done entirely because BetterHelp is done entirely because BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's extremely timeefficient. online, it's extremely timeefficient. online, it's extremely timeefficient. There's no driving to a therapist's There's no driving to a therapist's There's no driving to a therapist's office, looking for parking, etc. If office, looking for parking, etc. If office, looking for parking, etc. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to betterhelp.com/huberman to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Women are drinking more or less now. Women are drinking more or less now. Women are drinking more or less now. Women, unfortunately, Women, unfortunately, Women, unfortunately, um you know, in the late 90s, early um you know, in the late 90s, early um you know, in the late 90s, early odds, the alcohol industry figured out odds, the alcohol industry figured out odds, the alcohol industry figured out that uh women had more money and but that uh women had more money and but that uh women had more money and but they weren't drinking the way men were. they weren't drinking the way men were. they weren't drinking the way men were. So they uh engaged in a long-term So they uh engaged in a long-term So they uh engaged in a long-term campaign to try to increase women's campaign to try to increase women's campaign to try to increase women's drinking. So things like, you know, drinking. So things like, you know, drinking. So things like, you know, mommy wine juice and those wine mommy wine juice and those wine mommy wine juice and those wine mommy wine chats online and all wine mommy wine chats online and all wine mommy wine chats online and all that was really engineered by them. that was really engineered by them. that was really engineered by them. Even some of the ones that look organic Even some of the ones that look organic Even some of the ones that look organic online were engineered by the industry online were engineered by the industry online were engineered by the industry and it worked. Women's drinking went up and it worked. Women's drinking went up and it worked. Women's drinking went up a lot. Um and the damage per drink is a lot. Um and the damage per drink is a lot. Um and the damage per drink is more for women for most things than it more for women for most things than it more for women for most things than it is for men for partly due to body size is for men for partly due to body size is for men for partly due to body size but also partly probably due to some but also partly probably due to some but also partly probably due to some hormonal things. And so it's been you hormonal things. And so it's been you hormonal things. And so it's been you know a exploitation as I see it you know a exploitation as I see it you know a exploitation as I see it you know of women and I notice a lot of young of women and I notice a lot of young of women and I notice a lot of young women now like undergraduates I talked women now like undergraduates I talked women now like undergraduates I talked to re-evaluating that like looking at to re-evaluating that like looking at to re-evaluating that like looking at their mom's experience and saying you their mom's experience and saying you their mom's experience and saying you know I don't think I want to do that and know I don't think I want to do that and know I don't think I want to do that and I I'm really encouraged by that. I not I I'm really encouraged by that. I not I I'm really encouraged by that. I not that I want to control you know the not that I want to control you know the not that I want to control you know the decisions we make but I don't want them decisions we make but I don't want them decisions we make but I don't want them making them just because the industry making them just because the industry making them just because the industry slickly marketed to them um because the slickly marketed to them um because the slickly marketed to them um because the industry's sole interest is always going industry's sole interest is always going industry's sole interest is always going to be to generate profit and you do that to be to generate profit and you do that to be to generate profit and you do that with addiction because you know with addiction because you know with addiction because you know something like what 10% of our country something like what 10% of our country something like what 10% of our country drinks about half the alcohol so you drinks about half the alcohol so you drinks about half the alcohol so you have yeah you're shocked yeah have yeah you're shocked yeah have yeah you're shocked yeah &gt;&gt; 10% of the country drinks alcohol &gt;&gt; 10% of the country drinks alcohol &gt;&gt; 10% of the country drinks alcohol right United States so if you're alcohol right United States so if you're alcohol right United States so if you're running the industry you want that group running the industry you want that group running the industry you want that group to be as big as possible you do not make to be as big as possible you do not make to be as big as possible you do not make money off people who have a, you know, money off people who have a, you know, money off people who have a, you know, half a bottle of wine on special half a bottle of wine on special half a bottle of wine on special occasions. You make your money on the occasions. You make your money on the occasions. You make your money on the people who drink the equivalent of people who drink the equivalent of people who drink the equivalent of multiple bottles of wine every single multiple bottles of wine every single multiple bottles of wine every single day. So you have a fundamentally these day. So you have a fundamentally these day. So you have a fundamentally these industries, the more addiction there is, industries, the more addiction there is, industries, the more addiction there is, the better off they do financially. the better off they do financially. the better off they do financially. &gt;&gt; Wow. There's a lot there. The statistics &gt;&gt; Wow. There's a lot there. The statistics &gt;&gt; Wow. There's a lot there. The statistics say that drinking is at an all-time low say that drinking is at an all-time low say that drinking is at an all-time low in the United States right now. At least in the United States right now. At least in the United States right now. At least &gt;&gt; some statist Yeah. statistics &gt;&gt; some statist Yeah. statistics &gt;&gt; some statist Yeah. statistics something seems to have changed and something seems to have changed and something seems to have changed and this may have something to do with this may have something to do with this may have something to do with this new generation. new generation. new generation. &gt;&gt; You know there there's less risk &gt;&gt; You know there there's less risk &gt;&gt; You know there there's less risk behavior in lots of things on you know behavior in lots of things on you know behavior in lots of things on you know over the last 10 years. So uh you know over the last 10 years. So uh you know over the last 10 years. So uh you know less uh you know cutting class less uh less uh you know cutting class less uh less uh you know cutting class less uh less chance of uh dropping out of high less chance of uh dropping out of high less chance of uh dropping out of high school u fewer unwanted pregnancies all school u fewer unwanted pregnancies all school u fewer unwanted pregnancies all that stuff. So there is that generation that stuff. So there is that generation that stuff. So there is that generation will probably be a drier generation than will probably be a drier generation than will probably be a drier generation than their parents were. their parents were. their parents were. &gt;&gt; Is cannabis use higher in that group? &gt;&gt; Is cannabis use higher in that group? &gt;&gt; Is cannabis use higher in that group? Everyone likes to just default to well Everyone likes to just default to well Everyone likes to just default to well cannabis is up so alcohol is down cannabis is up so alcohol is down cannabis is up so alcohol is down implying that you have to do something implying that you have to do something implying that you have to do something that people have to be using some sort that people have to be using some sort that people have to be using some sort of mindaltering substance. of mindaltering substance. of mindaltering substance. &gt;&gt; Yeah. With the legalization of cannabis &gt;&gt; Yeah. With the legalization of cannabis &gt;&gt; Yeah. With the legalization of cannabis um we certainly have seen a lot more use um we certainly have seen a lot more use um we certainly have seen a lot more use and a lot stronger products but youth and a lot stronger products but youth and a lot stronger products but youth use really has only changed pretty use really has only changed pretty use really has only changed pretty slightly. So the growth has really been slightly. So the growth has really been slightly. So the growth has really been among adults including adults who among adults including adults who among adults including adults who probably stopped at some point and have probably stopped at some point and have probably stopped at some point and have now gone back in later life to uh using now gone back in later life to uh using now gone back in later life to uh using cannabis. We'll get back to cannabis, cannabis. We'll get back to cannabis, cannabis. We'll get back to cannabis, but I want to um parse the alcohol stats but I want to um parse the alcohol stats but I want to um parse the alcohol stats a bit more also as it relates to uh to a bit more also as it relates to uh to a bit more also as it relates to uh to women. Maybe we can just either put to rest or Maybe we can just either put to rest or Maybe we can just either put to rest or not this argument that some amount of not this argument that some amount of not this argument that some amount of alcohol, typically it's red wine is alcohol, typically it's red wine is alcohol, typically it's red wine is couched this way, is more beneficial for couched this way, is more beneficial for couched this way, is more beneficial for you than not drinking at all. My read of you than not drinking at all. My read of you than not drinking at all. My read of the data, and we covered this in a long the data, and we covered this in a long the data, and we covered this in a long episode on alcohol a few years ago, was episode on alcohol a few years ago, was episode on alcohol a few years ago, was that zero is better than any. And that zero is better than any. And that zero is better than any. And that two per week, two drinks per week, and two per week, two drinks per week, and two per week, two drinks per week, and that's getting very specific about that's getting very specific about that's getting very specific about ounces for, you know, spirits versus two ounces for, you know, spirits versus two ounces for, you know, spirits versus two per week is sort of the upper limit for per week is sort of the upper limit for per week is sort of the upper limit for adult non-alcoholics that um don't want adult non-alcoholics that um don't want adult non-alcoholics that um don't want to incur any additional health risk. Um to incur any additional health risk. Um to incur any additional health risk. Um the cancer risk very clear the uh the cancer risk very clear the uh the cancer risk very clear the uh disruption to sleep which probably disruption to sleep which probably disruption to sleep which probably cascades into other things inflammation cascades into other things inflammation cascades into other things inflammation etc. But is zero better than any is too etc. But is zero better than any is too etc. But is zero better than any is too safe for non-alcoholic adults because safe for non-alcoholic adults because safe for non-alcoholic adults because every week it seems I see a new article every week it seems I see a new article every week it seems I see a new article that says zero is better than any. No that says zero is better than any. No that says zero is better than any. No wait it turns out there's some benefit wait it turns out there's some benefit wait it turns out there's some benefit from two drinks per week and I'm getting from two drinks per week and I'm getting from two drinks per week and I'm getting frank I'm not tired of it but it's frank I'm not tired of it but it's frank I'm not tired of it but it's almost getting funny. almost getting funny. almost getting funny. &gt;&gt; Yeah. the extent to which the uh it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. the extent to which the uh it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. the extent to which the uh it's traditional media, not to poke on them, traditional media, not to poke on them, traditional media, not to poke on them, but they just keep flip-flopping. And but they just keep flip-flopping. And but they just keep flip-flopping. And then the questions that always come up then the questions that always come up then the questions that always come up are, well, did the alcohol industry sort are, well, did the alcohol industry sort are, well, did the alcohol industry sort of encourage this study? Because if of encourage this study? Because if of encourage this study? Because if we're honest, there's a lot of we're honest, there's a lot of we're honest, there's a lot of advertising of alcohol in traditional advertising of alcohol in traditional advertising of alcohol in traditional media outlets. media outlets. media outlets. &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. So, uh, statement &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. So, uh, statement &gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. So, uh, statement against interest because I like red against interest because I like red against interest because I like red wine. I would love to believe it is wine. I would love to believe it is wine. I would love to believe it is healthy. It's not. Uh and the whole healthy. It's not. Uh and the whole healthy. It's not. Uh and the whole thing about red wine per se by the way thing about red wine per se by the way thing about red wine per se by the way was never made any sense like why would was never made any sense like why would was never made any sense like why would there be a benefit to red wine that there be a benefit to red wine that there be a benefit to red wine that wasn't you know in other alcoholic wasn't you know in other alcoholic wasn't you know in other alcoholic beverages right and it came from a beverages right and it came from a beverages right and it came from a 60-minute story I think it was in the 60-minute story I think it was in the 60-minute story I think it was in the '9s was about why do French people why '9s was about why do French people why '9s was about why do French people why do why do Mediterranean the red wine do why do Mediterranean the red wine do why do Mediterranean the red wine red wine cells exploded you know you red wine cells exploded you know you red wine cells exploded you know you know this is so great know this is so great know this is so great &gt;&gt; resveratrol was an argument &gt;&gt; resveratrol was an argument &gt;&gt; resveratrol was an argument &gt;&gt; yes that's right you know there's such &gt;&gt; yes that's right you know there's such &gt;&gt; yes that's right you know there's such trace amounts that just like ludicrous trace amounts that just like ludicrous trace amounts that just like ludicrous you know in a grape skin um and so that you know in a grape skin um and so that you know in a grape skin um and so that was just spread and it was just so great was just spread and it was just so great was just spread and it was just so great for the industry it's better for you for the industry it's better for you for the industry it's better for you than not drinking. Um, and you know, than not drinking. Um, and you know, than not drinking. Um, and you know, that's just not true. Uh, you know, it's that's just not true. Uh, you know, it's that's just not true. Uh, you know, it's um when you look at they would look it's um when you look at they would look it's um when you look at they would look at studies and say, well, look, you at studies and say, well, look, you at studies and say, well, look, you know, the non-drinking group know, the non-drinking group know, the non-drinking group have higher mortality than the low have higher mortality than the low have higher mortality than the low drinking group and the famous called the drinking group and the famous called the drinking group and the famous called the J-shaped curve, you know, like that. J-shaped curve, you know, like that. J-shaped curve, you know, like that. Problem is non-drinkers include people Problem is non-drinkers include people Problem is non-drinkers include people who are like in alcoholic synonymous. who are like in alcoholic synonymous. who are like in alcoholic synonymous. That's why they don't drink. They had a, That's why they don't drink. They had a, That's why they don't drink. They had a, you know, a wretched experience with you know, a wretched experience with you know, a wretched experience with alcohol. And so, um, you know, they had alcohol. And so, um, you know, they had alcohol. And so, um, you know, they had they've had different kinds of damage to they've had different kinds of damage to they've had different kinds of damage to their bodies. Maybe their health is their bodies. Maybe their health is their bodies. Maybe their health is isn't as good. They're not going to live isn't as good. They're not going to live isn't as good. They're not going to live as long, but it's not that they would be as long, but it's not that they would be as long, but it's not that they would be better off if they went back to better off if they went back to better off if they went back to drinking. They would things would drinking. They would things would drinking. They would things would go to hell basically for them. And, uh, go to hell basically for them. And, uh, go to hell basically for them. And, uh, that just got, you know, marketed and that just got, you know, marketed and that just got, you know, marketed and spread. And it and it's not and spread. And it and it's not and spread. And it and it's not true. There might be some cardiac true. There might be some cardiac true. There might be some cardiac benefit, okay? But, you know, we don't benefit, okay? But, you know, we don't benefit, okay? But, you know, we don't we don't get to, you know, live our we don't get to, you know, live our we don't get to, you know, live our lives as single organs. We have a whole lives as single organs. We have a whole lives as single organs. We have a whole body. You have to weigh that if that is body. You have to weigh that if that is body. You have to weigh that if that is true. And it is wobbly. If that's true, true. And it is wobbly. If that's true, true. And it is wobbly. If that's true, it's smaller than the cancer risk. So it's smaller than the cancer risk. So it's smaller than the cancer risk. So your net is you're not going to get any your net is you're not going to get any your net is you're not going to get any mortality gain from mortality reduction mortality gain from mortality reduction mortality gain from mortality reduction from drinking alcohol. If you have two from drinking alcohol. If you have two from drinking alcohol. If you have two drinks a week, and by a drink I mean drinks a week, and by a drink I mean drinks a week, and by a drink I mean like a 12 ounce beer, uh a 1 oz shot like a 12 ounce beer, uh a 1 oz shot like a 12 ounce beer, uh a 1 oz shot or a uh a glass of wine, a 4 oz glass of or a uh a glass of wine, a 4 oz glass of or a uh a glass of wine, a 4 oz glass of wine, you have slightly higher risk, wine, you have slightly higher risk, wine, you have slightly higher risk, but it is very small. And you but it is very small. And you but it is very small. And you know, it's not the kind of thing if I, know, it's not the kind of thing if I, know, it's not the kind of thing if I, you know, if I were giving health advice you know, if I were giving health advice you know, if I were giving health advice to the country, that would not be on my to the country, that would not be on my to the country, that would not be on my top 10 things to be, you know, really top 10 things to be, you know, really top 10 things to be, you know, really frightened about. I think it's very frightened about. I think it's very frightened about. I think it's very small. It's just not good for you. small. It's just not good for you. small. It's just not good for you. That's what science has overturned the That's what science has overturned the That's what science has overturned the industry message that this is will industry message that this is will industry message that this is will extend your life and you'll be more extend your life and you'll be more extend your life and you'll be more healthy if you drink than if you don't. healthy if you drink than if you don't. healthy if you drink than if you don't. There's there's no way we can establish There's there's no way we can establish There's there's no way we can establish that as being true. You said it very that as being true. You said it very that as being true. You said it very clearly, but I'm going to um just repeat clearly, but I'm going to um just repeat clearly, but I'm going to um just repeat it because I think it's super important it because I think it's super important it because I think it's super important for people to take note of that the for people to take note of that the for people to take note of that the cardiac benefit is less than the cancer cardiac benefit is less than the cancer cardiac benefit is less than the cancer risk. And I think that's a very risk. And I think that's a very risk. And I think that's a very important way to view these stats. The important way to view these stats. The important way to view these stats. The episode that we did about alcohol um episode that we did about alcohol um episode that we did about alcohol um had a lot of different responses. U had a lot of different responses. U had a lot of different responses. U there's obviously a selection bias in there's obviously a selection bias in there's obviously a selection bias in the responses. Many people gave up the responses. Many people gave up the responses. Many people gave up drinking who I later learned wanted to drinking who I later learned wanted to drinking who I later learned wanted to quit drinking. They didn't like it. the quit drinking. They didn't like it. the quit drinking. They didn't like it. the downstream effects of the disruption to downstream effects of the disruption to downstream effects of the disruption to sleep from alcohol and so on. Probably sleep from alcohol and so on. Probably sleep from alcohol and so on. Probably part of the effect. Um it was very part of the effect. Um it was very part of the effect. Um it was very interesting as it relates to women interesting as it relates to women interesting as it relates to women because um many people including some because um many people including some because um many people including some members of my family really like their members of my family really like their members of my family really like their post-work glass of wine or want a drink post-work glass of wine or want a drink post-work glass of wine or want a drink to just kind of mark an end to the day to just kind of mark an end to the day to just kind of mark an end to the day and relax. Um and relax. Um and relax. Um my observation was that many women who my observation was that many women who my observation was that many women who stopped drinking stopped drinking stopped drinking either because of that discussion about either because of that discussion about either because of that discussion about alcohol or others that they had heard alcohol or others that they had heard alcohol or others that they had heard did so when they learned that women have did so when they learned that women have did so when they learned that women have a particular risk to cancer as it a particular risk to cancer as it a particular risk to cancer as it relates to alcohol meaning if the breast relates to alcohol meaning if the breast relates to alcohol meaning if the breast cancer risk and other hormone um cancer risk and other hormone um cancer risk and other hormone um &gt;&gt; ovarian cancer hormone related cancers &gt;&gt; ovarian cancer hormone related cancers &gt;&gt; ovarian cancer hormone related cancers and so forth not always hormone related and so forth not always hormone related and so forth not always hormone related but the moment it move that the it's but the moment it move that the it's but the moment it move that the it's probably best to avoid alcohol entirely probably best to avoid alcohol entirely probably best to avoid alcohol entirely conversation moved into women's specific conversation moved into women's specific conversation moved into women's specific health. It had a very potent impact. health. It had a very potent impact. health. It had a very potent impact. Uh which is interesting in its own Uh which is interesting in its own Uh which is interesting in its own right. &gt;&gt; Um and it speaks to what's perhaps &gt;&gt; Um and it speaks to what's perhaps &gt;&gt; Um and it speaks to what's perhaps required to override some of the required to override some of the required to override some of the marketing because let's be fair, it's marketing because let's be fair, it's marketing because let's be fair, it's nice to relax with friends. And if nice to relax with friends. And if nice to relax with friends. And if people think relaxing with friends is people think relaxing with friends is people think relaxing with friends is easier to do over a glass of wine or easier to do over a glass of wine or easier to do over a glass of wine or two, then that's a great not just two, then that's a great not just two, then that's a great not just marketing scheme, it's also somewhat marketing scheme, it's also somewhat marketing scheme, it's also somewhat true for them until there's counter true for them until there's counter true for them until there's counter evidence. And so what I'm really getting evidence. And so what I'm really getting evidence. And so what I'm really getting at here is, you know, how is it that at here is, you know, how is it that at here is, you know, how is it that people should frame what they know to be people should frame what they know to be people should frame what they know to be risky versus the other benefits of risky versus the other benefits of risky versus the other benefits of alcohol that clearly exist like helps alcohol that clearly exist like helps alcohol that clearly exist like helps people relax. Um it's social, they people relax. Um it's social, they people relax. Um it's social, they stress less stress less stress less &gt;&gt; and so on and so forth. &gt;&gt; and so on and so forth. &gt;&gt; and so on and so forth. &gt;&gt; You know, as I mentioned, I'm someone &gt;&gt; You know, as I mentioned, I'm someone &gt;&gt; You know, as I mentioned, I'm someone who drinks wine and I know that it is, who drinks wine and I know that it is, who drinks wine and I know that it is, you know, on average, you know, it's not you know, on average, you know, it's not you know, on average, you know, it's not healthy. Um why do I do that? It's like healthy. Um why do I do that? It's like healthy. Um why do I do that? It's like well because it creates other things well because it creates other things well because it creates other things particularly with exactly that situation particularly with exactly that situation particularly with exactly that situation that you know uh getting together with that you know uh getting together with that you know uh getting together with friends is enjoyable uh enriching good friends is enjoyable uh enriching good friends is enjoyable uh enriching good food is enriching good food and a and a food is enriching good food and a and a food is enriching good food and a and a good wine tastes good uh and I value good wine tastes good uh and I value good wine tastes good uh and I value those things and there are many other those things and there are many other those things and there are many other decisions we make like that where we decisions we make like that where we decisions we make like that where we endure some risk because uh we care endure some risk because uh we care endure some risk because uh we care about something else. you know, it's about something else. you know, it's about something else. you know, it's dangerous to, you know, for it's dangerous to, you know, for it's dangerous to, you know, for someone my age to, you know, hike up a someone my age to, you know, hike up a someone my age to, you know, hike up a mountain side probably. Um, but, uh, if mountain side probably. Um, but, uh, if mountain side probably. Um, but, uh, if the view is spectacular, I can I say, if the view is spectacular, I can I say, if the view is spectacular, I can I say, I'm going to accept that risk. You maybe I'm going to accept that risk. You maybe I'm going to accept that risk. You maybe I'm more prone to twist my ankle or I'm more prone to twist my ankle or I'm more prone to twist my ankle or something, but this is just really something, but this is just really something, but this is just really beautiful. That that's okay. I think I beautiful. That that's okay. I think I beautiful. That that's okay. I think I think what the place we got in alcohol think what the place we got in alcohol think what the place we got in alcohol that was bad was needing an explanation that was bad was needing an explanation that was bad was needing an explanation to stop. So, how often have you ever to stop. So, how often have you ever to stop. So, how often have you ever said to someone at a party or seen said to someone at a party or seen said to someone at a party or seen someone say at a party, "Why are you someone say at a party, "Why are you someone say at a party, "Why are you drinking?" I've never heard that, but drinking?" I've never heard that, but drinking?" I've never heard that, but I've certainly heard a million times, I've certainly heard a million times, I've certainly heard a million times, "Why aren't you drinking?" "Why aren't you drinking?" "Why aren't you drinking?" &gt;&gt; If you don't drink at parties or you &gt;&gt; If you don't drink at parties or you &gt;&gt; If you don't drink at parties or you refuse an offer of alcohol, people think refuse an offer of alcohol, people think refuse an offer of alcohol, people think there's something wrong with you. there's something wrong with you. there's something wrong with you. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you have to have to have an &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you have to have to have an &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you have to have to have an explanation like, "Well, I got a exam explanation like, "Well, I got a exam explanation like, "Well, I got a exam tomorrow morning or uh I've got a cold tomorrow morning or uh I've got a cold tomorrow morning or uh I've got a cold or something." It's like, you or something." It's like, you or something." It's like, you shouldn't need an explanation. Um, but shouldn't need an explanation. Um, but shouldn't need an explanation. Um, but people do feel that social people do feel that social people do feel that social pressure. And so that's one way health pressure. And so that's one way health pressure. And so that's one way health information can work. Why didn't a information can work. Why didn't a information can work. Why didn't a person just quit beforehand because they person just quit beforehand because they person just quit beforehand because they may not have had an explanation that may not have had an explanation that may not have had an explanation that worked in their uh their circle and now worked in their uh their circle and now worked in their uh their circle and now you can say well you know I see those you can say well you know I see those you can say well you know I see those data on uh you know ovarian cancer and data on uh you know ovarian cancer and data on uh you know ovarian cancer and uh you know I just I decided to quit uh you know I just I decided to quit uh you know I just I decided to quit drinking. Um and you know that is you drinking. Um and you know that is you drinking. Um and you know that is you know health is a reason people still know health is a reason people still know health is a reason people still accept I think as a uh legitimate for accept I think as a uh legitimate for accept I think as a uh legitimate for changing behavior. you can make that you changing behavior. you can make that you changing behavior. you can make that you know because you know cancer is scary know because you know cancer is scary know because you know cancer is scary and that may be why uh people quit. Um, and that may be why uh people quit. Um, and that may be why uh people quit. Um, you know, same thing happened when, you know, same thing happened when, you know, same thing happened when, you know, first surgeon general smoking, uh, know, first surgeon general smoking, uh, know, first surgeon general smoking, uh, thinking about everybody smoked. You had thinking about everybody smoked. You had thinking about everybody smoked. You had to sort of fit in at work, you had to sort of fit in at work, you had to sort of fit in at work, you had to smoke. And when that came out, there smoke. And when that came out, there smoke. And when that came out, there were a lot of people who just quit were a lot of people who just quit were a lot of people who just quit immediately. They clearly were capable immediately. They clearly were capable immediately. They clearly were capable of quitting, wanted to quit, but they of quitting, wanted to quit, but they of quitting, wanted to quit, but they needed some exp to tell everybody, why needed some exp to tell everybody, why needed some exp to tell everybody, why are you not smoking anymore? Why can't are you not smoking anymore? Why can't are you not smoking anymore? Why can't Why don't you carry cigarettes anymore? Why don't you carry cigarettes anymore? Why don't you carry cigarettes anymore? I can't bum one off you anymore. It's I can't bum one off you anymore. It's I can't bum one off you anymore. It's like that that's why. like that that's why. like that that's why. &gt;&gt; Why do you think people who drink uh &gt;&gt; Why do you think people who drink uh &gt;&gt; Why do you think people who drink uh feel uncomfortable about people not feel uncomfortable about people not feel uncomfortable about people not drinking around them? When people would drinking around them? When people would drinking around them? When people would ask me uh if I wanted to drink and I'd ask me uh if I wanted to drink and I'd ask me uh if I wanted to drink and I'd say no and they'd say why. They often say no and they'd say why. They often say no and they'd say why. They often say that I would say the truth which is say that I would say the truth which is say that I would say the truth which is I'll say anything that's on my mind I'll say anything that's on my mind I'll say anything that's on my mind without drinking. without drinking. without drinking. &gt;&gt; You don't want me to drink cuz then I'll &gt;&gt; You don't want me to drink cuz then I'll &gt;&gt; You don't want me to drink cuz then I'll tell you everything that's on my mind. tell you everything that's on my mind. tell you everything that's on my mind. &gt;&gt; Oh good. &gt;&gt; Oh good. &gt;&gt; Oh good. &gt;&gt; It's true. I mean like I will tell &gt;&gt; It's true. I mean like I will tell &gt;&gt; It's true. I mean like I will tell people what I'm thinking. Uh I don't people what I'm thinking. Uh I don't people what I'm thinking. Uh I don't need to like loosen up. I'm pretty need to like loosen up. I'm pretty need to like loosen up. I'm pretty relaxed in social settings. I don't have relaxed in social settings. I don't have relaxed in social settings. I don't have much social anxiety, but I realize some much social anxiety, but I realize some much social anxiety, but I realize some people might have trouble with social people might have trouble with social people might have trouble with social anxiety. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, I spent a little &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, I spent a little &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, I spent a little time in Japan when I was a young man and time in Japan when I was a young man and time in Japan when I was a young man and there's this, you know, culture of there's this, you know, culture of there's this, you know, culture of getting going out after work like the getting going out after work like the getting going out after work like the salary man go to work and someone salary man go to work and someone salary man go to work and someone getting really drunk and getting really drunk and getting really drunk and everyone's drinking and you're everyone's drinking and you're everyone's drinking and you're vulnerable with each other and you and vulnerable with each other and you and vulnerable with each other and you and then you know that I will I will it's then you know that I will I will it's then you know that I will I will it's like a trust exercise like that falling like a trust exercise like that falling like a trust exercise like that falling backwards thing except it is that we're backwards thing except it is that we're backwards thing except it is that we're all drunk and if someone weren't doing all drunk and if someone weren't doing all drunk and if someone weren't doing it's like why are you not undergoing it's like why are you not undergoing it's like why are you not undergoing any so we're all going to be vulnerable any so we're all going to be vulnerable any so we're all going to be vulnerable and you're not and like are you going to and you're not and like are you going to and you're not and like are you going to exploit us in some way or I'm going to exploit us in some way or I'm going to exploit us in some way or I'm going to say you I think I hate the boss and then say you I think I hate the boss and then say you I think I hate the boss and then you're going to repeat that at work you're going to repeat that at work you're going to repeat that at work because you know you you're the because you know you you're the because you know you you're the one person sober enough to remember I one person sober enough to remember I one person sober enough to remember I said that. I think that is a real thing said that. I think that is a real thing said that. I think that is a real thing that people have anxiety about. Or that people have anxiety about. Or that people have anxiety about. Or I can imagine you say what if uh I can imagine you say what if uh I can imagine you say what if uh you know a uh a man woman are on a date you know a uh a man woman are on a date you know a uh a man woman are on a date and the guy keeps giving drinks to the and the guy keeps giving drinks to the and the guy keeps giving drinks to the woman and doesn't drink himself like you woman and doesn't drink himself like you woman and doesn't drink himself like you know what is the natural thing to think know what is the natural thing to think know what is the natural thing to think are you trying to get me drunk? Are you are you trying to get me drunk? Are you are you trying to get me drunk? Are you going to take advantage of me because going to take advantage of me because going to take advantage of me because you know you're going to be with it you know you're going to be with it you know you're going to be with it and I'm not because I'm going to be and I'm not because I'm going to be and I'm not because I'm going to be drunk. So those kinds of fears may be in drunk. So those kinds of fears may be in drunk. So those kinds of fears may be in the soup. Um but I don't think you the soup. Um but I don't think you the soup. Um but I don't think you know so say maybe that's you know so say maybe that's you know so say maybe that's you know rational at some level but I don't think rational at some level but I don't think rational at some level but I don't think that should drive our sort of routine that should drive our sort of routine that should drive our sort of routine social interaction with our friends. It social interaction with our friends. It social interaction with our friends. It should just be a non-issue you know of should just be a non-issue you know of should just be a non-issue you know of what do you want? And if you I want what do you want? And if you I want what do you want? And if you I want sparkling water I just give you a glass sparkling water I just give you a glass sparkling water I just give you a glass of sparkling water and don't say why of sparkling water and don't say why of sparkling water and don't say why haven't you why aren't you drinking this haven't you why aren't you drinking this haven't you why aren't you drinking this intoxicating beverage? You know you intoxicating beverage? You know you intoxicating beverage? You know you shouldn't need to explain it to me. shouldn't need to explain it to me. shouldn't need to explain it to me. &gt;&gt; The trust piece is super interesting. So &gt;&gt; The trust piece is super interesting. So &gt;&gt; The trust piece is super interesting. So is the vulnerability piece. Um, a couple is the vulnerability piece. Um, a couple is the vulnerability piece. Um, a couple thoughts about this and they're just thoughts about this and they're just thoughts about this and they're just editorial thoughts, so forgive me, but editorial thoughts, so forgive me, but editorial thoughts, so forgive me, but one is for years I thought how crazy it one is for years I thought how crazy it one is for years I thought how crazy it was. I would go to these meetings with was. I would go to these meetings with was. I would go to these meetings with doctors and scientists who ostensibly doctors and scientists who ostensibly doctors and scientists who ostensibly were working on issues related to health were working on issues related to health were working on issues related to health and everyone would just get trashed at and everyone would just get trashed at and everyone would just get trashed at the bar the bar the bar &gt;&gt; and [clears throat] I wasn't into that. &gt;&gt; and [clears throat] I wasn't into that. &gt;&gt; and [clears throat] I wasn't into that. Um, and I wasn't judgmental. I actually Um, and I wasn't judgmental. I actually Um, and I wasn't judgmental. I actually kind of liked it cuz by the third day of kind of liked it cuz by the third day of kind of liked it cuz by the third day of the meeting I'm cranking and they're all the meeting I'm cranking and they're all the meeting I'm cranking and they're all just I can tell they're all just blery just I can tell they're all just blery just I can tell they're all just blery and they and they're also aging much and they and they're also aging much and they and they're also aging much faster than I am. They they would faster than I am. They they would faster than I am. They they would get what the tenur look as we would call get what the tenur look as we would call get what the tenur look as we would call it or as I would call it like you see it or as I would call it like you see it or as I would call it like you see them in five years. I'm like what them in five years. I'm like what them in five years. I'm like what happened to you? You aged 15 years. And happened to you? You aged 15 years. And happened to you? You aged 15 years. And and I these people tended to drink a lot and I these people tended to drink a lot and I these people tended to drink a lot both at meetings and outside meetings. both at meetings and outside meetings. both at meetings and outside meetings. &gt;&gt; Alcohol was paid for often by the &gt;&gt; Alcohol was paid for often by the &gt;&gt; Alcohol was paid for often by the meeting fees. Gets a little I'm not meeting fees. Gets a little I'm not meeting fees. Gets a little I'm not trying to, you know, point a finger trying to, you know, point a finger trying to, you know, point a finger here. And then a lot of the stuff that here. And then a lot of the stuff that here. And then a lot of the stuff that happened at meetings that turned out happened at meetings that turned out happened at meetings that turned out cost people jobs was always cost people jobs was always cost people jobs was always alcoholrelated. &gt;&gt; Yeah. In the instance of the man and &gt;&gt; Yeah. In the instance of the man and &gt;&gt; Yeah. In the instance of the man and woman on a date drinking or a group of woman on a date drinking or a group of woman on a date drinking or a group of uh people at work drinking together in uh people at work drinking together in uh people at work drinking together in Japan, it sounded like it was men Japan, it sounded like it was men Japan, it sounded like it was men getting drunk with other men. Yes. getting drunk with other men. Yes. getting drunk with other men. Yes. &gt;&gt; In my mental picture of the male &gt;&gt; In my mental picture of the male &gt;&gt; In my mental picture of the male female dynamic and drinking, female dynamic and drinking, female dynamic and drinking, &gt;&gt; I'm going to simplify this. If she &gt;&gt; I'm going to simplify this. If she &gt;&gt; I'm going to simplify this. If she drinks, it makes her vulnerable. If he drinks, it makes her vulnerable. If he drinks, it makes her vulnerable. If he drinks, it makes him more stupid and drinks, it makes him more stupid and drinks, it makes him more stupid and impulsive. Mhm. [clears throat] impulsive. Mhm. [clears throat] impulsive. Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; And so in the world where she's &gt;&gt; And so in the world where she's &gt;&gt; And so in the world where she's drinking and he's not, you gave the drinking and he's not, you gave the drinking and he's not, you gave the example that perhaps, you know, he would example that perhaps, you know, he would example that perhaps, you know, he would take advantage of her if he's take advantage of her if he's take advantage of her if he's encouraging it. Certainly there's that encouraging it. Certainly there's that encouraging it. Certainly there's that picture in one's mind. He's also can get picture in one's mind. He's also can get picture in one's mind. He's also can get her home safely. If he's drinking, he her home safely. If he's drinking, he her home safely. If he's drinking, he can't get her home safely and he might can't get her home safely and he might can't get her home safely and he might say or do something really dumb. say or do something really dumb. say or do something really dumb. &gt;&gt; So I feel like no matter how the math is &gt;&gt; So I feel like no matter how the math is &gt;&gt; So I feel like no matter how the math is arranged, it always ends up drinking arranged, it always ends up drinking arranged, it always ends up drinking ends up being kind of a bad idea. I ends up being kind of a bad idea. I ends up being kind of a bad idea. I mean, not trying to be judgmental here, mean, not trying to be judgmental here, mean, not trying to be judgmental here, like I because I'm not I don't judge like I because I'm not I don't judge like I because I'm not I don't judge what people do. do as you wish, but know what people do. do as you wish, but know what people do. do as you wish, but know what you're doing is my philosophy. what you're doing is my philosophy. what you're doing is my philosophy. But I just don't see a world where But I just don't see a world where But I just don't see a world where drinking with your co-workers or drinking with your co-workers or drinking with your co-workers or drinking on a date with somebody that drinking on a date with somebody that drinking on a date with somebody that you don't know very well, male or you don't know very well, male or you don't know very well, male or female, right, [clears throat] for female, right, [clears throat] for female, right, [clears throat] for either of them. It's just like a lack of either of them. It's just like a lack of either of them. It's just like a lack of safety all around. Um it just seems like safety all around. Um it just seems like safety all around. Um it just seems like a bad idea. a bad idea. a bad idea. &gt;&gt; As women move into more professions that &gt;&gt; As women move into more professions that &gt;&gt; As women move into more professions that may have changed that norm of, you may have changed that norm of, you may have changed that norm of, you know, everybody goes out and gets drunk know, everybody goes out and gets drunk know, everybody goes out and gets drunk because the consequences aren't the because the consequences aren't the because the consequences aren't the same. and you know I know a lot of same. and you know I know a lot of same. and you know I know a lot of you know professional women and friends you know professional women and friends you know professional women and friends I don't want to do that you know um you I don't want to do that you know um you I don't want to do that you know um you know I don't want to be around the boss know I don't want to be around the boss know I don't want to be around the boss when he's drunk you know and so let's when he's drunk you know and so let's when he's drunk you know and so let's have a Christmas lunch together at let's have a Christmas lunch together at let's have a Christmas lunch together at work instead of you know uh drinks work instead of you know uh drinks work instead of you know uh drinks afterwards so I definitely see that I afterwards so I definitely see that I afterwards so I definitely see that I think in the dating now of course I'm think in the dating now of course I'm think in the dating now of course I'm haven't thankfully had to worry about haven't thankfully had to worry about haven't thankfully had to worry about dating for 40 years I but what I dating for 40 years I but what I dating for 40 years I but what I think most people would say is just the think most people would say is just the think most people would say is just the anxiety you know is you know intense for anxiety you know is you know intense for anxiety you know is you know intense for some people and alcohol is anxolytic some people and alcohol is anxolytic some people and alcohol is anxolytic right and so it's probably that right and so it's probably that right and so it's probably that people are you know sort of feeling uh people are you know sort of feeling uh people are you know sort of feeling uh you know it's just it's you know they're you know it's just it's you know they're you know it's just it's you know they're too nervous you know and whether they too nervous you know and whether they too nervous you know and whether they should or they shouldn't that's just I should or they shouldn't that's just I should or they shouldn't that's just I think probably in the soup one think probably in the soup one think probably in the soup one of those benefits people uh care of those benefits people uh care of those benefits people uh care about and there are people it has to be about and there are people it has to be about and there are people it has to be said who are more socially uh engaging said who are more socially uh engaging said who are more socially uh engaging when they've had a drink than when they when they've had a drink than when they when they've had a drink than when they haven't because they're kind of wound up haven't because they're kind of wound up haven't because they're kind of wound up people when they relax some other stuff people when they relax some other stuff people when they relax some other stuff comes out and they may seem comes out and they may seem comes out and they may seem uh more appealing. uh more appealing. uh more appealing. &gt;&gt; It's interesting. We could uh dissect it &gt;&gt; It's interesting. We could uh dissect it &gt;&gt; It's interesting. We could uh dissect it a number of ways, but I think that's a number of ways, but I think that's a number of ways, but I think that's enough contour for people to be able to enough contour for people to be able to enough contour for people to be able to think about whether or not they have a think about whether or not they have a think about whether or not they have a genetic predisposition, understand that genetic predisposition, understand that genetic predisposition, understand that zero is better than any. um if we hear zero is better than any. um if we hear zero is better than any. um if we hear about some uh cardiac benefit to weigh about some uh cardiac benefit to weigh about some uh cardiac benefit to weigh that against the cancer risk and not that against the cancer risk and not that against the cancer risk and not just take it as an independent piece of just take it as an independent piece of just take it as an independent piece of information and then to think about information and then to think about information and then to think about vulnerabilities of um other people's vulnerabilities of um other people's vulnerabilities of um other people's actions and vulnerabilities of one's own actions and vulnerabilities of one's own actions and vulnerabilities of one's own actions and words uh if drinking and actions and words uh if drinking and actions and words uh if drinking and then people can make an informed then people can make an informed then people can make an informed decision. That's kind of how I decision. That's kind of how I decision. That's kind of how I &gt;&gt; a good summary &gt;&gt; a good summary &gt;&gt; a good summary &gt;&gt; how I uh feel about it. Again, do as you &gt;&gt; how I uh feel about it. Again, do as you &gt;&gt; how I uh feel about it. Again, do as you wish but know what you're doing is like wish but know what you're doing is like wish but know what you're doing is like the purpose here. Let's talk about the purpose here. Let's talk about the purpose here. Let's talk about cannabis a bit. Uh because eventually cannabis a bit. Uh because eventually cannabis a bit. Uh because eventually I'd like to weave back to how industries I'd like to weave back to how industries I'd like to weave back to how industries impact use and abuse. Um impact use and abuse. Um impact use and abuse. Um cannabis when I was growing up was cannabis when I was growing up was cannabis when I was growing up was illegal. You could go to jail for it. illegal. You could go to jail for it. illegal. You could go to jail for it. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; People still smoke pot. It happened. Um &gt;&gt; People still smoke pot. It happened. Um &gt;&gt; People still smoke pot. It happened. Um the idea was that it was much less the idea was that it was much less the idea was that it was much less potent. We can talk about that. But now potent. We can talk about that. But now potent. We can talk about that. But now it's a whole industry. it's a whole industry. it's a whole industry. &gt;&gt; Yes. And the edible industry has &gt;&gt; Yes. And the edible industry has &gt;&gt; Yes. And the edible industry has contributed to this greatly because it contributed to this greatly because it contributed to this greatly because it bypasses the um the [clears throat] bypasses the um the [clears throat] bypasses the um the [clears throat] blowing of smoke um the smell um and blowing of smoke um the smell um and blowing of smoke um the smell um and a number of other things. So what are a number of other things. So what are a number of other things. So what are your thoughts about cannabis as your thoughts about cannabis as your thoughts about cannabis as something that can be used quote unquote something that can be used quote unquote something that can be used quote unquote recreationally, medically, and its potential for abuse? and its potential for abuse? and its potential for abuse? and then let's talk about how those and then let's talk about how those and then let's talk about how those things have been amplified or reduced by things have been amplified or reduced by things have been amplified or reduced by the fact that it's essentially legal or the fact that it's essentially legal or the fact that it's essentially legal or decriminalized. So what are your thoughts on cannabis? So what are your thoughts on cannabis? So what are your thoughts on cannabis? &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I whenever we talk about I &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I whenever we talk about I &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I whenever we talk about I make a distinction between sort of old make a distinction between sort of old make a distinction between sort of old and new cannabis. So, you know, if you and new cannabis. So, you know, if you and new cannabis. So, you know, if you go back to the 80s and 90s, uh, when, as go back to the 80s and 90s, uh, when, as go back to the 80s and 90s, uh, when, as you mentioned, it was illegal you mentioned, it was illegal you mentioned, it was illegal everywhere, the THC content, that's the everywhere, the THC content, that's the everywhere, the THC content, that's the principal intoxicant, would be, you principal intoxicant, would be, you principal intoxicant, would be, you know, 3, four, 5%, something like that know, 3, four, 5%, something like that know, 3, four, 5%, something like that on average. And now, you know, studies on average. And now, you know, studies on average. And now, you know, studies of legal sales show the average product of legal sales show the average product of legal sales show the average product is about 20%. So, it's dramatically is about 20%. So, it's dramatically is about 20%. So, it's dramatically stronger. The other point is how people stronger. The other point is how people stronger. The other point is how people use it is different, perhaps related to use it is different, perhaps related to use it is different, perhaps related to that high potency. uh Jonathan Caulkins that high potency. uh Jonathan Caulkins that high potency. uh Jonathan Caulkins uh pulled together a lot of really uh pulled together a lot of really uh pulled together a lot of really interesting data that got a lot of play interesting data that got a lot of play interesting data that got a lot of play and it showed that about 40 I think it's and it showed that about 40 I think it's and it showed that about 40 I think it's 42% of people who use cannabis use it 42% of people who use cannabis use it 42% of people who use cannabis use it every day or almost every day that is every day or almost every day that is every day or almost every day that is also different so back if you go back in also different so back if you go back in also different so back if you go back in the past you know the more modal user the past you know the more modal user the past you know the more modal user might have been once or twice a week so might have been once or twice a week so might have been once or twice a week so you put those things together some so you put those things together some so you put those things together some so you take somebody you know what was like you take somebody you know what was like you take somebody you know what was like an 80s pot smoke well on weekends you an 80s pot smoke well on weekends you an 80s pot smoke well on weekends you know I'd smoke a joint at you know 5% know I'd smoke a joint at you know 5% know I'd smoke a joint at you know 5% but now if it's means every day I'm but now if it's means every day I'm but now if it's means every day I'm consuming 20% % you quickly realize like consuming 20% % you quickly realize like consuming 20% % you quickly realize like their brain exposure is dramatically their brain exposure is dramatically their brain exposure is dramatically higher about 65 times higher uh between higher about 65 times higher uh between higher about 65 times higher uh between the modes of those two uh the modes of those two uh the modes of those two uh experiences and what you know what so experiences and what you know what so experiences and what you know what so what is 65 times mean well it what is 65 times mean well it what is 65 times mean well it coincidentally is also the potency coincidentally is also the potency coincidentally is also the potency difference between a cocoa leaf and difference between a cocoa leaf and difference between a cocoa leaf and cocaine that is that is 65 times two so cocaine that is that is 65 times two so cocaine that is that is 65 times two so it's a big difference and as you know it's a big difference and as you know it's a big difference and as you know you know you know dose makes the poison you know you know dose makes the poison you know you know dose makes the poison so it is a just a really different so it is a just a really different so it is a just a really different drug than what was back there and this drug than what was back there and this drug than what was back there and this is very hard to get across to parents is very hard to get across to parents is very hard to get across to parents because their view is like ah I smoked because their view is like ah I smoked because their view is like ah I smoked weed you know is you know who weed you know is you know who weed you know is you know who cares if my you know 15-year-old is cares if my you know 15-year-old is cares if my you know 15-year-old is using it. It's like but that's kind using it. It's like but that's kind using it. It's like but that's kind saying you drank low alcohol beer and saying you drank low alcohol beer and saying you drank low alcohol beer and you're not you're not concerned you're not you're not concerned you're not you're not concerned that your 15-year-old is guzzling vodka. that your 15-year-old is guzzling vodka. that your 15-year-old is guzzling vodka. That's that's kind of the difference and That's that's kind of the difference and That's that's kind of the difference and it's just a bigger deal than it used to it's just a bigger deal than it used to it's just a bigger deal than it used to be. Even when you take away the fact be. Even when you take away the fact be. Even when you take away the fact that you have an industry really pushing that you have an industry really pushing that you have an industry really pushing it just the drug is stronger, more it just the drug is stronger, more it just the drug is stronger, more addictive. Does it have any uh medical addictive. Does it have any uh medical addictive. Does it have any uh medical applications? Almost surely you know the applications? Almost surely you know the applications? Almost surely you know the canabonoid receptor system canabonoid receptor system canabonoid receptor system evolutionarily is you know one of the evolutionarily is you know one of the evolutionarily is you know one of the oldest in the uh in history of homo oldest in the uh in history of homo oldest in the uh in history of homo sapiens. It is both in the brain but sapiens. It is both in the brain but sapiens. It is both in the brain but it's also in the body. There are clearly it's also in the body. There are clearly it's also in the body. There are clearly going to be some applications for pain. going to be some applications for pain. going to be some applications for pain. Um you know you know there's many people Um you know you know there's many people Um you know you know there's many people would say they spontaneously get relief. would say they spontaneously get relief. would say they spontaneously get relief. It's hard to tell always what that means It's hard to tell always what that means It's hard to tell always what that means because sometimes that's just relief because sometimes that's just relief because sometimes that's just relief from withdrawal, but you know, from withdrawal, but you know, from withdrawal, but you know, probably some type of medical probably some type of medical probably some type of medical applications for pain will come out of applications for pain will come out of applications for pain will come out of this plant. We do have some out of the this plant. We do have some out of the this plant. We do have some out of the CBD, which is the non- intoxicating part CBD, which is the non- intoxicating part CBD, which is the non- intoxicating part is a medication that is used uh in is a medication that is used uh in is a medication that is used uh in seizure disorders in kids, you know. So, seizure disorders in kids, you know. So, seizure disorders in kids, you know. So, there'll be some other things like that there'll be some other things like that there'll be some other things like that for sure. Um and you know, you know, the for sure. Um and you know, you know, the for sure. Um and you know, you know, the it's easier to study this than has ever it's easier to study this than has ever it's easier to study this than has ever been before. um you know that um about been before. um you know that um about been before. um you know that um about 2020 Congress changed the way uh 2020 Congress changed the way uh 2020 Congress changed the way uh research works. So it's a lot a lot research works. So it's a lot a lot research works. So it's a lot a lot simpler to uh do it. So we we'll simpler to uh do it. So we we'll simpler to uh do it. So we we'll figure those things out. Um but it we'll figure those things out. Um but it we'll figure those things out. Um but it is just a more a more dangerous drug is just a more a more dangerous drug is just a more a more dangerous drug than it was, you know, when I was a than it was, you know, when I was a than it was, you know, when I was a young person. young person. young person. &gt;&gt; I had a guest on the podcast uh who's a &gt;&gt; I had a guest on the podcast uh who's a &gt;&gt; I had a guest on the podcast uh who's a cannabis researcher, runs an animal lab. cannabis researcher, runs an animal lab. cannabis researcher, runs an animal lab. Um and we invited him on because I had Um and we invited him on because I had Um and we invited him on because I had released a solo episode about cannabis. released a solo episode about cannabis. released a solo episode about cannabis. We touched on some of the risk for We touched on some of the risk for We touched on some of the risk for psychosis. Yeah. psychosis. Yeah. psychosis. Yeah. &gt;&gt; In uh young men um and made some points &gt;&gt; In uh young men um and made some points &gt;&gt; In uh young men um and made some points about frankly concerns about cannabis about frankly concerns about cannabis about frankly concerns about cannabis because of the high THC content. Uh he because of the high THC content. Uh he because of the high THC content. Uh he was not happy with the things I said. He was not happy with the things I said. He was not happy with the things I said. He made that clear on social media. So um made that clear on social media. So um made that clear on social media. So um by the way, this isn't the way to get by the way, this isn't the way to get by the way, this isn't the way to get invited on the podcast, but we invited on the podcast, but we invited on the podcast, but we invited him on and I think we had a very him on and I think we had a very him on and I think we had a very fruitful discussion where he clarified a fruitful discussion where he clarified a fruitful discussion where he clarified a few things for me. And one of the things few things for me. And one of the things few things for me. And one of the things that he claims uh is that despite the that he claims uh is that despite the that he claims uh is that despite the higher THC content that there's a higher THC content that there's a higher THC content that there's a distinct difference between smoked distinct difference between smoked distinct difference between smoked versus edible cannabis whereby people versus edible cannabis whereby people versus edible cannabis whereby people who smoke cannabis even the high THC who smoke cannabis even the high THC who smoke cannabis even the high THC cannabis um are very good at gauging the cannabis um are very good at gauging the cannabis um are very good at gauging the kind of level of high so that they don't kind of level of high so that they don't kind of level of high so that they don't go into paranoid modes. they don't go into paranoid modes. they don't go into paranoid modes. they don't surpass the plane of high that would surpass the plane of high that would surpass the plane of high that would make them feel paranoid or um put them make them feel paranoid or um put them make them feel paranoid or um put them into a psychotic episode, but that into a psychotic episode, but that into a psychotic episode, but that people who take edibles because it's people who take edibles because it's people who take edibles because it's harder to gauge where you're at if you harder to gauge where you're at if you harder to gauge where you're at if you can just swallow an edible or even can just swallow an edible or even can just swallow an edible or even nibble on an edible um often surpass the nibble on an edible um often surpass the nibble on an edible um often surpass the level at which they would be level at which they would be level at which they would be comfortable, meaning at which there's a comfortable, meaning at which there's a comfortable, meaning at which there's a psychotic episode or there's paranoia. psychotic episode or there's paranoia. psychotic episode or there's paranoia. So he was making this kind of um soft So he was making this kind of um soft So he was making this kind of um soft argument for the fact that the elevated argument for the fact that the elevated argument for the fact that the elevated T THC levels in cannabis are not such a T THC levels in cannabis are not such a T THC levels in cannabis are not such a problem because people are essentially problem because people are essentially problem because people are essentially taking less to offset the taking less to offset the taking less to offset the difference. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think there's no evidence for &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think there's no evidence for &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think there's no evidence for that at all. In fact, and uh people that at all. In fact, and uh people that at all. In fact, and uh people are surprisingly bad, even experienced are surprisingly bad, even experienced are surprisingly bad, even experienced pot smokers at judging in lab studies of pot smokers at judging in lab studies of pot smokers at judging in lab studies of like how strong different cannabis is. I like how strong different cannabis is. I like how strong different cannabis is. I don't agree with that part, but I do don't agree with that part, but I do don't agree with that part, but I do agree we should think about the edibles agree we should think about the edibles agree we should think about the edibles differently because of the onset is differently because of the onset is differently because of the onset is different through the gut, you know. So different through the gut, you know. So different through the gut, you know. So when you smoke anything you know you get when you smoke anything you know you get when you smoke anything you know you get that goes very efficiently you know that goes very efficiently you know that goes very efficiently you know to the brain but when you eat something to the brain but when you eat something to the brain but when you eat something you know it takes a while you know to you know it takes a while you know to you know it takes a while you know to have its effect and so have its effect and so have its effect and so &gt;&gt; particularly when these products came &gt;&gt; particularly when these products came &gt;&gt; particularly when these products came out and a lot of people were uh new to out and a lot of people were uh new to out and a lot of people were uh new to them they would uh you know bite down on them they would uh you know bite down on them they would uh you know bite down on you know one piece of the whatever the you know one piece of the whatever the you know one piece of the whatever the bar the cookie or whatever five minutes bar the cookie or whatever five minutes bar the cookie or whatever five minutes later I feel the same take another bite later I feel the same take another bite later I feel the same take another bite still feel the same and then just eat still feel the same and then just eat still feel the same and then just eat the whole thing and then it would all the whole thing and then it would all the whole thing and then it would all hit them like a train. And you know hit them like a train. And you know hit them like a train. And you know that does happen. The other thing that does happen. The other thing that does happen. The other thing that is true is that a lot of these uh that is true is that a lot of these uh that is true is that a lot of these uh products are not wellmade or they're not products are not wellmade or they're not products are not wellmade or they're not up to like the standards of like you up to like the standards of like you up to like the standards of like you would have a cookie. You would you would have a cookie. You would you would have a cookie. You would you would never open up a bag of chocolate chip never open up a bag of chocolate chip never open up a bag of chocolate chip cookies in the United States and find cookies in the United States and find cookies in the United States and find all the chocolate chips at one end and all the chocolate chips at one end and all the chocolate chips at one end and just dough and the rest. But that does just dough and the rest. But that does just dough and the rest. But that does happen with cannabis products in legal happen with cannabis products in legal happen with cannabis products in legal markets. And so if you just bite on the markets. And so if you just bite on the markets. And so if you just bite on the wrong part, you're getting the, you wrong part, you're getting the, you wrong part, you're getting the, you know, the whole enchilada, so to speak. know, the whole enchilada, so to speak. know, the whole enchilada, so to speak. um that because it's not evenly blended um that because it's not evenly blended um that because it's not evenly blended through and there are some people who've through and there are some people who've through and there are some people who've gotten into trouble uh on that as gotten into trouble uh on that as gotten into trouble uh on that as well. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. What about the psychosis risk? What about the psychosis risk? What about the psychosis risk? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was very skeptical of this &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was very skeptical of this &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I was very skeptical of this literature for years. Not not to say literature for years. Not not to say literature for years. Not not to say that the science was bad, but just like that the science was bad, but just like that the science was bad, but just like it seemed to me there were lots of ways it seemed to me there were lots of ways it seemed to me there were lots of ways to explain it. Um, and I'm a lot less to explain it. Um, and I'm a lot less to explain it. Um, and I'm a lot less skeptical now, candidly, because, you skeptical now, candidly, because, you skeptical now, candidly, because, you know, in the in the old studies, they know, in the in the old studies, they know, in the in the old studies, they would be there men who had used cannabis would be there men who had used cannabis would be there men who had used cannabis in teen years and then they would have in teen years and then they would have in teen years and then they would have higher rates of uh psychotic higher rates of uh psychotic higher rates of uh psychotic disorders in adult. These were studies disorders in adult. These were studies disorders in adult. These were studies based on like Swedish uh registries based on like Swedish uh registries based on like Swedish uh registries because everybody has to register for because everybody has to register for because everybody has to register for the uh the military, you know, um and um the uh the military, you know, um and um the uh the military, you know, um and um they would track people and it's quite they would track people and it's quite they would track people and it's quite amazing data. So it is a whole national amazing data. So it is a whole national amazing data. So it is a whole national data that's good but there's lots of data that's good but there's lots of data that's good but there's lots of reasons that could come about you know reasons that could come about you know reasons that could come about you know could be a common factor between those could be a common factor between those could be a common factor between those two things um you know but um the two things um you know but um the two things um you know but um the evidence has gotten stronger as the drug evidence has gotten stronger as the drug evidence has gotten stronger as the drug has gotten stronger and again we got to has gotten stronger and again we got to has gotten stronger and again we got to got to realize people are using it um got to realize people are using it um got to realize people are using it um much more intensely. So if this effect much more intensely. So if this effect much more intensely. So if this effect is there it's much more plausible that is there it's much more plausible that is there it's much more plausible that it would be from a much stronger drug it would be from a much stronger drug it would be from a much stronger drug used you know every day could generate used you know every day could generate used you know every day could generate higher rates of psychosis. It's hard to higher rates of psychosis. It's hard to higher rates of psychosis. It's hard to test this because it's a rare thankfully test this because it's a rare thankfully test this because it's a rare thankfully condition, but I think there is, you condition, but I think there is, you condition, but I think there is, you know, probably something there. I am sad know, probably something there. I am sad know, probably something there. I am sad to say. I wish it I wish there weren't, to say. I wish it I wish there weren't, to say. I wish it I wish there weren't, but there probably is something there. but there probably is something there. but there probably is something there. Um, I would not use cannabis if I had Um, I would not use cannabis if I had Um, I would not use cannabis if I had any first-degree relatives with any, you any first-degree relatives with any, you any first-degree relatives with any, you know, schizophrenia, schizoid know, schizophrenia, schizoid know, schizophrenia, schizoid personality, anything in the psych personality, anything in the psych personality, anything in the psych bipolar disorder. I would not personally bipolar disorder. I would not personally bipolar disorder. I would not personally uh recommend that for anybody. I think uh recommend that for anybody. I think uh recommend that for anybody. I think that's probably uh probably quite risky. that's probably uh probably quite risky. that's probably uh probably quite risky. &gt;&gt; What about the cardiac risk and other &gt;&gt; What about the cardiac risk and other &gt;&gt; What about the cardiac risk and other health risks? I've heard recently that health risks? I've heard recently that health risks? I've heard recently that there's a direct risk of cannabis even there's a direct risk of cannabis even there's a direct risk of cannabis even if it's not smoked or vaped uh on if it's not smoked or vaped uh on if it's not smoked or vaped uh on cardiac health. cardiac health. cardiac health. &gt;&gt; I'm not sure of that of non-smoked &gt;&gt; I'm not sure of that of non-smoked &gt;&gt; I'm not sure of that of non-smoked cannabis in the heart. I mean, I haven't cannabis in the heart. I mean, I haven't cannabis in the heart. I mean, I haven't looked at that literature, so I don't I looked at that literature, so I don't I looked at that literature, so I don't I don't know the answer to that. Um I don't know the answer to that. Um I don't know the answer to that. Um I realize there's some one point uh I realize there's some one point uh I realize there's some one point uh I should touch on that you also raised should touch on that you also raised should touch on that you also raised earlier about first drinking which is earlier about first drinking which is earlier about first drinking which is everything is different when the brain everything is different when the brain everything is different when the brain is plastic and our brains are most is plastic and our brains are most is plastic and our brains are most highly plastic um you know when we're highly plastic um you know when we're highly plastic um you know when we're young and so a lot of these effects the young and so a lot of these effects the young and so a lot of these effects the worst things are going to be because worst things are going to be because worst things are going to be because people start when they're in teen or you people start when they're in teen or you people start when they're in teen or you know late single digit. know late single digit. know late single digit. That's where addictions overwhelmingly That's where addictions overwhelmingly That's where addictions overwhelmingly start. And that is where if there is a start. And that is where if there is a start. And that is where if there is a psychotic risk, it's almost surely then psychotic risk, it's almost surely then psychotic risk, it's almost surely then during that period of brain development during that period of brain development during that period of brain development before people get their first psychotic before people get their first psychotic before people get their first psychotic break, which tends to be around 18, 19, break, which tends to be around 18, 19, break, which tends to be around 18, 19, 20, 21. I worry about it less for 20, 21. I worry about it less for 20, 21. I worry about it less for anything. You know, initiating a anything. You know, initiating a anything. You know, initiating a substance when you're 50 is far less substance when you're 50 is far less substance when you're 50 is far less likely to end you up with an addiction likely to end you up with an addiction likely to end you up with an addiction or some other terrible thing than uh or some other terrible thing than uh or some other terrible thing than uh when you're young. when you're young. when you're young. I'm sure everyone knows at least one I'm sure everyone knows at least one I'm sure everyone knows at least one person or has heard of one person or has heard of one person or has heard of one person who's uh very productive in their life, who's uh very productive in their life, who's uh very productive in their life, healthy family, job, etc. Um high energy healthy family, job, etc. Um high energy healthy family, job, etc. Um high energy who uses cannabis. Um in my observation, who uses cannabis. Um in my observation, who uses cannabis. Um in my observation, they are the rare exception. Um and they are the rare exception. Um and they are the rare exception. Um and there are a lot of examples of people there are a lot of examples of people there are a lot of examples of people who use cannabis who um don't really go who use cannabis who um don't really go who use cannabis who um don't really go anywhere in life. They they don't go anywhere in life. They they don't go anywhere in life. They they don't go through the normal developmental through the normal developmental through the normal developmental progression of finding a job that can progression of finding a job that can progression of finding a job that can sustain them, right? Of sustain them, right? Of sustain them, right? Of organizing their life, their organizing their life, their organizing their life, their relationship life, their professional relationship life, their professional relationship life, their professional life. And clearly there are other life. And clearly there are other life. And clearly there are other aspects to life, but those are key ones, aspects to life, but those are key ones, aspects to life, but those are key ones, right? And um what are the data on high right? And um what are the data on high right? And um what are the data on high THC or just frequency of cannabis use as THC or just frequency of cannabis use as THC or just frequency of cannabis use as it relates to life progression? Failure it relates to life progression? Failure it relates to life progression? Failure to launch we call it now for typically to launch we call it now for typically to launch we call it now for typically it's guys that young men that fail to it's guys that young men that fail to it's guys that young men that fail to launch. Um launch. Um launch. Um &gt;&gt; and I want to be clear uh not for &gt;&gt; and I want to be clear uh not for &gt;&gt; and I want to be clear uh not for political reasons but I want to be clear political reasons but I want to be clear political reasons but I want to be clear when I say fail to launch. I don't mean when I say fail to launch. I don't mean when I say fail to launch. I don't mean that every kid has to go to college and, that every kid has to go to college and, that every kid has to go to college and, you know, be a, you know, a varsity you know, be a, you know, a varsity you know, be a, you know, a varsity athlete or any of this, but just moving athlete or any of this, but just moving athlete or any of this, but just moving out of one's home eventually, getting a out of one's home eventually, getting a out of one's home eventually, getting a regular job, keeping the job, hopefully regular job, keeping the job, hopefully regular job, keeping the job, hopefully having healthy relationships of various having healthy relationships of various having healthy relationships of various kinds and being self- sustaining. That's kinds and being self- sustaining. That's kinds and being self- sustaining. That's what I'm talking about. what I'm talking about. what I'm talking about. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely true. I mean, for &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely true. I mean, for &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely true. I mean, for example, I did Ezra Klein show. He's example, I did Ezra Klein show. He's example, I did Ezra Klein show. He's obviously a very successful guy and he obviously a very successful guy and he obviously a very successful guy and he mentioned that he sometimes uses mentioned that he sometimes uses mentioned that he sometimes uses cannabis edibles. I mean, cannabis edibles. I mean, cannabis edibles. I mean, &gt;&gt; he has that look. No, I'm just kidding. &gt;&gt; he has that look. No, I'm just kidding. &gt;&gt; he has that look. No, I'm just kidding. Sorry, Ezra. Just teasing. Yeah. I mean, Sorry, Ezra. Just teasing. Yeah. I mean, Sorry, Ezra. Just teasing. Yeah. I mean, so yeah, there's and you know, you could so yeah, there's and you know, you could so yeah, there's and you know, you could there are very successful there are very successful there are very successful people who use cannabis for sure. people who use cannabis for sure. people who use cannabis for sure. Overall though, I mean, I'll steal a Overall though, I mean, I'll steal a Overall though, I mean, I'll steal a phrase Caulkins. It's like, you know, we phrase Caulkins. It's like, you know, we phrase Caulkins. It's like, you know, we have performance enhancement drugs. It's have performance enhancement drugs. It's have performance enhancement drugs. It's kind of a performance degrading drug. kind of a performance degrading drug. kind of a performance degrading drug. So, it's not it's not fentanyl. you So, it's not it's not fentanyl. you So, it's not it's not fentanyl. you know, your odds of your death know, your odds of your death know, your odds of your death being directly tra traced to it are being directly tra traced to it are being directly tra traced to it are extraordinarily low. But it does with extraordinarily low. But it does with extraordinarily low. But it does with regular use undermine certain things regular use undermine certain things regular use undermine certain things that you need to succeed in the modern that you need to succeed in the modern that you need to succeed in the modern world like short-term memory and world like short-term memory and world like short-term memory and concentration and being able to keep concentration and being able to keep concentration and being able to keep track of details. And for some people track of details. And for some people track of details. And for some people also, it undermines their sort of also, it undermines their sort of also, it undermines their sort of motivation to do much of anything. I motivation to do much of anything. I motivation to do much of anything. I mean, the couch lock is a real thing. mean, the couch lock is a real thing. mean, the couch lock is a real thing. Um, you know, I know families in Palo Um, you know, I know families in Palo Um, you know, I know families in Palo Alto, where I'm from, very achiev uh, you know, a straight A son, you uh, you know, a straight A son, you uh, you know, a straight A son, you know, doing everything, starring on know, doing everything, starring on know, doing everything, starring on sports, whatever, who, you know, 6 sports, whatever, who, you know, 6 sports, whatever, who, you know, 6 months later was just smoking cannabis months later was just smoking cannabis months later was just smoking cannabis all day and had no interest in the team all day and had no interest in the team all day and had no interest in the team he used to star on and the math he used he used to star on and the math he used he used to star on and the math he used to be great on. And like, that's to be great on. And like, that's to be great on. And like, that's pretty frightening. And all those things pretty frightening. And all those things pretty frightening. And all those things are not conducive to succeeding in are not conducive to succeeding in are not conducive to succeeding in again in a modern world. If maybe back again in a modern world. If maybe back again in a modern world. If maybe back in an agrarian society, it didn't matter in an agrarian society, it didn't matter in an agrarian society, it didn't matter because we you know everything was on because we you know everything was on because we you know everything was on muscle power, right? Um but you know to muscle power, right? Um but you know to muscle power, right? Um but you know to succeed in this society, you have to succeed in this society, you have to succeed in this society, you have to be able to do those things. And and you be able to do those things. And and you be able to do those things. And and you are in competition, you know, if you are in competition, you know, if you are in competition, you know, if you want a job, you know, computer coding, want a job, you know, computer coding, want a job, you know, computer coding, you're in competition not just you're in competition not just you're in competition not just with the smartest kids in your with the smartest kids in your with the smartest kids in your neighborhood. you're in competition with neighborhood. you're in competition with neighborhood. you're in competition with the smartest kids who are in Mumbai, you the smartest kids who are in Mumbai, you the smartest kids who are in Mumbai, you know, and in Tokyo. And if you can't know, and in Tokyo. And if you can't know, and in Tokyo. And if you can't focus or you're just slower and you focus or you're just slower and you focus or you're just slower and you can't remember things, um or you have can't remember things, um or you have can't remember things, um or you have trouble like making sure you uh keep trouble like making sure you uh keep trouble like making sure you uh keep track of time, um that is going to put track of time, um that is going to put track of time, um that is going to put you at a disadvantage. uh and uh you at a disadvantage. uh and uh you at a disadvantage. uh and uh you can end up that stereotype of you know can end up that stereotype of you know can end up that stereotype of you know living in mom's basement that living in mom's basement that living in mom's basement that unfortunately is true of a chunk of unfortunately is true of a chunk of unfortunately is true of a chunk of people who are heavy users of cannabis. people who are heavy users of cannabis. people who are heavy users of cannabis. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I worry a lot about examples of so &gt;&gt; Yeah. I worry a lot about examples of so &gt;&gt; Yeah. I worry a lot about examples of so and so is very high achieving and they and so is very high achieving and they and so is very high achieving and they use cannabis. Um I had a friend growing use cannabis. Um I had a friend growing use cannabis. Um I had a friend growing up who desperately wanted to be a up who desperately wanted to be a up who desperately wanted to be a professional golf player and he would professional golf player and he would professional golf player and he would cite all these professional golf players cite all these professional golf players cite all these professional golf players who were heavy drinkers. He ended up who were heavy drinkers. He ended up who were heavy drinkers. He ended up just being good at the heavy drinking just being good at the heavy drinking just being good at the heavy drinking part. Yeah. part. Yeah. part. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um sadly, um I think he turned his life &gt;&gt; Um sadly, um I think he turned his life &gt;&gt; Um sadly, um I think he turned his life around at some point. But these examples around at some point. But these examples around at some point. But these examples of people who can use very addictive of people who can use very addictive of people who can use very addictive substances and are open about that and substances and are open about that and substances and are open about that and are very high achieving. I think there's are very high achieving. I think there's are very high achieving. I think there's a there's a real detriment to that a there's a real detriment to that a there's a real detriment to that messaging. Now, of course, you don't messaging. Now, of course, you don't messaging. Now, of course, you don't want people to cloak their reality, but want people to cloak their reality, but want people to cloak their reality, but it's complicated. it's complicated. it's complicated. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and it also has policy risk, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and it also has policy risk, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and it also has policy risk, too. I mean, you know, when you make up too. I mean, you know, when you make up too. I mean, you know, when you make up the rules, uh, you know, you know, your the rules, uh, you know, you know, your the rules, uh, you know, you know, your laws and regulations to think, well, laws and regulations to think, well, laws and regulations to think, well, you know, I'm accomplished. I I'm you know, I'm accomplished. I I'm you know, I'm accomplished. I I'm able to use this, so that must mean it's able to use this, so that must mean it's able to use this, so that must mean it's pretty safe. It's like, that just pretty safe. It's like, that just pretty safe. It's like, that just doesn't follow logically. The fact that doesn't follow logically. The fact that doesn't follow logically. The fact that you occasionally, you know, take a snort you occasionally, you know, take a snort you occasionally, you know, take a snort of cocaine or whatever, and you're of cocaine or whatever, and you're of cocaine or whatever, and you're still a state senator. Uh, that doesn't still a state senator. Uh, that doesn't still a state senator. Uh, that doesn't prove that would be safe for prove that would be safe for prove that would be safe for everyone. And, you know, we know everyone. And, you know, we know everyone. And, you know, we know people have different levels of risk. people have different levels of risk. people have different levels of risk. They have different social capital. they They have different social capital. they They have different social capital. they have different incentives in their lives have different incentives in their lives have different incentives in their lives and um you can't overgeneralize from and um you can't overgeneralize from and um you can't overgeneralize from a sort of a lucky life or a costed life. a sort of a lucky life or a costed life. a sort of a lucky life or a costed life. Sometimes you can do more of that than Sometimes you can do more of that than Sometimes you can do more of that than you can when you know there's not many you can when you know there's not many you can when you know there's not many uh you know uh nets sort of between the uh you know uh nets sort of between the uh you know uh nets sort of between the person and the you know and the ground. person and the you know and the ground. person and the you know and the ground. &gt;&gt; By now I'm sure that many of you have &gt;&gt; By now I'm sure that many of you have &gt;&gt; By now I'm sure that many of you have heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 for more than a decade. And indeed for more than a decade. And indeed for more than a decade. And indeed that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking AG1 way back in 2012 and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012 and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012 and the reason why I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most the highest quality and most the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to drink a1.com/huberman drink a1.com/huberman drink a1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away six free sample packs of is giving away six free sample packs of is giving away six free sample packs of AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, AGZ, which is AG1's new sleep formula, which by the way is fantastic. It's the which by the way is fantastic. It's the which by the way is fantastic. It's the only sleep supplement I take. It only sleep supplement I take. It only sleep supplement I take. It eliminates the need for all these pills eliminates the need for all these pills eliminates the need for all these pills and my sleep has never been better. The and my sleep has never been better. The and my sleep has never been better. The special offer gives you six free samples special offer gives you six free samples special offer gives you six free samples of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel of that AGZ as well as three AG1 travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your first subscription. Just go to your first subscription. Just go to your first subscription. Just go to drinka1.com/huberman to get started. I heard a wonderful talk to get started. I heard a wonderful talk to get started. I heard a wonderful talk that uh you participated in um with uh that uh you participated in um with uh that uh you participated in um with uh &gt;&gt; one of the members of the Kennedy &gt;&gt; one of the members of the Kennedy &gt;&gt; one of the members of the Kennedy family. it wasn't Robert Patrick family. it wasn't Robert Patrick family. it wasn't Robert Patrick Kennedy, excuse me, who's been very open Kennedy, excuse me, who's been very open Kennedy, excuse me, who's been very open about his own recovery and so many gems about his own recovery and so many gems about his own recovery and so many gems in that talk. We'll put a link to it and in that talk. We'll put a link to it and in that talk. We'll put a link to it and we'll touch on some of those things we'll touch on some of those things we'll touch on some of those things again, but just as such an important again, but just as such an important again, but just as such an important conversation. &gt;&gt; Um, and you know, it came up in that &gt;&gt; Um, and you know, it came up in that &gt;&gt; Um, and you know, it came up in that discussion that many industries are discussion that many industries are discussion that many industries are industries of addiction, alcohol, industries of addiction, alcohol, industries of addiction, alcohol, cannabis, gambling. Nowadays, I was cannabis, gambling. Nowadays, I was cannabis, gambling. Nowadays, I was thinking about what you guys were thinking about what you guys were thinking about what you guys were talking about. And nowadays, it's very talking about. And nowadays, it's very talking about. And nowadays, it's very difficult to look at any industry and difficult to look at any industry and difficult to look at any industry and not see it that way at some level. not see it that way at some level. not see it that way at some level. &gt;&gt; They talk about it themselves that way, &gt;&gt; They talk about it themselves that way, &gt;&gt; They talk about it themselves that way, you know, they they'll if you get you know, they they'll if you get you know, they they'll if you get together with app developers, they'll together with app developers, they'll together with app developers, they'll say, "How do we make this more say, "How do we make this more say, "How do we make this more addictive?" You know, so it's and addictive?" You know, so it's and addictive?" You know, so it's and it and it is good for business. There is it and it is good for business. There is it and it is good for business. There is no customer like an addicted customer. no customer like an addicted customer. no customer like an addicted customer. So, of course, that's going to be So, of course, that's going to be So, of course, that's going to be appealing if you're trying to sell appealing if you're trying to sell appealing if you're trying to sell something. I guess the question is something. I guess the question is something. I guess the question is healthy addictions or adaptive healthy addictions or adaptive healthy addictions or adaptive addictions or things that fall outside addictions or things that fall outside addictions or things that fall outside the progressive narrowing of the things the progressive narrowing of the things the progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure because a kid that bring you pleasure because a kid that bring you pleasure because a kid getting quote unquote addicted to a getting quote unquote addicted to a getting quote unquote addicted to a learning app learning app learning app &gt;&gt; uh that carries over into a number of &gt;&gt; uh that carries over into a number of &gt;&gt; uh that carries over into a number of things one hopes um in school and uh or things one hopes um in school and uh or things one hopes um in school and uh or even social media. I've learned a lot even social media. I've learned a lot even social media. I've learned a lot from YouTube videos. Heck, I even from YouTube videos. Heck, I even from YouTube videos. Heck, I even watched that YouTube video of you and watched that YouTube video of you and watched that YouTube video of you and Patrick uh you know uh on YouTube. So Patrick uh you know uh on YouTube. So Patrick uh you know uh on YouTube. So there's this double-edged blade piece. there's this double-edged blade piece. there's this double-edged blade piece. Uh, but when it comes to alcohol and Uh, but when it comes to alcohol and Uh, but when it comes to alcohol and cannabis, what you told us earlier, like cannabis, what you told us earlier, like cannabis, what you told us earlier, like getting women to drink more by making it getting women to drink more by making it getting women to drink more by making it seem like an important part of being a seem like an important part of being a seem like an important part of being a woman in the United States to drink. woman in the United States to drink. woman in the United States to drink. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That sounds diabolical. &gt;&gt; That sounds diabolical. &gt;&gt; That sounds diabolical. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Convincing people that cannabis is going &gt;&gt; Convincing people that cannabis is going &gt;&gt; Convincing people that cannabis is going to make them more creative and it's not to make them more creative and it's not to make them more creative and it's not as bad as alcohol, that to me is very as bad as alcohol, that to me is very as bad as alcohol, that to me is very diabolical. And I and I worry about diabolical. And I and I worry about diabolical. And I and I worry about this. Well, it's not as bad as alcohol this. Well, it's not as bad as alcohol this. Well, it's not as bad as alcohol argument because I mean shooting argument because I mean shooting argument because I mean shooting yourself in the head is way worse than yourself in the head is way worse than yourself in the head is way worse than stabbing yourself in the head. stabbing yourself in the head. stabbing yourself in the head. &gt;&gt; Well, alcohol also kills, you know, &gt;&gt; Well, alcohol also kills, you know, &gt;&gt; Well, alcohol also kills, you know, about 150,000 Americans a year. So, if about 150,000 Americans a year. So, if about 150,000 Americans a year. So, if that's our bar, we should have hand that's our bar, we should have hand that's our bar, we should have hand grenades in the drugstore there. You grenades in the drugstore there. You grenades in the drugstore there. You know, that killed tens of thousands but know, that killed tens of thousands but know, that killed tens of thousands but not 150,000. You know, we should not 150,000. You know, we should not 150,000. You know, we should legalize drunk driving because, you legalize drunk driving because, you legalize drunk driving because, you know, that only kills 10,000 people. I know, that only kills 10,000 people. I know, that only kills 10,000 people. I mean, that's just a crazy thing to set mean, that's just a crazy thing to set mean, that's just a crazy thing to set as the well, as long as it kills less as the well, as long as it kills less as the well, as long as it kills less than 150,000 people a year, it sounds than 150,000 people a year, it sounds than 150,000 people a year, it sounds great to me. No, that doesn't make any great to me. No, that doesn't make any great to me. No, that doesn't make any sense. I mean, I am clear like sense. I mean, I am clear like sense. I mean, I am clear like economically I am a capitalist. I'm glad economically I am a capitalist. I'm glad economically I am a capitalist. I'm glad we have companies. I love living in we have companies. I love living in we have companies. I love living in Silicon Valley. I love all the things Silicon Valley. I love all the things Silicon Valley. I love all the things people create there. And um and I think people create there. And um and I think people create there. And um and I think that is an important part for society to that is an important part for society to that is an important part for society to work to have a private sector. Um and at work to have a private sector. Um and at work to have a private sector. Um and at the same time, you have to regulate the same time, you have to regulate the same time, you have to regulate addictive uh goods. temptation goods addictive uh goods. temptation goods addictive uh goods. temptation goods very intelligently and tightly because very intelligently and tightly because very intelligently and tightly because you can't count on the sort of rational you can't count on the sort of rational you can't count on the sort of rational consumer to protect themselves like you consumer to protect themselves like you consumer to protect themselves like you can when you're dealing with cabbage or can when you're dealing with cabbage or can when you're dealing with cabbage or lettuce which nobody ever overdoses on. lettuce which nobody ever overdoses on. lettuce which nobody ever overdoses on. But we do see people burning down their But we do see people burning down their But we do see people burning down their lives over all these drugs. And for that lives over all these drugs. And for that lives over all these drugs. And for that reason, you know, to pro to protect reason, you know, to pro to protect reason, you know, to pro to protect those people, but also to protect the those people, but also to protect the those people, but also to protect the rest of us from the consequences of rest of us from the consequences of rest of us from the consequences of that, that's why, you know, you need that, that's why, you know, you need that, that's why, you know, you need things like advertising restrictions. things like advertising restrictions. things like advertising restrictions. That's why taxes to which people are That's why taxes to which people are That's why taxes to which people are people, even heavy users respond to people, even heavy users respond to people, even heavy users respond to price. Um, you know, that's a really price. Um, you know, that's a really price. Um, you know, that's a really important tool to regulate them. I would important tool to regulate them. I would important tool to regulate them. I would do I would do much more with cannabis do I would do much more with cannabis do I would do much more with cannabis particularly, you know, just some of the particularly, you know, just some of the particularly, you know, just some of the promotion is so naked and a lot of it is promotion is so naked and a lot of it is promotion is so naked and a lot of it is in places where kids are exposed in places where kids are exposed in places where kids are exposed particularly and this has just been a particularly and this has just been a particularly and this has just been a long-term fight. You know, we had it long-term fight. You know, we had it long-term fight. You know, we had it with the tobacco industry. Almost any with the tobacco industry. Almost any with the tobacco industry. Almost any nasty thing you could say about the nasty thing you could say about the nasty thing you could say about the tobacco industry turned out to be true. tobacco industry turned out to be true. tobacco industry turned out to be true. I mean, you know, they did work to make I mean, you know, they did work to make I mean, you know, they did work to make it more addictive. They worked to defeat it more addictive. They worked to defeat it more addictive. They worked to defeat uh any type of health regulation. They uh any type of health regulation. They uh any type of health regulation. They were marketing to kids, all that stuff. were marketing to kids, all that stuff. were marketing to kids, all that stuff. So, that those are the economic So, that those are the economic So, that those are the economic incentives. And so you should incentives. And so you should incentives. And so you should not be naive um if you work in this not be naive um if you work in this not be naive um if you work in this space about what the financial space about what the financial space about what the financial incentives are if you're making an incentives are if you're making an incentives are if you're making an addictive product. More addiction is addictive product. More addiction is addictive product. More addiction is good for your bottom line. So us on the good for your bottom line. So us on the good for your bottom line. So us on the on the other side have to say we're on the other side have to say we're on the other side have to say we're going to put in laws and regulations so going to put in laws and regulations so going to put in laws and regulations so that is harder to achieve. Never that is harder to achieve. Never that is harder to achieve. Never going to get rid of all of it. But you going to get rid of all of it. But you going to get rid of all of it. But you can make it a lot harder. Gambling can make it a lot harder. Gambling can make it a lot harder. Gambling is a great example. I mean, I'm just is a great example. I mean, I'm just is a great example. I mean, I'm just amazed that we have just given up on any amazed that we have just given up on any amazed that we have just given up on any restrictions on gambling now. I mean, restrictions on gambling now. I mean, restrictions on gambling now. I mean, when I was a kid, Pete Rose was not when I was a kid, Pete Rose was not when I was a kid, Pete Rose was not allowed to go into the Hall of Fame allowed to go into the Hall of Fame allowed to go into the Hall of Fame because he had once placed a better on because he had once placed a better on because he had once placed a better on his own team. He wasn't even doing his own team. He wasn't even doing his own team. He wasn't even doing anything corrupt, but he was he bet on anything corrupt, but he was he bet on anything corrupt, but he was he bet on his own team would win. He was kept out his own team would win. He was kept out his own team would win. He was kept out of the Hall of Fame. Now, you can't of the Hall of Fame. Now, you can't of the Hall of Fame. Now, you can't watch a sporting event without having watch a sporting event without having watch a sporting event without having gambling ads shoved in your face. Like, gambling ads shoved in your face. Like, gambling ads shoved in your face. Like, that's an example of something that that's an example of something that that's an example of something that should just not be the case. That is should just not be the case. That is should just not be the case. That is terrible for anyone who's trying to quit terrible for anyone who's trying to quit terrible for anyone who's trying to quit gambling. It's terrible. A lot of young gambling. It's terrible. A lot of young gambling. It's terrible. A lot of young men particularly, but not just young men particularly, but not just young men particularly, but not just young men, are just ruining themselves men, are just ruining themselves men, are just ruining themselves economically over sports gambling. economically over sports gambling. economically over sports gambling. And we did we don't need this. We we And we did we don't need this. We we And we did we don't need this. We we can we can do without it. The gambling can we can do without it. The gambling can we can do without it. The gambling thing is a real concern. We had a guest thing is a real concern. We had a guest thing is a real concern. We had a guest on this podcast who's a self-admitted uh on this podcast who's a self-admitted uh on this podcast who's a self-admitted uh gambling addict. And um gambling addict. And um gambling addict. And um a friend of mine who treats gambling a friend of mine who treats gambling a friend of mine who treats gambling addicts said uh it's among the worst of addicts said uh it's among the worst of addicts said uh it's among the worst of the addictions because they live with the addictions because they live with the addictions because they live with the reality. It's true that the next the reality. It's true that the next the reality. It's true that the next time really could change at all. time really could change at all. time really could change at all. &gt;&gt; And he said eventually they get addicted &gt;&gt; And he said eventually they get addicted &gt;&gt; And he said eventually they get addicted to the shame of losing. to the shame of losing. to the shame of losing. &gt;&gt; They just get so winning becomes a thing &gt;&gt; They just get so winning becomes a thing &gt;&gt; They just get so winning becomes a thing of the distant past. I mean, this sounds of the distant past. I mean, this sounds of the distant past. I mean, this sounds crazy to the rest of us, but it's crazy to the rest of us, but it's crazy to the rest of us, but it's fascinating. &gt;&gt; Um, it's fascinating and it um and &gt;&gt; Um, it's fascinating and it um and &gt;&gt; Um, it's fascinating and it um and disturbing. Um, and gambling addicts disturbing. Um, and gambling addicts disturbing. Um, and gambling addicts will say that every addiction is will say that every addiction is will say that every addiction is gambling. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's good. That's good. There's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's good. That's good. There's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's good. That's good. There's a tremendous book uh Addiction by Design a tremendous book uh Addiction by Design a tremendous book uh Addiction by Design and I'm afraid I'm going to mispronounce and I'm afraid I'm going to mispronounce and I'm afraid I'm going to mispronounce the name of the person who wrote I the name of the person who wrote I the name of the person who wrote I think it's Schull but I'm not sure but I think it's Schull but I'm not sure but I think it's Schull but I'm not sure but I know the title Addiction by Design about know the title Addiction by Design about know the title Addiction by Design about gambling and she profiles people who gambling and she profiles people who gambling and she profiles people who play video poker uh many of whom work in play video poker uh many of whom work in play video poker uh many of whom work in the casino. They basically get paid and the casino. They basically get paid and the casino. They basically get paid and then they go pay the casino back by then they go pay the casino back by then they go pay the casino back by giving it away. But some of them will giving it away. But some of them will giving it away. But some of them will take a toothpick and bend it and force take a toothpick and bend it and force take a toothpick and bend it and force the bet button down and they won't even the bet button down and they won't even the bet button down and they won't even touch it. They'll just sit there and touch it. They'll just sit there and touch it. They'll just sit there and watch in kind of a dissociative state as watch in kind of a dissociative state as watch in kind of a dissociative state as it just runs and runs and runs until as it just runs and runs and runs until as it just runs and runs and runs until their money is gone. You know, that's their money is gone. You know, that's their money is gone. You know, that's like, you know, it's like zombification, like, you know, it's like zombification, like, you know, it's like zombification, you know, of this stuff. And that tech you know, of this stuff. And that tech you know, of this stuff. And that tech has been perfected to be addicted. If has been perfected to be addicted. If has been perfected to be addicted. If you I do I do go to Las Vegas like once you I do I do go to Las Vegas like once you I do I do go to Las Vegas like once every couple years. I just find I not every couple years. I just find I not every couple years. I just find I not for gamma, but I just enjoy the sort of for gamma, but I just enjoy the sort of for gamma, but I just enjoy the sort of pageantry and the food and all that. Um pageantry and the food and all that. Um pageantry and the food and all that. Um it's very hard to see dealers at tables it's very hard to see dealers at tables it's very hard to see dealers at tables anymore because dealers don't give the anymore because dealers don't give the anymore because dealers don't give the perfect timing of reinforcement that perfect timing of reinforcement that perfect timing of reinforcement that machines can do and you know they don't machines can do and you know they don't machines can do and you know they don't you know you have to wait you know for you know you have to wait you know for you know you have to wait you know for your reward and all that kind of thing your reward and all that kind of thing your reward and all that kind of thing and you wait till you find out and you wait till you find out and you wait till you find out and there's a social component. Well that there's a social component. Well that there's a social component. Well that all slows down the process whereas a all slows down the process whereas a all slows down the process whereas a machine can give you exact timing machine can give you exact timing machine can give you exact timing between your press the button and then between your press the button and then between your press the button and then you get your reward or you know your you get your reward or you know your you get your reward or you know your win or your loss. Uh and you and it your win or your loss. Uh and you and it your win or your loss. Uh and you and it can just go infinitely 24 hours a day can just go infinitely 24 hours a day can just go infinitely 24 hours a day unlike a dealer never gets tired. And so unlike a dealer never gets tired. And so unlike a dealer never gets tired. And so all the casinos like chopped up dealers all the casinos like chopped up dealers all the casinos like chopped up dealers and now you're just playing with a and now you're just playing with a and now you're just playing with a machine. &gt;&gt; Incredible. Um I don't want to spill off &gt;&gt; Incredible. Um I don't want to spill off &gt;&gt; Incredible. Um I don't want to spill off into too many anecdotes on my side. Um into too many anecdotes on my side. Um into too many anecdotes on my side. Um but I will share uh something that was but I will share uh something that was but I will share uh something that was shared by a previous guest on the shared by a previous guest on the shared by a previous guest on the podcast you may find interesting. Um podcast you may find interesting. Um podcast you may find interesting. Um Michael Easter is uh is at a university Michael Easter is uh is at a university Michael Easter is uh is at a university out in Las Vegas and he got access to out in Las Vegas and he got access to out in Las Vegas and he got access to one of these. Um he wrote the comfort one of these. Um he wrote the comfort one of these. Um he wrote the comfort crisis about getting outdoors, getting crisis about getting outdoors, getting crisis about getting outdoors, getting away from things and away from things and away from things and &gt;&gt; basically carrying weight on your back &gt;&gt; basically carrying weight on your back &gt;&gt; basically carrying weight on your back and walking as a therapy of sorts. Um an and walking as a therapy of sorts. Um an and walking as a therapy of sorts. Um an important one to do regularly. Um but he important one to do regularly. Um but he important one to do regularly. Um but he got access to one of these uh research got access to one of these uh research got access to one of these uh research casinos. &gt;&gt; And it turns out that &gt;&gt; And it turns out that &gt;&gt; And it turns out that &gt;&gt; slot machines used to be a small &gt;&gt; slot machines used to be a small &gt;&gt; slot machines used to be a small fraction of what the of the income of fraction of what the of the income of fraction of what the of the income of casinos. Now it's 80% or more. Yeah. And casinos. Now it's 80% or more. Yeah. And casinos. Now it's 80% or more. Yeah. And he said that came about because um he said that came about because um he said that came about because um a father who worked for the casino a father who worked for the casino a father who worked for the casino industry was at home watching his kids industry was at home watching his kids industry was at home watching his kids play video games. And he realized that play video games. And he realized that play video games. And he realized that the kids weren't playing to win. They the kids weren't playing to win. They the kids weren't playing to win. They were playing for the novelty of what was were playing for the novelty of what was were playing for the novelty of what was on the next screen. And the kids didn't on the next screen. And the kids didn't on the next screen. And the kids didn't realize this, but it became clear to realize this, but it became clear to realize this, but it became clear to him. So now, and I think this will help him. So now, and I think this will help him. So now, and I think this will help people. This is why I'm taking the time people. This is why I'm taking the time people. This is why I'm taking the time to share this once again. Uh to share this once again. Uh to share this once again. Uh now, if you play a slot machine, you now, if you play a slot machine, you now, if you play a slot machine, you think you're trying to win. and hear think you're trying to win. and hear think you're trying to win. and hear that ching that ching that ching and the bells go off and you and you and the bells go off and you and you and the bells go off and you and you won. You think that's the dopamine won. You think that's the dopamine won. You think that's the dopamine reward. But they figured out that unlike reward. But they figured out that unlike reward. But they figured out that unlike the old rotor machines where you have the old rotor machines where you have the old rotor machines where you have some cherries and bells and stuff in the some cherries and bells and stuff in the some cherries and bells and stuff in the electronic landscape, you could have an electronic landscape, you could have an electronic landscape, you could have an infinite amount of novelty through novel infinite amount of novelty through novel infinite amount of novelty through novel combinations. So now they figured out combinations. So now they figured out combinations. So now they figured out that people will play to win 50 cents on that people will play to win 50 cents on that people will play to win 50 cents on the dollar. So they lost 50 cents, the dollar. So they lost 50 cents, the dollar. So they lost 50 cents, right? and they know that rationally or right? and they know that rationally or right? and they know that rationally or they could know that rationally, but they could know that rationally, but they could know that rationally, but they'll continue to play until it's all they'll continue to play until it's all they'll continue to play until it's all gone as long as you give them novelty. So, as long as you give them novelty. So, as long as you give them novelty. So, people aren't even really playing for people aren't even really playing for people aren't even really playing for the money anymore. They think they are. the money anymore. They think they are. the money anymore. They think they are. They're actually just being stimulated They're actually just being stimulated They're actually just being stimulated with enough novel combinations that with enough novel combinations that with enough novel combinations that their bank account gets drained, the their bank account gets drained, the their bank account gets drained, the house takes it all. house takes it all. house takes it all. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; When I heard that, I it changed my view &gt;&gt; When I heard that, I it changed my view &gt;&gt; When I heard that, I it changed my view of gambling and because I always thought of gambling and because I always thought of gambling and because I always thought it was about winning money and leaving. it was about winning money and leaving. it was about winning money and leaving. It's actually more about playing and It's actually more about playing and It's actually more about playing and it's more about the novelty that's it's more about the novelty that's it's more about the novelty that's introduced in each quote unquote hand or introduced in each quote unquote hand or introduced in each quote unquote hand or spin. And the I think knowing that spin. And the I think knowing that spin. And the I think knowing that carries over certainly to sports and the carries over certainly to sports and the carries over certainly to sports and the excitement that you're feeling about the excitement that you're feeling about the excitement that you're feeling about the potential that you could win, but that potential that you could win, but that potential that you could win, but that it's a novel combination of that it's a novel combination of that it's a novel combination of things um might prevent hopefully things um might prevent hopefully things um might prevent hopefully somebody from becoming a gambling addict somebody from becoming a gambling addict somebody from becoming a gambling addict or might help people realize that what or might help people realize that what or might help people realize that what they're addicted to, if not already they're addicted to, if not already they're addicted to, if not already shame, might actually just be the shame, might actually just be the shame, might actually just be the novelty. And that's why they're losing novelty. And that's why they're losing novelty. And that's why they're losing all their money. all their money. all their money. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's an industry term for that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's an industry term for that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's an industry term for that. It's LDWS, losses disguised as wins. So, It's LDWS, losses disguised as wins. So, It's LDWS, losses disguised as wins. So, you know, you put in a dollar and you know, you put in a dollar and you know, you put in a dollar and you get a hundred credits and then you pull get a hundred credits and then you pull get a hundred credits and then you pull the thing and it, you know, it does its the thing and it, you know, it does its the thing and it, you know, it does its thing and then it goes like, you know, d thing and then it goes like, you know, d thing and then it goes like, you know, d you you've matched this way, you've won you you've matched this way, you've won you you've matched this way, you've won 10 and it goes off and you've matched 10 and it goes off and you've matched 10 and it goes off and you've matched that way 20. Oh my god, I've won again that way 20. Oh my god, I've won again that way 20. Oh my god, I've won again 40. I've won 40 20 and 10 with all these 40. I've won 40 20 and 10 with all these 40. I've won 40 20 and 10 with all these exciting things. I just lost, you know, exciting things. I just lost, you know, exciting things. I just lost, you know, 30% of what I put in. But it feels like 30% of what I put in. But it feels like 30% of what I put in. But it feels like a win. And they realized, as you say, a win. And they realized, as you say, a win. And they realized, as you say, people will keep playing even while people will keep playing even while people will keep playing even while objectively they're just pouring money objectively they're just pouring money objectively they're just pouring money down a sewer. down a sewer. down a sewer. [snorts] So glad I'm not addicted to gambling. So glad I'm not addicted to gambling. So glad I'm not addicted to gambling. But I could see how I could be. Even But I could see how I could be. Even But I could see how I could be. Even though I would like to say I couldn't though I would like to say I couldn't though I would like to say I couldn't be, I could see how I could be. Um be, I could see how I could be. Um be, I could see how I could be. Um because the brain is just so prone to these the brain is just so prone to these the brain is just so prone to these kinds of things. We all have these kinds of things. We all have these kinds of things. We all have these circuits. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And uh it's interesting too, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And uh it's interesting too, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And uh it's interesting too, you know, casinos are one of the few you know, casinos are one of the few you know, casinos are one of the few places where you can still smoke uh you places where you can still smoke uh you places where you can still smoke uh you know, indoors and uh you get free know, indoors and uh you get free know, indoors and uh you get free drinks. And so it's really like um drinks. And so it's really like um drinks. And so it's really like um absolute dense pack of addictions and absolute dense pack of addictions and absolute dense pack of addictions and a huge number of people problem and a huge number of people problem and a huge number of people problem gamers are problem drinkers and also gamers are problem drinkers and also gamers are problem drinkers and also are addicted to cigarettes. Um and are addicted to cigarettes. Um and are addicted to cigarettes. Um and so when I when I go to Las Vegas, it's so when I when I go to Las Vegas, it's so when I when I go to Las Vegas, it's almost like a anthropology experience almost like a anthropology experience almost like a anthropology experience for me. I just look at all this like, for me. I just look at all this like, for me. I just look at all this like, wow. And there was a story in wow. And there was a story in wow. And there was a story in Scho's book which I just found amazing Scho's book which I just found amazing Scho's book which I just found amazing with a bunch of people playing with a bunch of people playing with a bunch of people playing and somebody had a heart playing and somebody had a heart playing and somebody had a heart attack at one of the machines fell over attack at one of the machines fell over attack at one of the machines fell over on the floor in a group of them and none on the floor in a group of them and none on the floor in a group of them and none of them even reacted. They just kept of them even reacted. They just kept of them even reacted. They just kept playing as this person died. playing as this person died. playing as this person died. &gt;&gt; What a metaphor for society. Well, I &gt;&gt; What a metaphor for society. Well, I &gt;&gt; What a metaphor for society. Well, I just decided if I'm ever going to Las just decided if I'm ever going to Las just decided if I'm ever going to Las Vegas, I'm going with you. Okay. Vegas, I'm going with you. Okay. Vegas, I'm going with you. Okay. &gt;&gt; Sorry to invite myself, but you seem &gt;&gt; Sorry to invite myself, but you seem &gt;&gt; Sorry to invite myself, but you seem like a safe person to go. like a safe person to go. like a safe person to go. &gt;&gt; I'm pretty safe. Yes. You you may win or &gt;&gt; I'm pretty safe. Yes. You you may win or &gt;&gt; I'm pretty safe. Yes. You you may win or lose five bucks and that'll be the end lose five bucks and that'll be the end lose five bucks and that'll be the end of it. of it. of it. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; Love it. So, industries that drive this stuff, So, industries that drive this stuff, So, industries that drive this stuff, okay, alcohol, okay, alcohol, okay, alcohol, um, cannabis, it's going to be very um, cannabis, it's going to be very um, cannabis, it's going to be very interesting to see what happens with interesting to see what happens with interesting to see what happens with cannabis now and going forward. Is it cannabis now and going forward. Is it cannabis now and going forward. Is it the case that in states where it's the case that in states where it's the case that in states where it's legalized or decriminalized that the legalized or decriminalized that the legalized or decriminalized that the state collects it taxes on it? state collects it taxes on it? state collects it taxes on it? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it depend depends. Those are &gt;&gt; Yeah, it depend depends. Those are &gt;&gt; Yeah, it depend depends. Those are different regimes and this is a different regimes and this is a different regimes and this is a really important point to get into when really important point to get into when really important point to get into when you think about policy. So, you think about policy. So, you think about policy. So, decriminalization is about the user and decriminalization is about the user and decriminalization is about the user and that's to say, look, we're not going to that's to say, look, we're not going to that's to say, look, we're not going to punish you for using pot. Okay? And that punish you for using pot. Okay? And that punish you for using pot. Okay? And that is a pretty popular it's always it's is a pretty popular it's always it's is a pretty popular it's always it's been a popular policy for a long time been a popular policy for a long time been a popular policy for a long time and doesn't it seem to really affect use and doesn't it seem to really affect use and doesn't it seem to really affect use that much you know maybe a little bit that much you know maybe a little bit that much you know maybe a little bit but not a lot. Legalization is making but not a lot. Legalization is making but not a lot. Legalization is making the production processing marketing and the production processing marketing and the production processing marketing and sale legal bringing in a corporation and sale legal bringing in a corporation and sale legal bringing in a corporation and that is fundamentally different um you that is fundamentally different um you that is fundamentally different um you know because the corporation is going to know because the corporation is going to know because the corporation is going to have very smart people who are you know have very smart people who are you know have very smart people who are you know good at selling and they will increase good at selling and they will increase good at selling and they will increase you know consumption of the product. Um you know consumption of the product. Um you know consumption of the product. Um it at this point, you know, I don't it at this point, you know, I don't it at this point, you know, I don't know the exact state count, but it's mo know the exact state count, but it's mo know the exact state count, but it's mo most people in the United States most people in the United States most people in the United States population-wise have access at this population-wise have access at this population-wise have access at this point to a recreational uh cannabis. And point to a recreational uh cannabis. And point to a recreational uh cannabis. And virtually every state, I believe, has virtually every state, I believe, has virtually every state, I believe, has something if it's not recreational, it's something if it's not recreational, it's something if it's not recreational, it's medical or there were these uh due to medical or there were these uh due to medical or there were these uh due to hemp, there was sort of a way mistake hemp, there was sort of a way mistake hemp, there was sort of a way mistake they made in regulation. There's a way they made in regulation. There's a way they made in regulation. There's a way to process hemp that you can make these to process hemp that you can make these to process hemp that you can make these like delta 8s and delta 9. Even in like delta 8s and delta 9. Even in like delta 8s and delta 9. Even in states that are prohibited, there's states that are prohibited, there's states that are prohibited, there's quite a bit of like, you know, hemp quite a bit of like, you know, hemp quite a bit of like, you know, hemp laced beverages which are quite strong. laced beverages which are quite strong. laced beverages which are quite strong. &gt;&gt; Is cannabis a gateway drug? We were told &gt;&gt; Is cannabis a gateway drug? We were told &gt;&gt; Is cannabis a gateway drug? We were told that when we were in school. that when we were in school. that when we were in school. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, all drugs are gateway drugs. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, all drugs are gateway drugs. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, all drugs are gateway drugs. The the lie in that was that you know The the lie in that was that you know The the lie in that was that you know cannabis had some unique role um you cannabis had some unique role um you cannabis had some unique role um you know that was going to lead you to use know that was going to lead you to use know that was going to lead you to use heroin use. But the truth is anything heroin use. But the truth is anything heroin use. But the truth is anything like you know if you're a teenager and like you know if you're a teenager and like you know if you're a teenager and you start smoking or you start drinking you start smoking or you start drinking you start smoking or you start drinking or you start uh you know using cannabis or you start uh you know using cannabis or you start uh you know using cannabis or you know stealing prescription or you know stealing prescription or you know stealing prescription opioids from your parents or whatever opioids from your parents or whatever opioids from your parents or whatever that will increase your likelihood of that will increase your likelihood of that will increase your likelihood of progressing to other substances you know progressing to other substances you know progressing to other substances you know for multiple reasons you know one you for multiple reasons you know one you for multiple reasons you know one you might like it say okay well I guess I'm might like it say okay well I guess I'm might like it say okay well I guess I'm convers let me try some others two your convers let me try some others two your convers let me try some others two your social networks may change so you're social networks may change so you're social networks may change so you're around other people who do this and so around other people who do this and so around other people who do this and so they're you're comfortable with them they're you're comfortable with them they're you're comfortable with them they're comfortable with you and they're comfortable with you and they're comfortable with you and they're also more likely to have something else also more likely to have something else also more likely to have something else you might want to try. And then the you might want to try. And then the you might want to try. And then the third thing is it could be some brain third thing is it could be some brain third thing is it could be some brain sensitization you know going on uh that sensitization you know going on uh that sensitization you know going on uh that you know makes you know drugs more you know makes you know drugs more you know makes you know drugs more rewarding and there is some interesting rewarding and there is some interesting rewarding and there is some interesting work with like identical twins and work with like identical twins and work with like identical twins and different states which seem to suggest different states which seem to suggest different states which seem to suggest that you could be starting some that you could be starting some that you could be starting some unfolding process when you expose a unfolding process when you expose a unfolding process when you expose a young brain to it. So all those young brain to it. So all those young brain to it. So all those processes is how gateways work. The lie processes is how gateways work. The lie processes is how gateways work. The lie was that it was just cannabis. And this was that it was just cannabis. And this was that it was just cannabis. And this actually fits with the general lie I actually fits with the general lie I actually fits with the general lie I would say is that alcohol is a drug and would say is that alcohol is a drug and would say is that alcohol is a drug and we pretend that it isn't. So you we pretend that it isn't. So you we pretend that it isn't. So you know you mentioned like people know you mentioned like people know you mentioned like people getting drunk at science conferences or getting drunk at science conferences or getting drunk at science conferences or health conferences. I have seen health conferences. I have seen health conferences. I have seen conferences, political events where conferences, political events where conferences, political events where people spend all day demonizing drug people spend all day demonizing drug people spend all day demonizing drug users and talking about, you know, the users and talking about, you know, the users and talking about, you know, the threat of drugs and how evil drugs are threat of drugs and how evil drugs are threat of drugs and how evil drugs are and how we have to, you know, destroy and how we have to, you know, destroy and how we have to, you know, destroy all drugs and then they all go to the all drugs and then they all go to the all drugs and then they all go to the bar and get drunk as if they are not bar and get drunk as if they are not bar and get drunk as if they are not drug users. not wanting to admit that drug users. not wanting to admit that drug users. not wanting to admit that alcohol is a drug is a very useful for alcohol is a drug is a very useful for alcohol is a drug is a very useful for the industry but it was also disuseful the industry but it was also disuseful the industry but it was also disuseful politically because you know you could politically because you know you could politically because you know you could say well the big threat to kids is say well the big threat to kids is say well the big threat to kids is cannabis when you know it's much cannabis when you know it's much cannabis when you know it's much more likely a kid was going to get in more likely a kid was going to get in more likely a kid was going to get in trouble with alcohol than with cannabis trouble with alcohol than with cannabis trouble with alcohol than with cannabis these days there's a lot of discussion these days there's a lot of discussion these days there's a lot of discussion about psychedelics about psychedelics about psychedelics broad category of drugs LSDs psilocybin broad category of drugs LSDs psilocybin broad category of drugs LSDs psilocybin MDMA is an empath not a psychedelic but MDMA is an empath not a psychedelic but MDMA is an empath not a psychedelic but somehow it's been lumped into it mmethyl somehow it's been lumped into it mmethyl somehow it's been lumped into it mmethyl uh it's a methylene dioxymeth uh it's a methylene dioxymeth uh it's a methylene dioxymeth Methamphetamine, MDMA, ecstasy, folks, Methamphetamine, MDMA, ecstasy, folks, Methamphetamine, MDMA, ecstasy, folks, it's methamphetamine with some it's methamphetamine with some it's methamphetamine with some modification. So, it's not a modification. So, it's not a modification. So, it's not a psychedelic. It's an impathogen. Um, but psychedelic. It's an impathogen. Um, but psychedelic. It's an impathogen. Um, but it gets lumped with that. Ketamine gets it gets lumped with that. Ketamine gets it gets lumped with that. Ketamine gets lumped with it. Dissociative anesthetic. lumped with it. Dissociative anesthetic. lumped with it. Dissociative anesthetic. It's not a psychedelic. So, if we're It's not a psychedelic. So, if we're It's not a psychedelic. So, if we're going to have a conversation about going to have a conversation about going to have a conversation about psychedelics, I want to be really clear. psychedelics, I want to be really clear. psychedelics, I want to be really clear. Um, maybe we just put psilocybin Um, maybe we just put psilocybin Um, maybe we just put psilocybin &gt;&gt; and LSD on the table and then talk about &gt;&gt; and LSD on the table and then talk about &gt;&gt; and LSD on the table and then talk about the impathogens and ketamine and all the impathogens and ketamine and all the impathogens and ketamine and all the rest separately because so often these rest separately because so often these rest separately because so often these get lumped and it leads to a lot of get lumped and it leads to a lot of get lumped and it leads to a lot of confusion. I know several people who feel they've I know several people who feel they've I know several people who feel they've benefited tremendously from doing benefited tremendously from doing benefited tremendously from doing clinical work meaning with a guide in clinical work meaning with a guide in clinical work meaning with a guide in safe setting etc on highdose [snorts] safe setting etc on highdose [snorts] safe setting etc on highdose [snorts] psilocybin maybe only two or three times psilocybin maybe only two or three times psilocybin maybe only two or three times total and that's it. total and that's it. total and that's it. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; For treatment of depression sometimes &gt;&gt; For treatment of depression sometimes &gt;&gt; For treatment of depression sometimes for alcohol issues and other issues. I'm for alcohol issues and other issues. I'm for alcohol issues and other issues. I'm not talking about micro doing they do a not talking about micro doing they do a not talking about micro doing they do a high dose to two to five grams. Mhm. high dose to two to five grams. Mhm. high dose to two to five grams. Mhm. &gt;&gt; A lot of addicts who use other things &gt;&gt; A lot of addicts who use other things &gt;&gt; A lot of addicts who use other things are interested in or currently using or are interested in or currently using or are interested in or currently using or considering using psilocybin LSD less so considering using psilocybin LSD less so considering using psilocybin LSD less so uh as a means to get over their uh as a means to get over their uh as a means to get over their addiction. I'd like your thoughts about addiction. I'd like your thoughts about addiction. I'd like your thoughts about that and your thoughts about these that and your thoughts about these that and your thoughts about these compounds specifically. Yeah, I mean compounds specifically. Yeah, I mean compounds specifically. Yeah, I mean they're exciting uh in part because they're exciting uh in part because they're exciting uh in part because we haven't really made much progress in we haven't really made much progress in we haven't really made much progress in pharmarmacothotherapy in the last 20 pharmarmacothotherapy in the last 20 pharmarmacothotherapy in the last 20 years, you know, for lots of things for years, you know, for lots of things for years, you know, for lots of things for depression, for addiction, you know. depression, for addiction, you know. depression, for addiction, you know. So the thought that these might work and So the thought that these might work and So the thought that these might work and I think there other than the GLP1s, you I think there other than the GLP1s, you I think there other than the GLP1s, you know, one of the, you know, probably say know, one of the, you know, probably say know, one of the, you know, probably say the second I'd say my second bet on the second I'd say my second bet on the second I'd say my second bet on that, I put my first one in GP1 agonist. that, I put my first one in GP1 agonist. that, I put my first one in GP1 agonist. Um there is an awful lot of hype. Um but Um there is an awful lot of hype. Um but Um there is an awful lot of hype. Um but real things can be hyped. um you know so real things can be hyped. um you know so real things can be hyped. um you know so the fact that there are a lot of the fact that there are a lot of the fact that there are a lot of extravagant claims being made and also extravagant claims being made and also extravagant claims being made and also again talking about industry you know again talking about industry you know again talking about industry you know there are people who are you know hoping there are people who are you know hoping there are people who are you know hoping to make a huge sum of money on these on to make a huge sum of money on these on to make a huge sum of money on these on these medications um but there's also these medications um but there's also these medications um but there's also something there um you know you can something there um you know you can something there um you know you can look at different pilot studies um you look at different pilot studies um you look at different pilot studies um you know small trials they are encouraging know small trials they are encouraging know small trials they are encouraging um and uh I'm glad that um you know it's um and uh I'm glad that um you know it's um and uh I'm glad that um you know it's a lot easier now to do these types of a lot easier now to do these types of a lot easier now to do these types of studies you know we just had my friend studies you know we just had my friend studies you know we just had my friend Dr. Todd Coris down to Stanford you know Dr. Todd Coris down to Stanford you know Dr. Todd Coris down to Stanford you know he's from Oregon you know Oregon is he's from Oregon you know Oregon is he's from Oregon you know Oregon is doing these things probably similar doing these things probably similar doing these things probably similar experience to what the you know your experience to what the you know your experience to what the you know your friend had where you get you know your friend had where you get you know your friend had where you get you know you have a prep you have preparation you have a prep you have preparation you have a prep you have preparation you with a with a trained person you get the with a with a trained person you get the with a with a trained person you get the medication and then you do the medication and then you do the medication and then you do the integration session afterwards and there integration session afterwards and there integration session afterwards and there are again people would say it's you know are again people would say it's you know are again people would say it's you know is transformative for them um there are is transformative for them um there are is transformative for them um there are also people who have very bad also people who have very bad also people who have very bad experiences on them too though it has to experiences on them too though it has to experiences on them too though it has to has to be said and that's why we don't has to be said and that's why we don't has to be said and that's why we don't just say all right let's just use this just say all right let's just use this just say all right let's just use this as our front line you mean during the as our front line you mean during the as our front line you mean during the psychedelic experience end afterwards psychedelic experience end afterwards psychedelic experience end afterwards &gt;&gt; or afterwards like flashbacks, you know, &gt;&gt; or afterwards like flashbacks, you know, &gt;&gt; or afterwards like flashbacks, you know, you're driving along and then you have a you're driving along and then you have a you're driving along and then you have a flashback, you know, and you know that flashback, you know, and you know that flashback, you know, and you know that is both upsetting depending what that is both upsetting depending what that is both upsetting depending what you're doing at the time, you know, you're doing at the time, you know, you're doing at the time, you know, could carry some risk to it. Um, could carry some risk to it. Um, could carry some risk to it. Um, we don't know that well how well these we don't know that well how well these we don't know that well how well these exactly how these drugs work, you know, exactly how these drugs work, you know, exactly how these drugs work, you know, the sort of seroteneric kinds of kinds the sort of seroteneric kinds of kinds the sort of seroteneric kinds of kinds of drug. The one thing we do know good of drug. The one thing we do know good of drug. The one thing we do know good though, keeping on the topic of though, keeping on the topic of though, keeping on the topic of addiction is thankfully um you know addiction is thankfully um you know addiction is thankfully um you know there's no evidence that people get there's no evidence that people get there's no evidence that people get addicted to psilocybin or uh to LSD if addicted to psilocybin or uh to LSD if addicted to psilocybin or uh to LSD if they have abuse potential. It's they have abuse potential. It's they have abuse potential. It's extremely slight. So I' I've extremely slight. So I' I've extremely slight. So I' I've always worried about them far less uh as always worried about them far less uh as always worried about them far less uh as a class of drugs than I do things a class of drugs than I do things a class of drugs than I do things like stimulants which I know and you like stimulants which I know and you like stimulants which I know and you know and alcohol. know and alcohol. know and alcohol. My read of the literature and this might My read of the literature and this might My read of the literature and this might have been updated since uh is that there have been updated since uh is that there have been updated since uh is that there is zero evidence that micro doing is zero evidence that micro doing is zero evidence that micro doing psilocybin has any benefit. psilocybin has any benefit. psilocybin has any benefit. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's just silly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's just silly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's just silly. &gt;&gt; Um there is solid evidence that in a &gt;&gt; Um there is solid evidence that in a &gt;&gt; Um there is solid evidence that in a clinical setting as you pointed out and clinical setting as you pointed out and clinical setting as you pointed out and thank you for pointing it out. We're thank you for pointing it out. We're thank you for pointing it out. We're talking about at least two or three talk talking about at least two or three talk talking about at least two or three talk sessions without psilocybin then a sessions without psilocybin then a sessions without psilocybin then a psilocybin journey that's typically two psilocybin journey that's typically two psilocybin journey that's typically two guides for safety purposes. Now that's guides for safety purposes. Now that's guides for safety purposes. Now that's kind of how it's being explored. M kind of how it's being explored. M kind of how it's being explored. M &gt;&gt; so they're um to avoid exploitation &gt;&gt; so they're um to avoid exploitation &gt;&gt; so they're um to avoid exploitation conditions because there has been some conditions because there has been some conditions because there has been some exploitation mainly in the MDMA trials exploitation mainly in the MDMA trials exploitation mainly in the MDMA trials but um and then followup that it's been but um and then followup that it's been but um and then followup that it's been somewhere between 60 and 70% of people somewhere between 60 and 70% of people somewhere between 60 and 70% of people who go into that sort of thing with who go into that sort of thing with who go into that sort of thing with major depression that hasn't been major depression that hasn't been major depression that hasn't been resolved by other approaches um get resolved by other approaches um get resolved by other approaches um get either significant relief or uh full either significant relief or uh full either significant relief or uh full remission after two full versions of remission after two full versions of remission after two full versions of what I just described at fairly high what I just described at fairly high what I just described at fairly high dosages. is when I think about the dosages. is when I think about the dosages. is when I think about the negative impacts I certainly there's the negative impacts I certainly there's the negative impacts I certainly there's the quote unquote bad trip um phenomenon quote unquote bad trip um phenomenon quote unquote bad trip um phenomenon what I've observed quite a lot and uh I what I've observed quite a lot and uh I what I've observed quite a lot and uh I hear from a lot of people in the hear from a lot of people in the hear from a lot of people in the psychedelic space is that post MDMA for psychedelic space is that post MDMA for psychedelic space is that post MDMA for trauma posts psilocybin for major trauma posts psilocybin for major trauma posts psilocybin for major depression and addiction issues there's depression and addiction issues there's depression and addiction issues there's the not euphoria but the feeling that the not euphoria but the feeling that the not euphoria but the feeling that something significant has changed in the something significant has changed in the something significant has changed in the weeks and months afterwards and then weeks and months afterwards and then weeks and months afterwards and then some period of time later a significant some period of time later a significant some period of time later a significant sudden drop in mood and that frightens sudden drop in mood and that frightens sudden drop in mood and that frightens them &gt;&gt; and that they're able to recover from, &gt;&gt; and that they're able to recover from, &gt;&gt; and that they're able to recover from, but that it's a real thing, a real but that it's a real thing, a real but that it's a real thing, a real trough. And this, by the way, is trough. And this, by the way, is trough. And this, by the way, is separate from the very well-known trough separate from the very well-known trough separate from the very well-known trough that comes 2 days after MDMA use. We that comes 2 days after MDMA use. We that comes 2 days after MDMA use. We could talk about that, but um you get could talk about that, but um you get could talk about that, but um you get high and then there's a low, you know, high and then there's a low, you know, high and then there's a low, you know, very well explained very well explained very well explained &gt;&gt; as with stimulants. &gt;&gt; as with stimulants. &gt;&gt; as with stimulants. &gt;&gt; As with stimulants, right? &gt;&gt; As with stimulants, right? &gt;&gt; As with stimulants, right? &gt;&gt; I'm divided on this psilocybin to treat &gt;&gt; I'm divided on this psilocybin to treat &gt;&gt; I'm divided on this psilocybin to treat addiction thing. Um it seems very addiction thing. Um it seems very addiction thing. Um it seems very precarious because of the lack of kind precarious because of the lack of kind precarious because of the lack of kind of standardization of how this would be of standardization of how this would be of standardization of how this would be done outside a clinical trial. done outside a clinical trial. done outside a clinical trial. &gt;&gt; It's hard, &gt;&gt; It's hard, &gt;&gt; It's hard, &gt;&gt; you know. I mean, you hear about some &gt;&gt; you know. I mean, you hear about some &gt;&gt; you know. I mean, you hear about some you hear shaman practitioner guide and you hear shaman practitioner guide and you hear shaman practitioner guide and there's no because it's illegal. There's there's no because it's illegal. There's there's no because it's illegal. There's no Yelp reviews for these people. no Yelp reviews for these people. no Yelp reviews for these people. &gt;&gt; There's no board that's overseeing it. &gt;&gt; There's no board that's overseeing it. &gt;&gt; There's no board that's overseeing it. &gt;&gt; Well, there is in Oregon. That's &gt;&gt; Well, there is in Oregon. That's &gt;&gt; Well, there is in Oregon. That's actually what Todd was presenting at, actually what Todd was presenting at, actually what Todd was presenting at, which is Yeah. Um because you It is which is Yeah. Um because you It is which is Yeah. Um because you It is legal. Um, legal. Um, legal. Um, &gt;&gt; it's legal, not just decriminalized. &gt;&gt; it's legal, not just decriminalized. &gt;&gt; it's legal, not just decriminalized. &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. Because in Oakland and California, &gt;&gt; Okay. Because in Oakland and California, &gt;&gt; Okay. Because in Oakland and California, it's decriminalized. Silicon is it's decriminalized. Silicon is it's decriminalized. Silicon is decriminalized. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Oak Oakland's very different. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Oak Oakland's very different. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Oak Oakland's very different. Yeah. No, in Oregon, you actually you Yeah. No, in Oregon, you actually you Yeah. No, in Oregon, you actually you are licensed by the state to do you are licensed by the state to do you are licensed by the state to do this. I see. So, yeah. So, that that's this. I see. So, yeah. So, that that's this. I see. So, yeah. So, that that's what we'll find out. I mean, to me, this what we'll find out. I mean, to me, this what we'll find out. I mean, to me, this is like pretty probably this is case is like pretty probably this is case is like pretty probably this is case where it's easy to be a scientist. where it's easy to be a scientist. where it's easy to be a scientist. Sometimes it's annoying to be a Sometimes it's annoying to be a Sometimes it's annoying to be a scientist. Makes life harder. Makes it scientist. Makes life harder. Makes it scientist. Makes life harder. Makes it easier. It's like I don't know if this easier. It's like I don't know if this easier. It's like I don't know if this works. &gt;&gt; It's really important to figure out if &gt;&gt; It's really important to figure out if &gt;&gt; It's really important to figure out if this works. We have really good methods this works. We have really good methods this works. We have really good methods to do that. So let's spend the dollars to do that. So let's spend the dollars to do that. So let's spend the dollars to get good people to do those studies to get good people to do those studies to get good people to do those studies and they this is the night of view and they this is the night of view and they this is the night of view you know national institute on drug they you know national institute on drug they you know national institute on drug they are funding quite a few studies you know are funding quite a few studies you know are funding quite a few studies you know of this sort um and I imagine NIA of this sort um and I imagine NIA of this sort um and I imagine NIA which is the alcohol institute is doing which is the alcohol institute is doing which is the alcohol institute is doing it also um I say good because to me it's it also um I say good because to me it's it also um I say good because to me it's really I think people get a little really I think people get a little really I think people get a little scared of these drugs and sort of like scared of these drugs and sort of like scared of these drugs and sort of like uh think um well you know you can't use uh think um well you know you can't use uh think um well you know you can't use them in medicine it's like well you we them in medicine it's like well you we them in medicine it's like well you we use lots of things in medicine that are use lots of things in medicine that are use lots of things in medicine that are a lot riskier than this, right? It's a lot riskier than this, right? It's a lot riskier than this, right? It's just a question of what is the effect on just a question of what is the effect on just a question of what is the effect on the patient? What is the balance? the patient? What is the balance? the patient? What is the balance? &gt;&gt; Electric shock treatment. &gt;&gt; Electric shock treatment. &gt;&gt; Electric shock treatment. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, you know, &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, you know, &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, you know, um, Oxycontton, you know, you know, um, Oxycontton, you know, you know, um, Oxycontton, you know, you know, there's all kinds of things, right? But there's all kinds of things, right? But there's all kinds of things, right? But we figured that out by running really we figured that out by running really we figured that out by running really good research and that's what good research and that's what good research and that's what this area needs and I'm glad it's this area needs and I'm glad it's this area needs and I'm glad it's getting the investment. It's getting a getting the investment. It's getting a getting the investment. It's getting a fair amount of philanthropic investment, fair amount of philanthropic investment, fair amount of philanthropic investment, too. Another important thing is that the too. Another important thing is that the too. Another important thing is that the people doing the studies are at people doing the studies are at people doing the studies are at equipoise. So um you know there's been equipoise. So um you know there's been equipoise. So um you know there's been some bad work and it you know in this some bad work and it you know in this some bad work and it you know in this area you know over the last 50 years or area you know over the last 50 years or area you know over the last 50 years or so because it was people who were super so because it was people who were super so because it was people who were super enthusiastic to the point that they enthusiastic to the point that they enthusiastic to the point that they weren't careful and critical uh you know weren't careful and critical uh you know weren't careful and critical uh you know about you know what the evidence said about you know what the evidence said about you know what the evidence said and they sort of overclaimed what they and they sort of overclaimed what they and they sort of overclaimed what they found because they believed in found because they believed in found because they believed in themselves. You maybe because they'd had themselves. You maybe because they'd had themselves. You maybe because they'd had very positive experiences themselves and very positive experiences themselves and very positive experiences themselves and just like that is not in the long run a just like that is not in the long run a just like that is not in the long run a good way to do science. You know, you good way to do science. You know, you good way to do science. You know, you really want people who design a good really want people who design a good really want people who design a good study and then let the chips fall where study and then let the chips fall where study and then let the chips fall where they may and then tell us all and then they may and then tell us all and then they may and then tell us all and then we can decide, but they don't. They're we can decide, but they don't. They're we can decide, but they don't. They're not, you know, shouldn't be a spin not, you know, shouldn't be a spin not, you know, shouldn't be a spin doctor. That's not good. doctor. That's not good. doctor. That's not good. &gt;&gt; Fun little factoid. And then uh another &gt;&gt; Fun little factoid. And then uh another &gt;&gt; Fun little factoid. And then uh another note about psilocybin. I was curious as note about psilocybin. I was curious as note about psilocybin. I was curious as to why there's so few studies about LSD. to why there's so few studies about LSD. to why there's so few studies about LSD. And [snorts] uh a colleague of mine who And [snorts] uh a colleague of mine who And [snorts] uh a colleague of mine who works in this space, he runs clinical works in this space, he runs clinical works in this space, he runs clinical trials at UCSF said, "Oh, it's very trials at UCSF said, "Oh, it's very trials at UCSF said, "Oh, it's very straightforward. Most of the studies on straightforward. Most of the studies on straightforward. Most of the studies on LSD clinical trials that is are done in LSD clinical trials that is are done in LSD clinical trials that is are done in Switzerland. Um because the LSD trip can Switzerland. Um because the LSD trip can Switzerland. Um because the LSD trip can last up to 13 hours and they'll work last up to 13 hours and they'll work last up to 13 hours and they'll work very long hard hours. In the United very long hard hours. In the United very long hard hours. In the United States, it's hard to get the staff States, it's hard to get the staff States, it's hard to get the staff to come in 2 hours before a 4 to 8 hour to come in 2 hours before a 4 to 8 hour to come in 2 hours before a 4 to 8 hour psilocybin session and then make sure psilocybin session and then make sure psilocybin session and then make sure that the person is okay enough and taken that the person is okay enough and taken that the person is okay enough and taken care enough to go. So um I'm not care enough to go. So um I'm not care enough to go. So um I'm not suggesting we extend uh work hours suggesting we extend uh work hours suggesting we extend uh work hours anymore than we already have [laughter] anymore than we already have [laughter] anymore than we already have [laughter] but it's kind of interesting that I but it's kind of interesting that I but it's kind of interesting that I mention it because sometimes practical mention it because sometimes practical mention it because sometimes practical issues drive the science. It's just as issues drive the science. It's just as issues drive the science. It's just as simple as that. simple as that. simple as that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It will drive also a health care &gt;&gt; Yeah. It will drive also a health care &gt;&gt; Yeah. It will drive also a health care system. So if it took that long to do system. So if it took that long to do system. So if it took that long to do the odds that this would ever be scaled the odds that this would ever be scaled the odds that this would ever be scaled up in health system are pretty low. up in health system are pretty low. up in health system are pretty low. Right. So there are real reasons Right. So there are real reasons Right. So there are real reasons why if you can do something in less why if you can do something in less why if you can do something in less time, you do it. time, you do it. time, you do it. &gt;&gt; And there is a movement now, meaning a &gt;&gt; And there is a movement now, meaning a &gt;&gt; And there is a movement now, meaning a solid effort in laboratories to figure solid effort in laboratories to figure solid effort in laboratories to figure out whether or not they're non out whether or not they're non out whether or not they're non hallucinogenic, non- psychedelic hallucinogenic, non- psychedelic hallucinogenic, non- psychedelic experience related compounds within experience related compounds within experience related compounds within these compounds. Meaning the psychedelic these compounds. Meaning the psychedelic these compounds. Meaning the psychedelic experience may not actually be critical experience may not actually be critical experience may not actually be critical to the anti-depressant effect. to the anti-depressant effect. to the anti-depressant effect. &gt;&gt; Right. No. So that's one of the &gt;&gt; Right. No. So that's one of the &gt;&gt; Right. No. So that's one of the interesting things about ketaman like if interesting things about ketaman like if interesting things about ketaman like if you blocked you know our late you blocked you know our late you blocked you know our late great friend Nolan Williams you know was great friend Nolan Williams you know was great friend Nolan Williams you know was looking at like if you could block like looking at like if you could block like looking at like if you could block like say with a some kind of nrexone molecule say with a some kind of nrexone molecule say with a some kind of nrexone molecule block the uh you know the blink of block the uh you know the blink of block the uh you know the blink of lights and the visions and all that lights and the visions and all that lights and the visions and all that stuff would it still have the same stuff would it still have the same stuff would it still have the same effect that is a great question uh you effect that is a great question uh you effect that is a great question uh you know for science to figure out now some know for science to figure out now some know for science to figure out now some people say but that I like that part people say but that I like that part people say but that I like that part it's like okay but a lot of people find it's like okay but a lot of people find it's like okay but a lot of people find that actually pretty upsetting but if that actually pretty upsetting but if that actually pretty upsetting but if you know they could take ketamin and not you know they could take ketamin and not you know they could take ketamin and not have that kind of vivid good have that kind of vivid good have that kind of vivid good dissociational stuff and they were dissociational stuff and they were dissociational stuff and they were depressed and help them. That would be a depressed and help them. That would be a depressed and help them. That would be a good medicine to have, right? good medicine to have, right? good medicine to have, right? &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this and on other podcasts before on this and on other podcasts before on this and on other podcasts about the fact that getting a great about the fact that getting a great about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of night's sleep is the foundation of night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. When we aren't getting performance. When we aren't getting performance. When we aren't getting great sleep on a consistent basis, great sleep on a consistent basis, great sleep on a consistent basis, everything suffers. And when we are everything suffers. And when we are everything suffers. And when we are sleeping well and enough, our mental sleeping well and enough, our mental sleeping well and enough, our mental health, physical health, and performance health, physical health, and performance health, physical health, and performance in all endeavors improve marketkedly. in all endeavors improve marketkedly. in all endeavors improve marketkedly. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep huge difference in the quality of sleep huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is that you get each night. How soft it is that you get each night. How soft it is or how firm it is all play into your or how firm it is all play into your or how firm it is all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your comfort and need to be tailored to your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the unique sleep needs. If you go to the unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief Helix website, you can take a brief Helix website, you can take a brief two-minute quiz and it will ask you two-minute quiz and it will ask you two-minute quiz and it will ask you questions such as, do you sleep on your questions such as, do you sleep on your questions such as, do you sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? to run hot or cold during the night? to run hot or cold during the night? Things of that sort. You answer those Things of that sort. You answer those Things of that sort. You answer those questions and Helix will match you to questions and Helix will match you to questions and Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that the ideal mattress for you. For me, that the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress. turned out to be the Dusk mattress. turned out to be the Dusk mattress. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress for more than 4 years now, and it's been for more than 4 years now, and it's been for more than 4 years now, and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've far and away the best sleep that I've far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. If you'd like to try Helix, ever had. If you'd like to try Helix, ever had. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 27% off their entire site. giving up to 27% off their entire site. giving up to 27% off their entire site. Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, which allows you to use your HSA FSA which allows you to use your HSA FSA which allows you to use your HSA FSA dollars to shop Helix's award-winning dollars to shop Helix's award-winning dollars to shop Helix's award-winning mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's helix.com/huberman to get up to 27% off. SSRIs, to get up to 27% off. SSRIs, to get up to 27% off. SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and all the other anti-depressants have and all the other anti-depressants have and all the other anti-depressants have gotten kind of a bad rap in recent gotten kind of a bad rap in recent gotten kind of a bad rap in recent years. Uh there's the idea that all the years. Uh there's the idea that all the years. Uh there's the idea that all the school shooters were on SSRIs. Um school shooters were on SSRIs. Um school shooters were on SSRIs. Um whether or not that can be separated whether or not that can be separated whether or not that can be separated from the data on how many kids are on from the data on how many kids are on from the data on how many kids are on SSRIs, you'll tell us. Um SSRIs, you'll tell us. Um SSRIs, you'll tell us. Um talk therapy, SSRIs, and other talk therapy, SSRIs, and other talk therapy, SSRIs, and other prescription anti-depressants, prescription anti-depressants, prescription anti-depressants, psilocybin, and any psychedelic for the psilocybin, and any psychedelic for the psilocybin, and any psychedelic for the treatment of depression and on and on treatment of depression and on and on treatment of depression and on and on all funnel into brain plasticity. If I all funnel into brain plasticity. If I all funnel into brain plasticity. If I sit in your office and I tell you what's sit in your office and I tell you what's sit in your office and I tell you what's bothering me and you give me insights bothering me and you give me insights bothering me and you give me insights and over time I work with that, that's and over time I work with that, that's and over time I work with that, that's and I get better. It's the consequence and I get better. It's the consequence and I get better. It's the consequence of brain plasticity that so I think of brain plasticity that so I think of brain plasticity that so I think of all of these things whether or not all of these things whether or not all of these things whether or not pharmacologic or talk therapy or pharmacologic or talk therapy or pharmacologic or talk therapy or combination or TMS combination or TMS combination or TMS &gt;&gt; or TMS transcranial magnetic &gt;&gt; or TMS transcranial magnetic &gt;&gt; or TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation. Thank you. Yeah, it's stimulation. Thank you. Yeah, it's stimulation. Thank you. Yeah, it's all about rewiring brain circuits. And all about rewiring brain circuits. And all about rewiring brain circuits. And so it's not about the psychedelic so it's not about the psychedelic so it's not about the psychedelic experience. Where I get frustrated is experience. Where I get frustrated is experience. Where I get frustrated is when people say, "Oh, you know, these when people say, "Oh, you know, these when people say, "Oh, you know, these things open plasticity." I think to things open plasticity." I think to things open plasticity." I think to myself, oh my god, somebody who studied myself, oh my god, somebody who studied myself, oh my god, somebody who studied plasticity, David Hub and Torrren plasticity, David Hub and Torrren plasticity, David Hub and Torrren Weasel, who essentially got the Nobel Weasel, who essentially got the Nobel Weasel, who essentially got the Nobel Prize for it, were my scientific Prize for it, were my scientific Prize for it, were my scientific great-grandparents, like they would be I great-grandparents, like they would be I great-grandparents, like they would be I think Torrren's still alive, but David think Torrren's still alive, but David think Torrren's still alive, but David would be rolling over in his grave or would be rolling over in his grave or would be rolling over in his grave or you know, like no, like you don't want you know, like no, like you don't want you know, like no, like you don't want to open plasticity because it can go in to open plasticity because it can go in to open plasticity because it can go in any direction. You want directed any direction. You want directed any direction. You want directed plasticity &gt;&gt; and so while talk therapy is slower, &gt;&gt; and so while talk therapy is slower, &gt;&gt; and so while talk therapy is slower, while um TMS might be slower, I mean, while um TMS might be slower, I mean, while um TMS might be slower, I mean, plasticity needs to be funneled. It just plasticity needs to be funneled. It just plasticity needs to be funneled. It just can't be let's just open plasticity. And can't be let's just open plasticity. And can't be let's just open plasticity. And I think people are very intrigued by the I think people are very intrigued by the I think people are very intrigued by the idea of just opening plasticity as if idea of just opening plasticity as if idea of just opening plasticity as if that's going to solve the issue. that's going to solve the issue. that's going to solve the issue. &gt;&gt; Plasticity, which we have naturally the &gt;&gt; Plasticity, which we have naturally the &gt;&gt; Plasticity, which we have naturally the most when we're young, is most when we're young, is most when we're young, is absolutely a two-edged sword. So, you absolutely a two-edged sword. So, you absolutely a two-edged sword. So, you know, if you try to learn, you know, if you try to learn, you know, if you try to learn, you know, French at my age, it's just really French at my age, it's just really French at my age, it's just really hard, you know, to pick up really hard, you know, to pick up really hard, you know, to pick up that new habit. Whereas, if you, you that new habit. Whereas, if you, you that new habit. Whereas, if you, you know, grow up speaking it or you as or know, grow up speaking it or you as or know, grow up speaking it or you as or you try to learn as a second language you try to learn as a second language you try to learn as a second language teenager, you you're going to have much teenager, you you're going to have much teenager, you you're going to have much more capacity to get it and retain more capacity to get it and retain more capacity to get it and retain it. That's true. Is also true that if it. That's true. Is also true that if it. That's true. Is also true that if you start smoking cigarettes in my age, you start smoking cigarettes in my age, you start smoking cigarettes in my age, you probably will not get addicted. And you probably will not get addicted. And you probably will not get addicted. And if you start smoking cigarettes when if you start smoking cigarettes when if you start smoking cigarettes when you're 13, you almost certainly will. Is you're 13, you almost certainly will. Is you're 13, you almost certainly will. Is that true? that true? that true? &gt;&gt; Yes. Same thing. Plasticity. Almost all &gt;&gt; Yes. Same thing. Plasticity. Almost all &gt;&gt; Yes. Same thing. Plasticity. Almost all addictions start when people are young, addictions start when people are young, addictions start when people are young, you know, and you can I mean, could you know, and you can I mean, could you know, and you can I mean, could you think of it as a learned, you know, it think of it as a learned, you know, it think of it as a learned, you know, it is it is a you know, it's maladaptive it is it is a you know, it's maladaptive it is it is a you know, it's maladaptive learning, but it is learning, you know, learning, but it is learning, you know, learning, but it is learning, you know, that you know, you acquire those that you know, you acquire those that you know, you acquire those things and you stay all the way through. things and you stay all the way through. things and you stay all the way through. It's why, you know, some sometimes older It's why, you know, some sometimes older It's why, you know, some sometimes older people I can remember getting mad like people I can remember getting mad like people I can remember getting mad like shows they like got cancelled and people shows they like got cancelled and people shows they like got cancelled and people were watching them. I remember the show were watching them. I remember the show were watching them. I remember the show because my parents watched it. Dr. because my parents watched it. Dr. because my parents watched it. Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman. Well, why? Quinn, Medicine Woman. Well, why? Quinn, Medicine Woman. Well, why? Because old people watched it and Because old people watched it and Because old people watched it and advertisers don't want to pay for old advertisers don't want to pay for old advertisers don't want to pay for old people. The advertisers want young people. The advertisers want young people. The advertisers want young people. &gt;&gt; Lifetime users. &gt;&gt; Lifetime users. &gt;&gt; Lifetime users. &gt;&gt; That's right. And to instill those &gt;&gt; That's right. And to instill those &gt;&gt; That's right. And to instill those habits when people are young, okay, is habits when people are young, okay, is habits when people are young, okay, is how you get them to do it for 50 years. how you get them to do it for 50 years. how you get them to do it for 50 years. You can't really persuade many people my You can't really persuade many people my You can't really persuade many people my age to start eating Cheerios or Frosted age to start eating Cheerios or Frosted age to start eating Cheerios or Frosted Flakes or whatever, but you start it Flakes or whatever, but you start it Flakes or whatever, but you start it when people are young. And that just when people are young. And that just when people are young. And that just underscores the point you're making of underscores the point you're making of underscores the point you're making of like it plasticity isn't good or bad. like it plasticity isn't good or bad. like it plasticity isn't good or bad. It's it's this capacity the brain has It's it's this capacity the brain has It's it's this capacity the brain has and it can be used in very different and it can be used in very different and it can be used in very different ways. &gt;&gt; Maybe it explains why for despite some &gt;&gt; Maybe it explains why for despite some &gt;&gt; Maybe it explains why for despite some minimal effort, I can't get addicted to minimal effort, I can't get addicted to minimal effort, I can't get addicted to TikTok. It just it's aversive to TikTok. It just it's aversive to TikTok. It just it's aversive to me, thank goodness. me, thank goodness. me, thank goodness. &gt;&gt; But maybe if you'd started when you were &gt;&gt; But maybe if you'd started when you were &gt;&gt; But maybe if you'd started when you were 13, it didn't exist then. But you know 13, it didn't exist then. But you know 13, it didn't exist then. But you know if it did you might have you might have if it did you might have you might have if it did you might have you might have found it far more far more engaging uh found it far more far more engaging uh found it far more far more engaging uh and picked up that habit. and picked up that habit. and picked up that habit. &gt;&gt; Chances are I mean based on what I &gt;&gt; Chances are I mean based on what I &gt;&gt; Chances are I mean based on what I observe uh and knowing myself. You observe uh and knowing myself. You observe uh and knowing myself. You mentioned ketamine. Ketamine is an mentioned ketamine. Ketamine is an mentioned ketamine. Ketamine is an interesting one. A not a psychedelic interesting one. A not a psychedelic interesting one. A not a psychedelic dissociative anesthetic has some proven dissociative anesthetic has some proven dissociative anesthetic has some proven benefit for depression although maybe benefit for depression although maybe benefit for depression although maybe transient &gt;&gt; but high abuse potential. And here in &gt;&gt; but high abuse potential. And here in &gt;&gt; but high abuse potential. And here in Los Angeles, not six months goes by Los Angeles, not six months goes by Los Angeles, not six months goes by without hearing about some famous person without hearing about some famous person without hearing about some famous person dying of ketamine, which means that a dying of ketamine, which means that a dying of ketamine, which means that a lot more [clears throat] lot more [clears throat] lot more [clears throat] non-famous people are dying of ketamine, non-famous people are dying of ketamine, non-famous people are dying of ketamine, and we're not hearing about it. and we're not hearing about it. and we're not hearing about it. &gt;&gt; That's a good point. Yeah. And I don't &gt;&gt; That's a good point. Yeah. And I don't &gt;&gt; That's a good point. Yeah. And I don't know if you can if you can post know if you can if you can post know if you can if you can post articles, but we did a review Todd articles, but we did a review Todd articles, but we did a review Todd Corside and some other colleagues of the Corside and some other colleagues of the Corside and some other colleagues of the potential therapeutic effect of this potential therapeutic effect of this potential therapeutic effect of this whole drugs. And and the thing about whole drugs. And and the thing about whole drugs. And and the thing about ketamine that struck me, yes, it is FDA ketamine that struck me, yes, it is FDA ketamine that struck me, yes, it is FDA approved for treatment resistant approved for treatment resistant approved for treatment resistant depression. So, it is approved. There's depression. So, it is approved. There's depression. So, it is approved. There's a lot of negative trials for depression. a lot of negative trials for depression. a lot of negative trials for depression. I mean it didn't like vault over the you I mean it didn't like vault over the you I mean it didn't like vault over the you know efficacy thing. It cleared it. know efficacy thing. It cleared it. know efficacy thing. It cleared it. There are some positive trials and I There are some positive trials and I There are some positive trials and I can say I know a couple people who I can say I know a couple people who I can say I know a couple people who I judgment I trust said it was very judgment I trust said it was very judgment I trust said it was very valuable to them in a deep depression valuable to them in a deep depression valuable to them in a deep depression but um I didn't view it as quite the but um I didn't view it as quite the but um I didn't view it as quite the knockout I thought it was going to be knockout I thought it was going to be knockout I thought it was going to be before I read all these studies. And before I read all these studies. And before I read all these studies. And then you do have the other problem. then you do have the other problem. then you do have the other problem. It is addictive. It also and so we have It is addictive. It also and so we have It is addictive. It also and so we have a lot of people getting addicted and a lot of people getting addicted and a lot of people getting addicted and then also the bladder you know damage then also the bladder you know damage then also the bladder you know damage you get from it. You know, you get young you get from it. You know, you get young you get from it. You know, you get young people with, you know, sort of, you people with, you know, sort of, you people with, you know, sort of, you know, 60 year old bladders from ketamine know, 60 year old bladders from ketamine know, 60 year old bladders from ketamine and like that is, you know, most and like that is, you know, most and like that is, you know, most urologists have seen this now. It's like urologists have seen this now. It's like urologists have seen this now. It's like why is someone at 25 coming in with why is someone at 25 coming in with why is someone at 25 coming in with this? It's like because their bladder this? It's like because their bladder this? It's like because their bladder has been damaged by ketamine. So those has been damaged by ketamine. So those has been damaged by ketamine. So those are significant, you know, side effects. are significant, you know, side effects. are significant, you know, side effects. So not would not be the thing I would So not would not be the thing I would So not would not be the thing I would jump to if I if I had treat resist jump to if I if I had treat resist jump to if I if I had treat resist depression, which has got to be said is depression, which has got to be said is depression, which has got to be said is a terribly, you know, challenging, you a terribly, you know, challenging, you a terribly, you know, challenging, you know, condition to deal with. I'd be far know, condition to deal with. I'd be far know, condition to deal with. I'd be far more likely to actually do the same more likely to actually do the same more likely to actually do the same protocol that Nolian Williams developed protocol that Nolian Williams developed protocol that Nolian Williams developed with RTMS because the effects of with RTMS because the effects of with RTMS because the effects of that for treatment resist are so much that for treatment resist are so much that for treatment resist are so much clearer in my view and the downsides are clearer in my view and the downsides are clearer in my view and the downsides are far as I can see virtually nil. Thanks far as I can see virtually nil. Thanks far as I can see virtually nil. Thanks for bringing it up again. TMS for bringing it up again. TMS for bringing it up again. TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation is a transcranial magnetic stimulation is a transcranial magnetic stimulation is a non-invasive brain stimulation that can non-invasive brain stimulation that can non-invasive brain stimulation that can either activate or decrease neural either activate or decrease neural either activate or decrease neural activity in specific brain areas. Right. activity in specific brain areas. Right. activity in specific brain areas. Right. &gt;&gt; Um very good data on this. um how soon &gt;&gt; Um very good data on this. um how soon &gt;&gt; Um very good data on this. um how soon will that be available to folks will that be available to folks will that be available to folks in all parts of the country in the world in all parts of the country in the world in all parts of the country in the world &gt;&gt; in our country? I mean RTMS for &gt;&gt; in our country? I mean RTMS for &gt;&gt; in our country? I mean RTMS for depression is approved, you know, and so depression is approved, you know, and so depression is approved, you know, and so you can get it, you know, at clinics you can get it, you know, at clinics you can get it, you know, at clinics that have this technology. These are big that have this technology. These are big that have this technology. These are big expensive machines, so I'm sure there's expensive machines, so I'm sure there's expensive machines, so I'm sure there's lots of places where they're not local. lots of places where they're not local. lots of places where they're not local. Um but um you know, yeah, it's uh Um but um you know, yeah, it's uh Um but um you know, yeah, it's uh it's covered. I think Medicare actually it's covered. I think Medicare actually it's covered. I think Medicare actually covers it. Um whether they cover the covers it. Um whether they cover the covers it. Um whether they cover the specific protocol that Nolan did, I'm specific protocol that Nolan did, I'm specific protocol that Nolan did, I'm honestly not sure. you know, because honestly not sure. you know, because honestly not sure. you know, because there was a lower intensity one and there was a lower intensity one and there was a lower intensity one and Nolan's, you know, genius was to Nolan's, you know, genius was to Nolan's, you know, genius was to compress this treatment. So, people compress this treatment. So, people compress this treatment. So, people would come in, you know, five days would come in, you know, five days would come in, you know, five days in a row and have 10 minutes on, 50 in a row and have 10 minutes on, 50 in a row and have 10 minutes on, 50 minutes off, I believe that's the minutes off, I believe that's the minutes off, I believe that's the thing uh the rate all day long, 5 thing uh the rate all day long, 5 thing uh the rate all day long, 5 days, and uh at a with a theta burst days, and uh at a with a theta burst days, and uh at a with a theta burst setting for the RTMS. And you know, I've setting for the RTMS. And you know, I've setting for the RTMS. And you know, I've seen some people's lives just absolutely seen some people's lives just absolutely seen some people's lives just absolutely changed by that. And you can you can see changed by that. And you can you can see changed by that. And you can you can see his tri I mean, it's a trial. It's a his tri I mean, it's a trial. It's a his tri I mean, it's a trial. It's a good trial. Unlike with psychedelics, good trial. Unlike with psychedelics, good trial. Unlike with psychedelics, you really can fool people that they're you really can fool people that they're you really can fool people that they're getting RTMS. You know, it's always getting RTMS. You know, it's always getting RTMS. You know, it's always tough to interpret psychedelic vision tough to interpret psychedelic vision tough to interpret psychedelic vision because everybody knows when they've because everybody knows when they've because everybody knows when they've gotten the psychedelic drug. gotten the psychedelic drug. gotten the psychedelic drug. &gt;&gt; The people in the control experiment &gt;&gt; The people in the control experiment &gt;&gt; The people in the control experiment know they're in the control experiment. know they're in the control experiment. know they're in the control experiment. &gt;&gt; That's correct. But not true in RTMS. &gt;&gt; That's correct. But not true in RTMS. &gt;&gt; That's correct. But not true in RTMS. You you can put these coils on the You you can put these coils on the You you can put these coils on the head. I've actually tried it and it head. I've actually tried it and it head. I've actually tried it and it feels like something's happening and feels like something's happening and feels like something's happening and it's just a sham. And when you ask it's just a sham. And when you ask it's just a sham. And when you ask people again, guess which condition uh people again, guess which condition uh people again, guess which condition uh they're in, they can't guess. So um they're in, they can't guess. So um they're in, they can't guess. So um these are this is really some good these are this is really some good these are this is really some good science and that that's where I would go science and that that's where I would go science and that that's where I would go next if I were I would look at the saint next if I were I would look at the saint next if I were I would look at the saint protocol is the name of it maybe we can protocol is the name of it maybe we can protocol is the name of it maybe we can I don't know if we can put I don't know if we can put I don't know if we can put &gt;&gt; yeah we have links we'll put links to &gt;&gt; yeah we have links we'll put links to &gt;&gt; yeah we have links we'll put links to any papers any outlets you know I any papers any outlets you know I any papers any outlets you know I hear from a lot of people with hear from a lot of people with hear from a lot of people with &gt;&gt; um depression issues people have become &gt;&gt; um depression issues people have become &gt;&gt; um depression issues people have become very wary of SSRIs uh because of the very wary of SSRIs uh because of the very wary of SSRIs uh because of the side effect profiles probably also side effect profiles probably also side effect profiles probably also because of what they've heard because of what they've heard because of what they've heard &gt;&gt; um I remind people that um SSRIs have &gt;&gt; um I remind people that um SSRIs have &gt;&gt; um I remind people that um SSRIs have been very helpful to the community been very helpful to the community been very helpful to the community of people who suffer from true OCD. Not of people who suffer from true OCD. Not of people who suffer from true OCD. Not like, oh, they're so OCD. People who like, oh, they're so OCD. People who like, oh, they're so OCD. People who have debilitating levels of obsess of have debilitating levels of obsess of have debilitating levels of obsess of obsessions, excuse me, and compulsions. obsessions, excuse me, and compulsions. obsessions, excuse me, and compulsions. So, I don't like to demonize any So, I don't like to demonize any So, I don't like to demonize any compound. &gt;&gt; No, we shouldn't do that. There's lots &gt;&gt; No, we shouldn't do that. There's lots &gt;&gt; No, we shouldn't do that. There's lots of people who benefit from SSRI. There's of people who benefit from SSRI. There's of people who benefit from SSRI. There's no question. no question. no question. &gt;&gt; But maybe uh TMS would be something to &gt;&gt; But maybe uh TMS would be something to &gt;&gt; But maybe uh TMS would be something to where people would want to explore. But, where people would want to explore. But, where people would want to explore. But, um, as long as we're on SSRIs, um, do um, as long as we're on SSRIs, um, do um, as long as we're on SSRIs, um, do SSRIs make people shoot other people or SSRIs make people shoot other people or SSRIs make people shoot other people or themselves? &gt;&gt; No. I don't believe that the mass &gt;&gt; No. I don't believe that the mass &gt;&gt; No. I don't believe that the mass shooting thing. Um, I mean it doesn't shooting thing. Um, I mean it doesn't shooting thing. Um, I mean it doesn't fit the data where mass shootings are. I fit the data where mass shootings are. I fit the data where mass shootings are. I mean, there was just a mass shooting in mean, there was just a mass shooting in mean, there was just a mass shooting in Australia. Think that is so rare that Australia. Think that is so rare that Australia. Think that is so rare that you see these in developed countries you see these in developed countries you see these in developed countries other than the United States. That was other than the United States. That was other than the United States. That was their first mass shooting in 30 years. their first mass shooting in 30 years. their first mass shooting in 30 years. There's plenty of people take SSRIs in There's plenty of people take SSRIs in There's plenty of people take SSRIs in Australia. Why weren't there mass Australia. Why weren't there mass Australia. Why weren't there mass shootings? Europe didn't let many people shootings? Europe didn't let many people shootings? Europe didn't let many people take SSRIs. They don't have the level of take SSRIs. They don't have the level of take SSRIs. They don't have the level of mass shootings. So, that I don't think mass shootings. So, that I don't think mass shootings. So, that I don't think that is the explanatory variable. I that is the explanatory variable. I that is the explanatory variable. I mean, I think the explanatory variable mean, I think the explanatory variable mean, I think the explanatory variable is that it's extremely easy to get is that it's extremely easy to get is that it's extremely easy to get highowered weaponry in our country and highowered weaponry in our country and highowered weaponry in our country and it's harder pretty much in the rest of it's harder pretty much in the rest of it's harder pretty much in the rest of the developed world. the developed world. the developed world. &gt;&gt; Not pushing back for sake of pushing &gt;&gt; Not pushing back for sake of pushing &gt;&gt; Not pushing back for sake of pushing back, but I I've seen data, I don't know back, but I I've seen data, I don't know back, but I I've seen data, I don't know how solid the data are, uh that how solid the data are, uh that how solid the data are, uh that something like 70 plus% of the something like 70 plus% of the something like 70 plus% of the prescription drugs for depression are prescription drugs for depression are prescription drugs for depression are consumed by the United States. So that consumed by the United States. So that consumed by the United States. So that the relative percentages of a the relative percentages of a the relative percentages of a population maybe that's a better way to population maybe that's a better way to population maybe that's a better way to frame it taking SSRIs is much frame it taking SSRIs is much frame it taking SSRIs is much higher in the United States than it is higher in the United States than it is higher in the United States than it is say in um northern Europe or in say in um northern Europe or in say in um northern Europe or in Australia. So yes they take SSRIs but at Australia. So yes they take SSRIs but at Australia. So yes they take SSRIs but at a much lower frequency. a much lower frequency. a much lower frequency. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But you would you would not go 30 &gt;&gt; Yeah. But you would you would not go 30 &gt;&gt; Yeah. But you would you would not go 30 if there were significant risks there if there were significant risks there if there were significant risks there you wouldn't go 30 years without a mass you wouldn't go 30 years without a mass you wouldn't go 30 years without a mass shooting in a country Australia what shooting in a country Australia what shooting in a country Australia what does it have 25 30 million people in it. does it have 25 30 million people in it. does it have 25 30 million people in it. I mean, you know, e even at a lower I mean, you know, e even at a lower I mean, you know, e even at a lower rate, there would be the disparity rate, there would be the disparity rate, there would be the disparity is so huge in where mass shootings occur is so huge in where mass shootings occur is so huge in where mass shootings occur that that's just not going to be the, that that's just not going to be the, that that's just not going to be the, you know, the likely explanatory you know, the likely explanatory you know, the likely explanatory variable. &gt;&gt; What about suicides? &gt;&gt; What about suicides? &gt;&gt; What about suicides? &gt;&gt; There is some worry about adolescence on &gt;&gt; There is some worry about adolescence on &gt;&gt; There is some worry about adolescence on SSRIs. This has been a really SSRIs. This has been a really SSRIs. This has been a really hard-fought, you know, debated issue for hard-fought, you know, debated issue for hard-fought, you know, debated issue for years and it's tough because years and it's tough because years and it's tough because depression of course raises suicide depression of course raises suicide depression of course raises suicide risk, right? So you by definition if risk, right? So you by definition if risk, right? So you by definition if someone's getting an SSRI they already someone's getting an SSRI they already someone's getting an SSRI they already have some risk present. I think have some risk present. I think have some risk present. I think there's some legitimate worry with there's some legitimate worry with there's some legitimate worry with teenagers I would say it's nonzero but teenagers I would say it's nonzero but teenagers I would say it's nonzero but to be honest it's not completely in my to be honest it's not completely in my to be honest it's not completely in my wheelhouse. So I'm just going to leave wheelhouse. So I'm just going to leave wheelhouse. So I'm just going to leave it at that. Uh there are people who've it at that. Uh there are people who've it at that. Uh there are people who've worked on this uh um much more uh deeply worked on this uh um much more uh deeply worked on this uh um much more uh deeply than I am. Still though I would say than I am. Still though I would say than I am. Still though I would say there are many teenagers on these there are many teenagers on these there are many teenagers on these medications who benefit from them also. medications who benefit from them also. medications who benefit from them also. There's no doubt about that. There's no doubt about that. There's no doubt about that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And folks who are interested in &gt;&gt; Yeah. And folks who are interested in &gt;&gt; Yeah. And folks who are interested in this, I'm working on a on an episode this, I'm working on a on an episode this, I'm working on a on an episode with a guest about some of these with a guest about some of these with a guest about some of these long-term effects of SSRIs that some long-term effects of SSRIs that some long-term effects of SSRIs that some people seem to experience. There there people seem to experience. There there people seem to experience. There there is a cohort of people out there. Um this is a cohort of people out there. Um this is a cohort of people out there. Um this is one of the great things about the is one of the great things about the is one of the great things about the internet who have rallied together and internet who have rallied together and internet who have rallied together and saying, "Hey, you know, we have the same saying, "Hey, you know, we have the same saying, "Hey, you know, we have the same constellation of symptoms. Uh we don't constellation of symptoms. Uh we don't constellation of symptoms. Uh we don't have any bias against the medical have any bias against the medical have any bias against the medical industry, but we were prescribed SS industry, but we were prescribed SS industry, but we were prescribed SS SSRIs in uh in our teen years and early SSRIs in uh in our teen years and early SSRIs in uh in our teen years and early 20s." And there's a constellation of 20s." And there's a constellation of 20s." And there's a constellation of um mainly sexual side effects and um mainly sexual side effects and um mainly sexual side effects and mood related side effects that don't mood related side effects that don't mood related side effects that don't seem to resolve even after coming off. seem to resolve even after coming off. seem to resolve even after coming off. We also see this with finasteride which We also see this with finasteride which We also see this with finasteride which was used to treat baldness. And our was used to treat baldness. And our was used to treat baldness. And our colleague uh Mike Eisenberg um colleague uh Mike Eisenberg um colleague uh Mike Eisenberg um &gt;&gt; came on here and said look the data &gt;&gt; came on here and said look the data &gt;&gt; came on here and said look the data aren't really there but I hear from a aren't really there but I hear from a aren't really there but I hear from a lot of young guys who were given these lot of young guys who were given these lot of young guys who were given these you know anti-hair loss drugs and they you know anti-hair loss drugs and they you know anti-hair loss drugs and they come off the drugs and they're still come off the drugs and they're still come off the drugs and they're still experiencing debilitating sexual side experiencing debilitating sexual side experiencing debilitating sexual side effects. And so it is true that the effects. And so it is true that the effects. And so it is true that the medical profession sometimes takes 10 20 medical profession sometimes takes 10 20 medical profession sometimes takes 10 20 years to catch up to what many people years to catch up to what many people years to catch up to what many people are experiencing. So I'm not trying are experiencing. So I'm not trying are experiencing. So I'm not trying to make a an anti-SSRI statement here, to make a an anti-SSRI statement here, to make a an anti-SSRI statement here, but I think there is but I think there is but I think there is &gt;&gt; there are people walking around out &gt;&gt; there are people walking around out &gt;&gt; there are people walking around out there that are convinced one way or the there that are convinced one way or the there that are convinced one way or the other that SSRI mess them up pretty bad other that SSRI mess them up pretty bad other that SSRI mess them up pretty bad and they have loud voices. And so I and they have loud voices. And so I and they have loud voices. And so I think that's where the concern comes think that's where the concern comes think that's where the concern comes from. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I honestly don't know the you &gt;&gt; Yeah. I honestly don't know the you &gt;&gt; Yeah. I honestly don't know the you know uh what the evidence is in know uh what the evidence is in know uh what the evidence is in that particular case. I will say just that particular case. I will say just that particular case. I will say just something very general about medications something very general about medications something very general about medications how we approve them. They're approved on how we approve them. They're approved on how we approve them. They're approved on short-term trials. I mean, if you look short-term trials. I mean, if you look short-term trials. I mean, if you look at like the typical trial for opioids at like the typical trial for opioids at like the typical trial for opioids and pain, you know, it's like 9 weeks or and pain, you know, it's like 9 weeks or and pain, you know, it's like 9 weeks or 12 weeks. 12 weeks. 12 weeks. &gt;&gt; And there's lots of medications, you &gt;&gt; And there's lots of medications, you &gt;&gt; And there's lots of medications, you know, and opioids are a good example know, and opioids are a good example know, and opioids are a good example that doesn't necessarily mean that doesn't necessarily mean that doesn't necessarily mean that taking them for a year gives you the taking them for a year gives you the taking them for a year gives you the same effects because you, you know, for same effects because you, you know, for same effects because you, you know, for example, you become tolerant to them or example, you become tolerant to them or example, you become tolerant to them or you might become addicted to them and you might become addicted to them and you might become addicted to them and all that. And that is a general just all that. And that is a general just all that. And that is a general just challenge of how we regulate these challenge of how we regulate these challenge of how we regulate these medications. There are post marketing medications. There are post marketing medications. There are post marketing studies, you know, that are done, studies, you know, that are done, studies, you know, that are done, but um particularly if something is a uh but um particularly if something is a uh but um particularly if something is a uh complicated and rare uh from a widely complicated and rare uh from a widely complicated and rare uh from a widely used medication, it it's hard to used medication, it it's hard to used medication, it it's hard to figure that out. I mean, doctors will figure that out. I mean, doctors will figure that out. I mean, doctors will make reports that get, you know, make reports that get, you know, make reports that get, you know, aggregated up, but um that's hard that's aggregated up, but um that's hard that's aggregated up, but um that's hard that's hard to figure out. Before moving on hard to figure out. Before moving on hard to figure out. Before moving on from the discussion about psychedelics, from the discussion about psychedelics, from the discussion about psychedelics, our late and indeed great colleague our late and indeed great colleague our late and indeed great colleague Nolan Williams. Sadly, he passed um a Nolan Williams. Sadly, he passed um a Nolan Williams. Sadly, he passed um a few months ago. Um we may talk about few months ago. Um we may talk about few months ago. Um we may talk about that later, maybe not. Either way, I'll that later, maybe not. Either way, I'll that later, maybe not. Either way, I'll put a link to his uh information because put a link to his uh information because put a link to his uh information because he's a critical figure in this general he's a critical figure in this general he's a critical figure in this general space around the treatment of space around the treatment of space around the treatment of depression. Um because of his work on depression. Um because of his work on depression. Um because of his work on TMS, the Saint protocol as it's referred TMS, the Saint protocol as it's referred TMS, the Saint protocol as it's referred to, uh as well as IEN, which is a very to, uh as well as IEN, which is a very to, uh as well as IEN, which is a very unusual psychedelic. Uh but he was unusual psychedelic. Uh but he was unusual psychedelic. Uh but he was running trials on veterans mainly taking running trials on veterans mainly taking running trials on veterans mainly taking Ibagane out of country, illegal in the Ibagane out of country, illegal in the Ibagane out of country, illegal in the United States, so he had to do it out of United States, so he had to do it out of United States, so he had to do it out of country. Um it's a 22-hour long country. Um it's a 22-hour long country. Um it's a 22-hour long psychedelic experience. Uh you have to psychedelic experience. Uh you have to psychedelic experience. Uh you have to be heart rate monitored. Nobody does be heart rate monitored. Nobody does be heart rate monitored. Nobody does this recreationally and nobody should do this recreationally and nobody should do this recreationally and nobody should do it recreationally. Sometimes it was it recreationally. Sometimes it was it recreationally. Sometimes it was followed up with DMT, sometimes no. But followed up with DMT, sometimes no. But followed up with DMT, sometimes no. But from my last discussion about Nolan from my last discussion about Nolan from my last discussion about Nolan before um he passed, it seemed like the before um he passed, it seemed like the before um he passed, it seemed like the data were very encouraging data were very encouraging data were very encouraging such that people who had veterans who such that people who had veterans who such that people who had veterans who had PTSD and/or addiction issues would had PTSD and/or addiction issues would had PTSD and/or addiction issues would do Iain once under this intense do Iain once under this intense do Iain once under this intense supervision, sometimes followed by DMT supervision, sometimes followed by DMT supervision, sometimes followed by DMT and would experience a total remission of would experience a total remission of would experience a total remission of everything bad. Frankly, they're back to everything bad. Frankly, they're back to everything bad. Frankly, they're back to life. And it was pretty striking, at life. And it was pretty striking, at life. And it was pretty striking, at least the way it was being described. So least the way it was being described. So least the way it was being described. So much so that I was anticipating that much so that I was anticipating that much so that I was anticipating that Ibgainain would be the first FDA Ibgainain would be the first FDA Ibgainain would be the first FDA approved psychedelic in part because approved psychedelic in part because approved psychedelic in part because it's not the kind of thing you can just it's not the kind of thing you can just it's not the kind of thing you can just do hanging around with your friends and do hanging around with your friends and do hanging around with your friends and you wouldn't want to. It it involves a you wouldn't want to. It it involves a you wouldn't want to. It it involves a lot of uh scary experiences in there lot of uh scary experiences in there lot of uh scary experiences in there that one works through. What are your that one works through. What are your that one works through. What are your thoughts about the Ibagane work and thoughts about the Ibagane work and thoughts about the Ibagane work and Ibagane as a potential first through the Ibagane as a potential first through the Ibagane as a potential first through the legal door of psychedelics? Yeah. So, legal door of psychedelics? Yeah. So, legal door of psychedelics? Yeah. So, um, Nolan and I were office neighbors um, Nolan and I were office neighbors um, Nolan and I were office neighbors and I really liked him. It was a huge and I really liked him. It was a huge and I really liked him. It was a huge loss. I think he was one of the great loss. I think he was one of the great loss. I think he was one of the great psychiatrists of his generation. There's psychiatrists of his generation. There's psychiatrists of his generation. There's enormous respect for him as a person and enormous respect for him as a person and enormous respect for him as a person and as a scientist and I miss him every as a scientist and I miss him every as a scientist and I miss him every day when I walk by his office. Um, uh, I day when I walk by his office. Um, uh, I day when I walk by his office. Um, uh, I think what he did with I was really think what he did with I was really think what he did with I was really fascinating in part because he did the fascinating in part because he did the fascinating in part because he did the important thing he imaged uh, people nor important thing he imaged uh, people nor important thing he imaged uh, people nor imagage them before and afterwards and imagage them before and afterwards and imagage them before and afterwards and he was able to see a lot of these he was able to see a lot of these he was able to see a lot of these changes. And why does that matter? changes. And why does that matter? changes. And why does that matter? because you know um people you know because you know um people you know because you know um people you know there there's certain experiences people there there's certain experiences people there there's certain experiences people might have described very might have described very might have described very enthusiastically and think they're enthusiastically and think they're enthusiastically and think they're really different but they aren't in fact really different but they aren't in fact really different but they aren't in fact different but he actually documents that different but he actually documents that different but he actually documents that is different so you know I think that's is different so you know I think that's is different so you know I think that's was really groundbreaking and it's sad was really groundbreaking and it's sad was really groundbreaking and it's sad he's not going to get to continue that he's not going to get to continue that he's not going to get to continue that work the thing say is this is an open work the thing say is this is an open work the thing say is this is an open label trial with no control group so label trial with no control group so label trial with no control group so that's what we have so far so that's what we have so far so that's what we have so far so that now the thing is to do a proper that now the thing is to do a proper that now the thing is to do a proper trial you know and see, you know, trial you know and see, you know, trial you know and see, you know, there is a lot also of sort of ceremony there is a lot also of sort of ceremony there is a lot also of sort of ceremony around this. You know, it's sort of like around this. You know, it's sort of like around this. You know, it's sort of like as a colleague might describe as it's as a colleague might describe as it's as a colleague might describe as it's like the final mission for the soldiers. like the final mission for the soldiers. like the final mission for the soldiers. They go down, you know, to Mexico, they They go down, you know, to Mexico, they They go down, you know, to Mexico, they do this, there's a lot of camaraderie, do this, there's a lot of camaraderie, do this, there's a lot of camaraderie, there's a lot of other good stuff packed there's a lot of other good stuff packed there's a lot of other good stuff packed around it. And so like is that part of around it. And so like is that part of around it. And so like is that part of the therapeutic experience or is it the therapeutic experience or is it the therapeutic experience or is it entirely, you know, a chemical entirely, you know, a chemical entirely, you know, a chemical experience? That's a thing you would experience? That's a thing you would experience? That's a thing you would find out in a trial. You know, you find out in a trial. You know, you find out in a trial. You know, you would have sort of, you know, you do would have sort of, you know, you do would have sort of, you know, you do all that other stuff, but you wouldn't all that other stuff, but you wouldn't all that other stuff, but you wouldn't have the ibeine at the end. And you have the ibeine at the end. And you have the ibeine at the end. And you know, absolutely worth uh studying know, absolutely worth uh studying know, absolutely worth uh studying and uh you know, uh it newer hands will and uh you know, uh it newer hands will and uh you know, uh it newer hands will have to pick this up, but I really hope have to pick this up, but I really hope have to pick this up, but I really hope people will. people will. people will. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm very curious as to where &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm very curious as to where &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm very curious as to where that work is going to go now that work is going to go now that work is going to go now that because it really was Nolan spearheading because it really was Nolan spearheading because it really was Nolan spearheading that work, but there are people who are that work, but there are people who are that work, but there are people who are working hard to keep it, you know, going working hard to keep it, you know, going working hard to keep it, you know, going forward. Stimulants, um I'm a heavy caffeine user. um I'm a heavy caffeine user. um I'm a heavy caffeine user. &gt;&gt; Okay, &gt;&gt; Okay, &gt;&gt; Okay, &gt;&gt; my caffeine tolerance is insanely high. &gt;&gt; my caffeine tolerance is insanely high. &gt;&gt; my caffeine tolerance is insanely high. I mean, people have teased me online. I mean, people have teased me online. I mean, people have teased me online. There's no way that's true. 800 There's no way that's true. 800 There's no way that's true. 800 milligrams a day of caffeine. Child's milligrams a day of caffeine. Child's milligrams a day of caffeine. Child's play. Meaning, when I was a kid, I've play. Meaning, when I was a kid, I've play. Meaning, when I was a kid, I've got a photograph of me drinking yerba got a photograph of me drinking yerba got a photograph of me drinking yerba mate. My father's Argentine out the mate. My father's Argentine out the mate. My father's Argentine out the gourd, which is fairly um gourd, which is fairly um gourd, which is fairly um uh stimulatory, although nice even flat uh stimulatory, although nice even flat uh stimulatory, although nice even flat ride. You know, you can tell I like ride. You know, you can tell I like ride. You know, you can tell I like stimulants by the way. I talk about them stimulants by the way. I talk about them stimulants by the way. I talk about them when I was three or four years old. when I was three or four years old. when I was three or four years old. &gt;&gt; 800 milligrams of caffeine, no big deal. &gt;&gt; 800 milligrams of caffeine, no big deal. &gt;&gt; 800 milligrams of caffeine, no big deal. you know, a gram of caffeine a day. you know, a gram of caffeine a day. you know, a gram of caffeine a day. That's kind of like where I'm nearing my That's kind of like where I'm nearing my That's kind of like where I'm nearing my limit. I can drink caffeine all day my limit. I can drink caffeine all day my limit. I can drink caffeine all day long. I stop around 2 p.m. so I can long. I stop around 2 p.m. so I can long. I stop around 2 p.m. so I can sleep well. Not a problem. sleep well. Not a problem. sleep well. Not a problem. I think 90% of the world uses caffeine. I think 90% of the world uses caffeine. I think 90% of the world uses caffeine. Adult world uses caffeine. Adult world uses caffeine. Adult world uses caffeine. Is caffeine I'm asking this for my own Is caffeine I'm asking this for my own Is caffeine I'm asking this for my own reasons. Is caffeine addictive? Is it reasons. Is caffeine addictive? Is it reasons. Is caffeine addictive? Is it dangerously addictive? It makes me more dangerously addictive? It makes me more dangerously addictive? It makes me more productive. Um I love life on caffeine. productive. Um I love life on caffeine. productive. Um I love life on caffeine. I can handle life without caffeine if I can handle life without caffeine if I can handle life without caffeine if I have a flu or cold. Otherwise, I'm not have a flu or cold. Otherwise, I'm not have a flu or cold. Otherwise, I'm not interested in finding out what life interested in finding out what life interested in finding out what life without caffeine is like. without caffeine is like. without caffeine is like. &gt;&gt; I'm probably the worst person to answer &gt;&gt; I'm probably the worst person to answer &gt;&gt; I'm probably the worst person to answer this because I love coffee. And as this because I love coffee. And as this because I love coffee. And as I like to say, I don't have a problem I like to say, I don't have a problem I like to say, I don't have a problem with coffee. If I had to choose between with coffee. If I had to choose between with coffee. If I had to choose between coffee and my children, I can make that coffee and my children, I can make that coffee and my children, I can make that decision. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; But I would really miss them. [laughter] &gt;&gt; But I would really miss them. [laughter] &gt;&gt; But I would really miss them. [laughter] That one I knew that was an okay joke to That one I knew that was an okay joke to That one I knew that was an okay joke to say cuz my sons laughed when I told it say cuz my sons laughed when I told it say cuz my sons laughed when I told it to them. But um the um yeah it's a to them. But um the um yeah it's a to them. But um the um yeah it's a stimulant so it's rewarding and it is stimulant so it's rewarding and it is stimulant so it's rewarding and it is potentially addictive but you know so potentially addictive but you know so potentially addictive but you know so how what would you see if someone were how what would you see if someone were how what would you see if someone were addicted you would someone come in and addicted you would someone come in and addicted you would someone come in and says I'm drinking so much I'm wretching says I'm drinking so much I'm wretching says I'm drinking so much I'm wretching I'm having you know shooting stomach I'm having you know shooting stomach I'm having you know shooting stomach pains I can't sleep said are you going pains I can't sleep said are you going pains I can't sleep said are you going to stop and if you know I I've actually to stop and if you know I I've actually to stop and if you know I I've actually never met but perhaps there are some never met but perhaps there are some never met but perhaps there are some people said no I can't seem to stop people said no I can't seem to stop people said no I can't seem to stop using okay that would be addictive but using okay that would be addictive but using okay that would be addictive but I've never met a true what I consider a I've never met a true what I consider a I've never met a true what I consider a coffee addict uh person because coffee addict uh person because coffee addict uh person because it's not that intense of a stimulant and it's not that intense of a stimulant and it's not that intense of a stimulant and the you know the things you know you the you know the things you know you the you know the things you know you can GI symptoms things like that can GI symptoms things like that can GI symptoms things like that would be the main thing or would be the main thing or would be the main thing or jitteriness and sleeplessness but almost jitteriness and sleeplessness but almost jitteriness and sleeplessness but almost everybody who experiences those seems to everybody who experiences those seems to everybody who experiences those seems to quit um so or at least everyone I I've quit um so or at least everyone I I've quit um so or at least everyone I I've met seems to quit more generally on met seems to quit more generally on met seems to quit more generally on stimulants I have to say this is the stimulants I have to say this is the stimulants I have to say this is the biggest disappointment of my career uh biggest disappointment of my career uh biggest disappointment of my career uh what the in the addiction field I what the in the addiction field I what the in the addiction field I started my career in the late 80s and started my career in the late 80s and started my career in the late 80s and going into um uh in the lower east side going into um uh in the lower east side going into um uh in the lower east side of Detroit which was very rough uh crack of Detroit which was very rough uh crack of Detroit which was very rough uh crack cocaine is everywhere and the treatment cocaine is everywhere and the treatment cocaine is everywhere and the treatment offering to people who were addicted to offering to people who were addicted to offering to people who were addicted to crack cocaine then in the late ' 80s is crack cocaine then in the late ' 80s is crack cocaine then in the late ' 80s is not very different from what it is today not very different from what it is today not very different from what it is today uh you know which is almost 40 years uh you know which is almost 40 years uh you know which is almost 40 years later &gt;&gt; no phicotherapy at all um nothing no &gt;&gt; no phicotherapy at all um nothing no &gt;&gt; no phicotherapy at all um nothing no evidence of anything that works in evidence of anything that works in evidence of anything that works in phicotherapy um a lot of uh psychotherapies that um a lot of uh psychotherapies that um a lot of uh psychotherapies that don't really seem to work very well um don't really seem to work very well um don't really seem to work very well um you know and you know groups and stuff you know and you know groups and stuff you know and you know groups and stuff like that you know which have sort of like that you know which have sort of like that you know which have sort of like very most modest effects. I'm like very most modest effects. I'm like very most modest effects. I'm talking about therapy groups. Um that's talking about therapy groups. Um that's talking about therapy groups. Um that's not a lot of development and a lot of not a lot of development and a lot of not a lot of development and a lot of people have tried I mean they've tried people have tried I mean they've tried people have tried I mean they've tried all kinds of you know medications for all kinds of you know medications for all kinds of you know medications for stimulants and just not been able to for stimulants and just not been able to for stimulants and just not been able to succeed. The only thing that seems to succeed. The only thing that seems to succeed. The only thing that seems to work is contingency management which are work is contingency management which are work is contingency management which are these things where you uh Steve Higgins these things where you uh Steve Higgins these things where you uh Steve Higgins I think was the first person to do this I think was the first person to do this I think was the first person to do this where he showed against the idea that where he showed against the idea that where he showed against the idea that people have no control in addiction people have no control in addiction people have no control in addiction which is in fact rare. They have which is in fact rare. They have which is in fact rare. They have impaired control but not no control. He impaired control but not no control. He impaired control but not no control. He started experimenting with people started experimenting with people started experimenting with people addicted to cocaine saying, "Well, addicted to cocaine saying, "Well, addicted to cocaine saying, "Well, you're coming into treatment. How about you're coming into treatment. How about you're coming into treatment. How about tomorrow uh we'll do a ur analysis when tomorrow uh we'll do a ur analysis when tomorrow uh we'll do a ur analysis when you come in and um you know, and if it's you come in and um you know, and if it's you come in and um you know, and if it's a negative urine analysis, the first day a negative urine analysis, the first day a negative urine analysis, the first day we'll give you two bucks, and the day we'll give you two bucks, and the day we'll give you two bucks, and the day after we'll give you four bucks, the day after we'll give you four bucks, the day after we'll give you four bucks, the day after we give you eight bucks, day after we give you eight bucks, day after we give you eight bucks, day after give you 16 bucks." And he found out give you 16 bucks." And he found out give you 16 bucks." And he found out people stopped, you know, they people stopped, you know, they people stopped, you know, they wanted those rewards. And that's wanted those rewards. And that's wanted those rewards. And that's managing a contingency. You can use that managing a contingency. You can use that managing a contingency. You can use that to change stimulant uh users behavior to change stimulant uh users behavior to change stimulant uh users behavior also for other things you know like uh also for other things you know like uh also for other things you know like uh you know well if you know if you uh you know well if you know if you uh you know well if you know if you come in there's some kind of reward or come in there's some kind of reward or come in there's some kind of reward or you um if you fill out a job application you um if you fill out a job application you um if you fill out a job application there's some kind of reward that is the there's some kind of reward that is the there's some kind of reward that is the only thing that really looks good for only thing that really looks good for only thing that really looks good for stimulant use disorder and it's fine as stimulant use disorder and it's fine as stimulant use disorder and it's fine as a behavioral technology and I'm glad to a behavioral technology and I'm glad to a behavioral technology and I'm glad to say it's been expanded a lot um you can say it's been expanded a lot um you can say it's been expanded a lot um you can you can do it um under you know it's you can do it um under you know it's you can do it um under you know it's covered by insurance now in most places covered by insurance now in most places covered by insurance now in most places but it's just disappointing to me that but it's just disappointing to me that but it's just disappointing to me that if you if you trans, you know, took if you if you trans, you know, took if you if you trans, you know, took Keith 2025 back to late ' 80s and like Keith 2025 back to late ' 80s and like Keith 2025 back to late ' 80s and like talked to those same people I was talked to those same people I was talked to those same people I was meeting coming into treatment, they say, meeting coming into treatment, they say, meeting coming into treatment, they say, "Wow, what new things happened for "Wow, what new things happened for "Wow, what new things happened for people like me over the next, you know, people like me over the next, you know, people like me over the next, you know, in the 40 years in Man from the Future?" in the 40 years in Man from the Future?" in the 40 years in Man from the Future?" And I'd say, "I'm sorry, basically And I'd say, "I'm sorry, basically And I'd say, "I'm sorry, basically nothing." And that is really nothing." And that is really nothing." And that is really disappointing. &gt;&gt; What about all the prescription &gt;&gt; What about all the prescription &gt;&gt; What about all the prescription stimulants, Adderall, Viviance? I feel stimulants, Adderall, Viviance? I feel stimulants, Adderall, Viviance? I feel very lucky that those didn't exist when very lucky that those didn't exist when very lucky that those didn't exist when I was in high school and college and I was in high school and college and I was in high school and college and graduate school. probably in part graduate school. probably in part graduate school. probably in part because I like caffeine enough that because I like caffeine enough that because I like caffeine enough that yeah, I worry that I might have liked yeah, I worry that I might have liked yeah, I worry that I might have liked them. I've never taken any of the things them. I've never taken any of the things them. I've never taken any of the things I just mentioned. Yeah, I just mentioned. Yeah, I just mentioned. Yeah, &gt;&gt; back then we had a fedra and ephedrin &gt;&gt; back then we had a fedra and ephedrin &gt;&gt; back then we had a fedra and ephedrin pills and things like that were pills and things like that were pills and things like that were sold over the counter and sold over the counter and sold over the counter and &gt;&gt; that always felt too stimulatory. &gt;&gt; that always felt too stimulatory. &gt;&gt; that always felt too stimulatory. Um nowadays I would say ha I would say ha I would say ha yes at least half of my friends with yes at least half of my friends with yes at least half of my friends with male children those children are on male children those children are on male children those children are on amphetamines for the treatment of ADHD. amphetamines for the treatment of ADHD. amphetamines for the treatment of ADHD. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; And they start them young and then they &gt;&gt; And they start them young and then they &gt;&gt; And they start them young and then they call me because I have a network not call me because I have a network not call me because I have a network not because I can treat but not a clinician because I can treat but not a clinician because I can treat but not a clinician but then they call me because they're but then they call me because they're but then they call me because they're worried about the um growth stunting worried about the um growth stunting worried about the um growth stunting effects. &gt;&gt; Mhm. They're worried their kids aren't &gt;&gt; Mhm. They're worried their kids aren't &gt;&gt; Mhm. They're worried their kids aren't going to achieve maximum height. Then going to achieve maximum height. Then going to achieve maximum height. Then they're worried that their kids aren't they're worried that their kids aren't they're worried that their kids aren't sleeping or eating. And then so all the sleeping or eating. And then so all the sleeping or eating. And then so all the classic symptoms of stimulant addiction classic symptoms of stimulant addiction classic symptoms of stimulant addiction and general sets of issues. So what are and general sets of issues. So what are and general sets of issues. So what are your thoughts about you know Adderall, your thoughts about you know Adderall, your thoughts about you know Adderall, Viveance um and similar? Viveance um and similar? Viveance um and similar? &gt;&gt; Those are tough calls for parents. Um &gt;&gt; Those are tough calls for parents. Um &gt;&gt; Those are tough calls for parents. Um there are kids whose lives are there are kids whose lives are there are kids whose lives are transformed positively by brittle you transformed positively by brittle you transformed positively by brittle you know who cannot sit still cannot do know who cannot sit still cannot do know who cannot sit still cannot do their homework you know and it is their homework you know and it is their homework you know and it is transformative um they're at the same time I would say um they're at the same time I would say um they're at the same time I would say overprescribed maybe example drug that overprescribed maybe example drug that overprescribed maybe example drug that is sometimes is both underprescribed and is sometimes is both underprescribed and is sometimes is both underprescribed and overprescribed there's probably people overprescribed there's probably people overprescribed there's probably people could benefit or not getting them and could benefit or not getting them and could benefit or not getting them and there's a lot of people who are getting there's a lot of people who are getting there's a lot of people who are getting them that you know I think there's them that you know I think there's them that you know I think there's just less tolerance for some variations just less tolerance for some variations just less tolerance for some variations in how all our brains worked in how all our brains worked in how all our brains worked in medicalizing everything. Um, and I medicalizing everything. Um, and I medicalizing everything. Um, and I noticed that a lot. Um, and which makes noticed that a lot. Um, and which makes noticed that a lot. Um, and which makes parents anxious. You know, your, you parents anxious. You know, your, you parents anxious. You know, your, you know, your kid has his thing and all know, your kid has his thing and all know, your kid has his thing and all that as opposed to could be well, you that as opposed to could be well, you that as opposed to could be well, you know, he is kind of an active kid or he know, he is kind of an active kid or he know, he is kind of an active kid or he doesn't pay that much attention, but he doesn't pay that much attention, but he doesn't pay that much attention, but he doesn't have an illness that needs to be doesn't have an illness that needs to be doesn't have an illness that needs to be medicated. That that I worry about that medicated. That that I worry about that medicated. That that I worry about that just very generally. I worry like a kid just very generally. I worry like a kid just very generally. I worry like a kid can't be shy anymore. they have to be on can't be shy anymore. they have to be on can't be shy anymore. they have to be on the spectrum, you know, or uh you know, the spectrum, you know, or uh you know, the spectrum, you know, or uh you know, uh and carry a diagnostic label. uh and carry a diagnostic label. uh and carry a diagnostic label. And I think there's, you know, u a lot And I think there's, you know, u a lot And I think there's, you know, u a lot of that going on, unfortunately. And I of that going on, unfortunately. And I of that going on, unfortunately. And I sympathize with the parents. I'm not I sympathize with the parents. I'm not I sympathize with the parents. I'm not judging any of them because I know those judging any of them because I know those judging any of them because I know those calls are really tough to those calls are really tough to those calls are really tough to make. Um and uh and again, I know I know make. Um and uh and again, I know I know make. Um and uh and again, I know I know some kids whose lives are meaningfully some kids whose lives are meaningfully some kids whose lives are meaningfully transformed by them. So, it's transformed by them. So, it's transformed by them. So, it's that's tough. That's tough. Tell me if that's tough. That's tough. Tell me if that's tough. That's tough. Tell me if you disagree with this, and forgive me you disagree with this, and forgive me you disagree with this, and forgive me for citing previous guests, but because for citing previous guests, but because for citing previous guests, but because I'm not an expert, uh, but I hosted a I'm not an expert, uh, but I hosted a I'm not an expert, uh, but I hosted a psychiatrist on here who's expert in psychiatrist on here who's expert in psychiatrist on here who's expert in ADHD, and his claim is that non-treated ADHD, and his claim is that non-treated ADHD, and his claim is that non-treated ADHD is a poses a much greater risk for ADHD is a poses a much greater risk for ADHD is a poses a much greater risk for addiction than treating ADHD with addiction than treating ADHD with addiction than treating ADHD with substances that in nonADHD substances that in nonADHD substances that in nonADHD folks are addictive. In other words, if folks are addictive. In other words, if folks are addictive. In other words, if a kid or adult has ADHD and doesn't a kid or adult has ADHD and doesn't a kid or adult has ADHD and doesn't medicate, they're at much greater risk medicate, they're at much greater risk medicate, they're at much greater risk of abusing drugs. of abusing drugs. of abusing drugs. um if you do medicate they're at much um if you do medicate they're at much um if you do medicate they're at much lower risk because it lowers the lower risk because it lowers the lower risk because it lowers the impulsivity. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that could well be true. Uh it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that could well be true. Uh it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that could well be true. Uh it's not my core area but the there it could not my core area but the there it could not my core area but the there it could well be true. I there is a very high well be true. I there is a very high well be true. I there is a very high rate of ADHD among people you know in rate of ADHD among people you know in rate of ADHD among people you know in adulthood you see are alcohol addicted adulthood you see are alcohol addicted adulthood you see are alcohol addicted which doesn't seem to be you know a which doesn't seem to be you know a which doesn't seem to be you know a coincidence you know so um it you know coincidence you know so um it you know coincidence you know so um it you know that could well be true. that could well be true. that could well be true. &gt;&gt; So when you look out on the landscape of &gt;&gt; So when you look out on the landscape of &gt;&gt; So when you look out on the landscape of like energy drinks and nicotine has made like energy drinks and nicotine has made like energy drinks and nicotine has made a big comeback. Yeah, a big comeback. Yeah, a big comeback. Yeah, &gt;&gt; big comeback. Um, &gt;&gt; big comeback. Um, &gt;&gt; big comeback. Um, &gt;&gt; interesting stimulant because it's both &gt;&gt; interesting stimulant because it's both &gt;&gt; interesting stimulant because it's both a stimulant, but it also relaxes you to a stimulant, but it also relaxes you to a stimulant, but it also relaxes you to some extent. some extent. some extent. &gt;&gt; I tried it for a bit. The gums despite &gt;&gt; I tried it for a bit. The gums despite &gt;&gt; I tried it for a bit. The gums despite my uh caffeine tolerance, I very um my uh caffeine tolerance, I very um my uh caffeine tolerance, I very um sensitive to drugs. So, I can do like 2 sensitive to drugs. So, I can do like 2 sensitive to drugs. So, I can do like 2 milligrams of nicotine gum and it I milligrams of nicotine gum and it I milligrams of nicotine gum and it I notic it gave me spasms in my throat notic it gave me spasms in my throat notic it gave me spasms in my throat when I wasn't taking it. Um, and I was when I wasn't taking it. Um, and I was when I wasn't taking it. Um, and I was told that's because the muscerinic told that's because the muscerinic told that's because the muscerinic acetyloline stimulation. So, you start acetyloline stimulation. So, you start acetyloline stimulation. So, you start your throat starts spasming then you your throat starts spasming then you your throat starts spasming then you feel like you need it. It's actually a feel like you need it. It's actually a feel like you need it. It's actually a physical sensation. than the oral health physical sensation. than the oral health physical sensation. than the oral health folks tell me that it's bad for gum folks tell me that it's bad for gum folks tell me that it's bad for gum disease and the skin folks this disease and the skin folks this disease and the skin folks this always gets uh typically women but here always gets uh typically women but here always gets uh typically women but here in LA men and women um it definitely in LA men and women um it definitely in LA men and women um it definitely ages skin faster because of the vaso ages skin faster because of the vaso ages skin faster because of the vaso constriction in the skin so it makes you constriction in the skin so it makes you constriction in the skin so it makes you look older even though you're not look older even though you're not look older even though you're not smoking at the oral nicotine but smoking at the oral nicotine but smoking at the oral nicotine but &gt;&gt; here I just have to pepper with what &gt;&gt; here I just have to pepper with what &gt;&gt; here I just have to pepper with what I've heard we have a Nobel Prize winning I've heard we have a Nobel Prize winning I've heard we have a Nobel Prize winning colleague I'll just name him it's colleague I'll just name him it's colleague I'll just name him it's Richard Axel at Columbia who told me Richard Axel at Columbia who told me Richard Axel at Columbia who told me long ago and many times nicotine is long ago and many times nicotine is long ago and many times nicotine is protective against Parkinson's and protective against Parkinson's and protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer s, which is why he chews or Alzheimer s, which is why he chews or Alzheimer s, which is why he chews or did chew tons of nicarette uh per day. did chew tons of nicarette uh per day. did chew tons of nicarette uh per day. Um, so what's the deal? Nicotine seems Um, so what's the deal? Nicotine seems Um, so what's the deal? Nicotine seems like it has some benefits. It might make like it has some benefits. It might make like it has some benefits. It might make you look older. It might maybe you need you look older. It might maybe you need you look older. It might maybe you need to take better care of your teeth. It's to take better care of your teeth. It's to take better care of your teeth. It's a stimulant, but highly habit forming a stimulant, but highly habit forming a stimulant, but highly habit forming and addictive. So, what's your view on and addictive. So, what's your view on and addictive. So, what's your view on nicotine as an industry and as a nicotine as an industry and as a nicotine as an industry and as a substance? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, it's a poison. If you if &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, it's a poison. If you if &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, it's a poison. If you if you consumed all the nicotine in a you consumed all the nicotine in a you consumed all the nicotine in a carton cigarettes, it would kill you. I carton cigarettes, it would kill you. I carton cigarettes, it would kill you. I mean, you know, that that's remarkable mean, you know, that that's remarkable mean, you know, that that's remarkable uh that it that is so popular because of uh that it that is so popular because of uh that it that is so popular because of that. It is exactly the reason you say that. It is exactly the reason you say that. It is exactly the reason you say it's both I feel sharper and then um I it's both I feel sharper and then um I it's both I feel sharper and then um I uh yet I feel I feel relaxed at the same uh yet I feel I feel relaxed at the same uh yet I feel I feel relaxed at the same time. Um I think a lot of people who time. Um I think a lot of people who time. Um I think a lot of people who use it are mistaking uh the treatment of use it are mistaking uh the treatment of use it are mistaking uh the treatment of withdrawal for a drug benefit. withdrawal for a drug benefit. withdrawal for a drug benefit. &gt;&gt; Can you elaborate on that? &gt;&gt; Can you elaborate on that? &gt;&gt; Can you elaborate on that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, sure. So like if you let's say you &gt;&gt; Yeah, sure. So like if you let's say you &gt;&gt; Yeah, sure. So like if you let's say you smoke when you sleep obviously you're smoke when you sleep obviously you're smoke when you sleep obviously you're not smoking and the nicotine blood level not smoking and the nicotine blood level not smoking and the nicotine blood level goes down and you wake up feel jittery goes down and you wake up feel jittery goes down and you wake up feel jittery and jangly and all that and you have and jangly and all that and you have and jangly and all that and you have your first cigarette and it feels great your first cigarette and it feels great your first cigarette and it feels great because you're it but that because you're it but that because you're it but that doesn't mean wow cigarettes are really doesn't mean wow cigarettes are really doesn't mean wow cigarettes are really good for you. Look you smoke and you good for you. Look you smoke and you good for you. Look you smoke and you feel really good. what you're doing is feel really good. what you're doing is feel really good. what you're doing is just the withdrawal that makes you just the withdrawal that makes you just the withdrawal that makes you agitated and angry and annoying goes agitated and angry and annoying goes agitated and angry and annoying goes away and you attribute that well you away and you attribute that well you away and you attribute that well you know it's the use of the nicotine but know it's the use of the nicotine but know it's the use of the nicotine but you know it could just be you are you know it could just be you are you know it could just be you are dependent on this drug and what you dependent on this drug and what you dependent on this drug and what you actually need to do is persist through actually need to do is persist through actually need to do is persist through the you know the days where you will the you know the days where you will the you know the days where you will feel cognitively sludgy and maybe a feel cognitively sludgy and maybe a feel cognitively sludgy and maybe a little bit keyed up and all that but little bit keyed up and all that but little bit keyed up and all that but then you know once you go through the then you know once you go through the then you know once you go through the withdrawal you won't need it to get to withdrawal you won't need it to get to withdrawal you won't need it to get to that point I think there's a lot of that point I think there's a lot of that point I think there's a lot of people like that happens with cannabis a people like that happens with cannabis a people like that happens with cannabis a lot too I mean a lot of people say I lot too I mean a lot of people say I lot too I mean a lot of people say I can't sleep without it. It's like, yeah, can't sleep without it. It's like, yeah, can't sleep without it. It's like, yeah, well, one sign of cannabis well, one sign of cannabis well, one sign of cannabis withdrawal is sleeplessness. So, are you withdrawal is sleeplessness. So, are you withdrawal is sleeplessness. So, are you sure that you've got like a sleep sure that you've got like a sleep sure that you've got like a sleep disorder that you're treating and not disorder that you're treating and not disorder that you're treating and not that you basically just are trapped in a that you basically just are trapped in a that you basically just are trapped in a cycle of withdrawal and medicating cycle of withdrawal and medicating cycle of withdrawal and medicating withdrawal? Happens to opioids, too, is withdrawal? Happens to opioids, too, is withdrawal? Happens to opioids, too, is another example. People think my pain's another example. People think my pain's another example. People think my pain's coming back and it's like my injury. coming back and it's like my injury. coming back and it's like my injury. It's like, well, could be, but it could It's like, well, could be, but it could It's like, well, could be, but it could also be you're dependent on opioids. also be you're dependent on opioids. also be you're dependent on opioids. &gt;&gt; What's your advice to those people to &gt;&gt; What's your advice to those people to &gt;&gt; What's your advice to those people to ride it out? There are treatments that ride it out? There are treatments that ride it out? There are treatments that can make, you know, withdrawal easier can make, you know, withdrawal easier can make, you know, withdrawal easier from different types of drugs. But yeah, from different types of drugs. But yeah, from different types of drugs. But yeah, I mean, if you can get past that point, I mean, if you can get past that point, I mean, if you can get past that point, you could be free of using it at you could be free of using it at you could be free of using it at all. And wouldn't that be nice to do? all. And wouldn't that be nice to do? all. And wouldn't that be nice to do? It's definitely worth running the It's definitely worth running the It's definitely worth running the experiment. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes when I have sufficient electrolytes when I have sufficient electrolytes when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. I'm certain to claim a free sample pack. I'm certain to claim a free sample pack. I'm certain a lot of people, including me, are a lot of people, including me, are a lot of people, including me, are interested in how to avoid getting interested in how to avoid getting interested in how to avoid getting addicted to things and how to get over addicted to things and how to get over addicted to things and how to get over addiction to different things. And I'm addiction to different things. And I'm addiction to different things. And I'm very curious as to whether or not the very curious as to whether or not the very curious as to whether or not the field of addiction treatment has started field of addiction treatment has started field of addiction treatment has started to parse early, middle stage, and kind to parse early, middle stage, and kind to parse early, middle stage, and kind of late stage addiction or whether or of late stage addiction or whether or of late stage addiction or whether or not it's all just considered addiction. not it's all just considered addiction. not it's all just considered addiction. Like for instance, a number of people Like for instance, a number of people Like for instance, a number of people now are suspecting that they might be now are suspecting that they might be now are suspecting that they might be addicted to social media or their phone addicted to social media or their phone addicted to social media or their phone or texting or something uh something or texting or something uh something or texting or something uh something electronic. they are suspecting that electronic. they are suspecting that electronic. they are suspecting that they might be uh too dependent on food. they might be uh too dependent on food. they might be uh too dependent on food. &gt;&gt; Uh they might be addicted to X Y and Z. &gt;&gt; Uh they might be addicted to X Y and Z. &gt;&gt; Uh they might be addicted to X Y and Z. And I think that represents the great And I think that represents the great And I think that represents the great success of you and your colleagues and success of you and your colleagues and success of you and your colleagues and people like Anna Limkkey and people like Anna Limkkey and people like Anna Limkkey and people being public advocates about what being public advocates about what being public advocates about what addiction is and isn't. Mhm. addiction is and isn't. Mhm. addiction is and isn't. Mhm. &gt;&gt; But to me, it seems like independent of &gt;&gt; But to me, it seems like independent of &gt;&gt; But to me, it seems like independent of the substance or the behavior, if the substance or the behavior, if the substance or the behavior, if somebody is early in the experience of somebody is early in the experience of somebody is early in the experience of feeling like they're weighed down by feeling like they're weighed down by feeling like they're weighed down by something and it's hurting them in some something and it's hurting them in some something and it's hurting them in some subtle way, very different than somebody subtle way, very different than somebody subtle way, very different than somebody who's like raising a hand hopefully um who's like raising a hand hopefully um who's like raising a hand hopefully um or thinking hopefully not about taking or thinking hopefully not about taking or thinking hopefully not about taking their own life because they're so their own life because they're so their own life because they're so hopelessly addicted to alcohol or drugs, hopelessly addicted to alcohol or drugs, hopelessly addicted to alcohol or drugs, they've lost everything. So, as a they've lost everything. So, as a they've lost everything. So, as a clinician, what's your approach if clinician, what's your approach if clinician, what's your approach if somebody says, "Hey, I think I might somebody says, "Hey, I think I might somebody says, "Hey, I think I might have a problem with X." have a problem with X." have a problem with X." &gt;&gt; First off, you would say, um, "Wow, I'm &gt;&gt; First off, you would say, um, "Wow, I'm &gt;&gt; First off, you would say, um, "Wow, I'm so glad you told me." Um, this is so glad you told me." Um, this is so glad you told me." Um, this is something that tens of millions of something that tens of millions of something that tens of millions of people experience and many of them stay people experience and many of them stay people experience and many of them stay silent about it and therefore people silent about it and therefore people silent about it and therefore people feel and you may feel that you are feel and you may feel that you are feel and you may feel that you are strange or this is shameful or uh, you strange or this is shameful or uh, you strange or this is shameful or uh, you know, or um, an odd experience when it know, or um, an odd experience when it know, or um, an odd experience when it is really an extremely common is really an extremely common is really an extremely common experience. and you're saying that so the person and you're saying that so the person and you're saying that so the person doesn't feel embarrassed and they feel doesn't feel embarrassed and they feel doesn't feel embarrassed and they feel comfortable, you know, talking about it. comfortable, you know, talking about it. comfortable, you know, talking about it. Um, other thing is you convey optimism. Um, other thing is you convey optimism. Um, other thing is you convey optimism. You know, there are probably a surveys You know, there are probably a surveys You know, there are probably a surveys give something like 24 million Americans give something like 24 million Americans give something like 24 million Americans are in recovery. Uh, we just don't are in recovery. Uh, we just don't are in recovery. Uh, we just don't notice them because someone in recovery notice them because someone in recovery notice them because someone in recovery looks like anybody else. We notice them looks like anybody else. We notice them looks like anybody else. We notice them when they're actively addicted, but not when they're actively addicted, but not when they're actively addicted, but not when they're in recovery because they when they're in recovery because they when they're in recovery because they sort of returned and they just look they sort of returned and they just look they sort of returned and they just look like, oh, that's just a school teacher, like, oh, that's just a school teacher, like, oh, that's just a school teacher, that's an accountant, that's a police that's an accountant, that's a police that's an accountant, that's a police officer, whatever. but that there's a officer, whatever. but that there's a officer, whatever. but that there's a lot of reason for rational hope. And uh lot of reason for rational hope. And uh lot of reason for rational hope. And uh in the particular case you're talking in the particular case you're talking in the particular case you're talking about when someone's just starting to about when someone's just starting to about when someone's just starting to worry and it's early stage the odds that worry and it's early stage the odds that worry and it's early stage the odds that they will um recover are dramatically they will um recover are dramatically they will um recover are dramatically higher. So you know you it's much higher. So you know you it's much higher. So you know you it's much easier to sort of pull out before much easier to sort of pull out before much easier to sort of pull out before you've burned your life down around you. you've burned your life down around you. you've burned your life down around you. So you know it's real it's tough when So you know it's real it's tough when So you know it's real it's tough when people come in and you say all right people come in and you say all right people come in and you say all right well do you have family support when my well do you have family support when my well do you have family support when my family doesn't talk to me anymore? Okay. family doesn't talk to me anymore? Okay. family doesn't talk to me anymore? Okay. Uh, do you have at least a safe place to Uh, do you have at least a safe place to Uh, do you have at least a safe place to live? No, I lost my I'm I'm, you know, live? No, I lost my I'm I'm, you know, live? No, I lost my I'm I'm, you know, sleeping on a couch right now. Um, you sleeping on a couch right now. Um, you sleeping on a couch right now. Um, you know, well, at work or, you know, I lost know, well, at work or, you know, I lost know, well, at work or, you know, I lost my job. You know, that's tough for the my job. You know, that's tough for the my job. You know, that's tough for the person to rebuild everything. But if you person to rebuild everything. But if you person to rebuild everything. But if you still have those resources, there's still have those resources, there's still have those resources, there's still people who love you in your life, still people who love you in your life, still people who love you in your life, you still have a meaningful role where you still have a meaningful role where you still have a meaningful role where you're contributing and you also have you're contributing and you also have you're contributing and you also have some accountability, that's going to some accountability, that's going to some accountability, that's going to help you make that behavior change, help you make that behavior change, help you make that behavior change, whatever it is. I would say that about whatever it is. I would say that about whatever it is. I would say that about any behavior change, not just one uh any behavior change, not just one uh any behavior change, not just one uh connected to substances. And then what connected to substances. And then what connected to substances. And then what do we do when we work with people? do we do when we work with people? do we do when we work with people? Well, we always think about Well, we always think about Well, we always think about motivation. Um it's hard. This may seem motivation. Um it's hard. This may seem motivation. Um it's hard. This may seem strange, but someone says, "I want to strange, but someone says, "I want to strange, but someone says, "I want to quit smoking." A good clinician will quit smoking." A good clinician will quit smoking." A good clinician will say, "Why why would you want to do say, "Why why would you want to do say, "Why why would you want to do that?" Um you think like, "That's dumb. that?" Um you think like, "That's dumb. that?" Um you think like, "That's dumb. You aren't supposed to say, "Yeah, good, You aren't supposed to say, "Yeah, good, You aren't supposed to say, "Yeah, good, great, good." It's like, well, if you great, good." It's like, well, if you great, good." It's like, well, if you don't want to do it, it doesn't matter don't want to do it, it doesn't matter don't want to do it, it doesn't matter what I think, right? You know, and also what I think, right? You know, and also what I think, right? You know, and also there's quite a few people if you push there's quite a few people if you push there's quite a few people if you push on it, they actually become less likely on it, they actually become less likely on it, they actually become less likely to do it if you sort of nag them to say, to do it if you sort of nag them to say, to do it if you sort of nag them to say, "So tell me why would you want what do "So tell me why would you want what do "So tell me why would you want what do you want to get out of this because it's you want to get out of this because it's you want to get out of this because it's work? I mean, I'm happy to work with work? I mean, I'm happy to work with work? I mean, I'm happy to work with you, but you know, what is it? What are you, but you know, what is it? What are you, but you know, what is it? What are your what are your motives?" And that's, your what are your motives?" And that's, your what are your motives?" And that's, you know, reflecting on that like, well, you know, reflecting on that like, well, you know, reflecting on that like, well, here's the thing. I like all my clothes here's the thing. I like all my clothes here's the thing. I like all my clothes stink and I hate the way. So, you would stink and I hate the way. So, you would stink and I hate the way. So, you would you would you would enjoy and help them you would you would enjoy and help them you would you would enjoy and help them elaborate. So you would like get up and elaborate. So you would like get up and elaborate. So you would like get up and your clothes would f smell really good your clothes would f smell really good your clothes would f smell really good and you'd feel good about go. Yeah. and you'd feel good about go. Yeah. and you'd feel good about go. Yeah. It's like you know and I and Yeah. It's like you know and I and Yeah. It's like you know and I and I'm spending a lot of money. Say how I'm spending a lot of money. Say how I'm spending a lot of money. Say how much are you spending you know you know much are you spending you know you know much are you spending you know you know whatever 2,000 bucks a year. So if you whatever 2,000 bucks a year. So if you whatever 2,000 bucks a year. So if you had 2,000 bucks because you hadn't had 2,000 bucks because you hadn't had 2,000 bucks because you hadn't smoked in year what would you buy for smoked in year what would you buy for smoked in year what would you buy for yourself? What would be it something yourself? What would be it something yourself? What would be it something you'd really enjoy? Tell me about it. you'd really enjoy? Tell me about it. you'd really enjoy? Tell me about it. And and sort of helping them build up And and sort of helping them build up And and sort of helping them build up you know in their own mind because again you know in their own mind because again you know in their own mind because again this is about them not you. What do you this is about them not you. What do you this is about them not you. What do you get? because this is going to be tough get? because this is going to be tough get? because this is going to be tough and maybe I want to do it today, but in and maybe I want to do it today, but in and maybe I want to do it today, but in three days I'm going to be in withdrawal three days I'm going to be in withdrawal three days I'm going to be in withdrawal and I'm going to feel like I want to go and I'm going to feel like I want to go and I'm going to feel like I want to go back and I need to think about wait a back and I need to think about wait a back and I need to think about wait a minute, you know, when I if a year minute, you know, when I if a year minute, you know, when I if a year without smoking I get, you know, that without smoking I get, you know, that without smoking I get, you know, that $2,000 trip to Cancun I've always wanted $2,000 trip to Cancun I've always wanted $2,000 trip to Cancun I've always wanted to take. Um, so I, you know, that helps to take. Um, so I, you know, that helps to take. Um, so I, you know, that helps that helps motivate them. And then you that helps motivate them. And then you that helps motivate them. And then you talk then we do some like sort of talk then we do some like sort of talk then we do some like sort of behavioral analysis of where do you use, behavioral analysis of where do you use, behavioral analysis of where do you use, how much do you use, what do you use, how much do you use, what do you use, how much do you use, what do you use, are there cues to use? often for many are there cues to use? often for many are there cues to use? often for many people there are, you know, um and people there are, you know, um and people there are, you know, um and also to non-use. Are there places where also to non-use. Are there places where also to non-use. Are there places where you would never use? Well, I'd never you would never use? Well, I'd never you would never use? Well, I'd never use, you know, I never at my mom's use, you know, I never at my mom's use, you know, I never at my mom's house. Huh. Okay, that's good to know. house. Huh. Okay, that's good to know. house. Huh. Okay, that's good to know. Maybe you could visit your mom more Maybe you could visit your mom more Maybe you could visit your mom more often. Or, you know, uh you know, uh I often. Or, you know, uh you know, uh I often. Or, you know, uh you know, uh I never smoke on a holy day and whatever never smoke on a holy day and whatever never smoke on a holy day and whatever my religion is. Oh, okay. So, that let's my religion is. Oh, okay. So, that let's my religion is. Oh, okay. So, that let's talk about that. How do you get through talk about that. How do you get through talk about that. How do you get through that day? What are the techniques you that day? What are the techniques you that day? What are the techniques you use there that we could try on try on use there that we could try on try on use there that we could try on try on other days? Um and also, what are the other days? Um and also, what are the other days? Um and also, what are the things that get you in trouble? you things that get you in trouble? you things that get you in trouble? you know, like, uh, I'm trying to quit know, like, uh, I'm trying to quit know, like, uh, I'm trying to quit drinking. Well, what if I went into your drinking. Well, what if I went into your drinking. Well, what if I went into your house and opened up the cabinet, what house and opened up the cabinet, what house and opened up the cabinet, what would it be? Well, there'd be like, you would it be? Well, there'd be like, you would it be? Well, there'd be like, you know, 20 different type. So, could that know, 20 different type. So, could that know, 20 different type. So, could that go somewhere else? Could you give that go somewhere else? Could you give that go somewhere else? Could you give that away so that it's behaviorally harder away so that it's behaviorally harder away so that it's behaviorally harder for you to uh, you know, get this? You'd for you to uh, you know, get this? You'd for you to uh, you know, get this? You'd have to go down the street and go to a have to go down the street and go to a have to go down the street and go to a liquor store, that kind of thing. Uh, liquor store, that kind of thing. Uh, liquor store, that kind of thing. Uh, help people and stuff like that. And help people and stuff like that. And help people and stuff like that. And then, you know, there's often practical then, you know, there's often practical then, you know, there's often practical skills in learning that, like, how do I skills in learning that, like, how do I skills in learning that, like, how do I manage a social interaction without manage a social interaction without manage a social interaction without alcohol, for example, or what do I do alcohol, for example, or what do I do alcohol, for example, or what do I do for fun? you maybe you don't think like for fun? you maybe you don't think like for fun? you maybe you don't think like that or how do I hang out with my that or how do I hang out with my that or how do I hang out with my friend who loves to drink and explain to friend who loves to drink and explain to friend who loves to drink and explain to him what why I can't drink anymore. Um him what why I can't drink anymore. Um him what why I can't drink anymore. Um those kinds of things as well. And those kinds of things as well. And those kinds of things as well. And that's what the therapist does. The that's what the therapist does. The that's what the therapist does. The other thing is really important is that other thing is really important is that other thing is really important is that like any other anytime you're making a like any other anytime you're making a like any other anytime you're making a behavior change, this is maybe seem like behavior change, this is maybe seem like behavior change, this is maybe seem like incredibly simple, almost dumb advice, incredibly simple, almost dumb advice, incredibly simple, almost dumb advice, but hang out with other people who are but hang out with other people who are but hang out with other people who are trying to make the same change. You want trying to make the same change. You want trying to make the same change. You want to start jogging, join a jogging group. to start jogging, join a jogging group. to start jogging, join a jogging group. you know, you want to uh you want to you know, you want to uh you want to you know, you want to uh you want to stop drinking, I would, you know, stop drinking, I would, you know, stop drinking, I would, you know, suggest go check into an AA meeting or suggest go check into an AA meeting or suggest go check into an AA meeting or one of the other fellowships we have, one of the other fellowships we have, one of the other fellowships we have, Life Ring Recovery or Smart Recovery. Life Ring Recovery or Smart Recovery. Life Ring Recovery or Smart Recovery. Having other people on the same journey Having other people on the same journey Having other people on the same journey is good for us. It I mean, everything is good for us. It I mean, everything is good for us. It I mean, everything shows that no matter what you're doing, shows that no matter what you're doing, shows that no matter what you're doing, I'm losing weight, I'm exercising, I'm losing weight, I'm exercising, I'm losing weight, I'm exercising, I'm more whatever, I'm quitting smoking more whatever, I'm quitting smoking more whatever, I'm quitting smoking because it gives you two things. It because it gives you two things. It because it gives you two things. It gives you support. Um but it also gives you support. Um but it also gives you support. Um but it also gives you some accountability. It's like, hey, you some accountability. It's like, hey, you some accountability. It's like, hey, you were going jogging and uh Tuesday, you were going jogging and uh Tuesday, you were going jogging and uh Tuesday, you weren't there. What's up? are you weren't there. What's up? are you weren't there. What's up? are you going to be part of this group or not? going to be part of this group or not? going to be part of this group or not? And that is uh helpful for people the And that is uh helpful for people the And that is uh helpful for people the combination of the two. So all those the combination of the two. So all those the combination of the two. So all those things we encourage people to do. things we encourage people to do. things we encourage people to do. &gt;&gt; That's wonderful to hear um some &gt;&gt; That's wonderful to hear um some &gt;&gt; That's wonderful to hear um some concrete questions that one would ask concrete questions that one would ask concrete questions that one would ask because I think people have heard of you because I think people have heard of you because I think people have heard of you know just quit. I think a lot of people know just quit. I think a lot of people know just quit. I think a lot of people who aren't familiar with addiction as a who aren't familiar with addiction as a who aren't familiar with addiction as a chemical brain circuit hormonal full chemical brain circuit hormonal full chemical brain circuit hormonal full body full brain issue but mostly a body full brain issue but mostly a body full brain issue but mostly a &gt;&gt; brain. Sorry. It almost makes you laugh &gt;&gt; brain. Sorry. It almost makes you laugh &gt;&gt; brain. Sorry. It almost makes you laugh just think like someone's going to just think like someone's going to just think like someone's going to say, "My god, why didn't I think of that say, "My god, why didn't I think of that say, "My god, why didn't I think of that before? Thanks, doctor." And stamp on a before? Thanks, doctor." And stamp on a before? Thanks, doctor." And stamp on a cigarette and walk out. Yeah, cigarette and walk out. Yeah, cigarette and walk out. Yeah, &gt;&gt; it's wild, right? I mean, this addiction &gt;&gt; it's wild, right? I mean, this addiction &gt;&gt; it's wild, right? I mean, this addiction used to be looked at as a character used to be looked at as a character used to be looked at as a character defect. &gt;&gt; And um I certainly addicts have &gt;&gt; And um I certainly addicts have &gt;&gt; And um I certainly addicts have character defects, but I would argue at character defects, but I would argue at character defects, but I would argue at no greater rate than non Everybody has no greater rate than non Everybody has no greater rate than non Everybody has character defects. character defects. character defects. &gt;&gt; Everybody has character defects. &gt;&gt; Everybody has character defects. &gt;&gt; Everybody has character defects. Exactly. Um, and part of the reason I Exactly. Um, and part of the reason I Exactly. Um, and part of the reason I think it was viewed as a character think it was viewed as a character think it was viewed as a character defect is that defect is that defect is that a addictions vary and susceptibility to a addictions vary and susceptibility to a addictions vary and susceptibility to them varies. So if it's been easy for me them varies. So if it's been easy for me them varies. So if it's been easy for me to quit drinking alcohol and I wasn't to quit drinking alcohol and I wasn't to quit drinking alcohol and I wasn't aware of what addiction is, I might look aware of what addiction is, I might look aware of what addiction is, I might look at somebody who is having a hard time at somebody who is having a hard time at somebody who is having a hard time quitting drinking and just think, well, quitting drinking and just think, well, quitting drinking and just think, well, just quit. I did it. You can't this kind just quit. I did it. You can't this kind just quit. I did it. You can't this kind of thing. And and u and just swap of thing. And and u and just swap of thing. And and u and just swap whatever substance or behavior for whatever substance or behavior for whatever substance or behavior for alcohol there. Um and then I think the alcohol there. Um and then I think the alcohol there. Um and then I think the other reason is that oftentimes sadly um other reason is that oftentimes sadly um other reason is that oftentimes sadly um addicts hurt people around them in their addicts hurt people around them in their addicts hurt people around them in their addiction. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; This is you know they lose money that &gt;&gt; This is you know they lose money that &gt;&gt; This is you know they lose money that wasn't theirs. They um they harm wasn't theirs. They um they harm wasn't theirs. They um they harm themselves or others in very in themselves or others in very in themselves or others in very in psychologically or physically and um psychologically or physically and um psychologically or physically and um I mean I know drug addicts that it had I mean I know drug addicts that it had I mean I know drug addicts that it had to come down to their kid getting into to come down to their kid getting into to come down to their kid getting into their drugs and almost dying before uh their drugs and almost dying before uh their drugs and almost dying before uh they finally quit. And even at that time they finally quit. And even at that time they finally quit. And even at that time they were concerned that they might not they were concerned that they might not they were concerned that they might not be able to quit even though they adore be able to quit even though they adore be able to quit even though they adore their children and wife. their children and wife. their children and wife. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; fortunately that person is still sober &gt;&gt; fortunately that person is still sober &gt;&gt; fortunately that person is still sober some years later. But some years later. But some years later. But &gt;&gt; it's like &gt;&gt; it's like &gt;&gt; it's like you can imagine I from the outside it you can imagine I from the outside it you can imagine I from the outside it you can come up with some pretty good you can come up with some pretty good you can come up with some pretty good character defect arguments when you know character defect arguments when you know character defect arguments when you know when you observe that kind of thing. when you observe that kind of thing. when you observe that kind of thing. &gt;&gt; But when these people get sober it's &gt;&gt; But when these people get sober it's &gt;&gt; But when these people get sober it's spectacular how the real person seems to spectacular how the real person seems to spectacular how the real person seems to emerge. um which points to the fact that emerge. um which points to the fact that emerge. um which points to the fact that the addiction masks something about who the addiction masks something about who the addiction masks something about who they truly are, not the other way they truly are, not the other way they truly are, not the other way around. &gt;&gt; I agree with that. And I think you're &gt;&gt; I agree with that. And I think you're &gt;&gt; I agree with that. And I think you're right that a lot of the explanations for right that a lot of the explanations for right that a lot of the explanations for addiction come from people who are hurt addiction come from people who are hurt addiction come from people who are hurt and angry, you know, with good and angry, you know, with good and angry, you know, with good reason. You know, they had they had an reason. You know, they had they had an reason. You know, they had they had an addicted parent and that was hard for addicted parent and that was hard for addicted parent and that was hard for them or their marriage is them or their marriage is them or their marriage is disintegrating and so they're mad and disintegrating and so they're mad and disintegrating and so they're mad and they're going to so they're going to they're going to so they're going to they're going to so they're going to have a certain amount of venom in how have a certain amount of venom in how have a certain amount of venom in how they explain this, you know, sort of they explain this, you know, sort of they explain this, you know, sort of understandably. And in addiction, you understandably. And in addiction, you understandably. And in addiction, you know, people do things they would not know, people do things they would not know, people do things they would not otherwise do. I mean, like you're otherwise do. I mean, like you're otherwise do. I mean, like you're saying, you know, um lying about lots of saying, you know, um lying about lots of saying, you know, um lying about lots of things that there's no they normally things that there's no they normally things that there's no they normally wouldn't lie about. Like, I promise I'll wouldn't lie about. Like, I promise I'll wouldn't lie about. Like, I promise I'll show up to the baseball game and watch show up to the baseball game and watch show up to the baseball game and watch you watch you play your game or um you watch you play your game or um you watch you play your game or um you know, yeah, I'm going to save up some know, yeah, I'm going to save up some know, yeah, I'm going to save up some money and we're going to get that uh you money and we're going to get that uh you money and we're going to get that uh you know, the plumbing fixed, but I'm know, the plumbing fixed, but I'm know, the plumbing fixed, but I'm actually spending on drugs. Those actually spending on drugs. Those actually spending on drugs. Those types of things. And you know that uh types of things. And you know that uh types of things. And you know that uh hurts people that I I've and I hurts people that I I've and I hurts people that I I've and I and it's very important to acknowledge and it's very important to acknowledge and it's very important to acknowledge that because sometimes the language that because sometimes the language that because sometimes the language about the message that sometimes about the message that sometimes about the message that sometimes government public health people have government public health people have government public health people have given about addiction is a disease given about addiction is a disease given about addiction is a disease sounds scolding to people who have been sounds scolding to people who have been sounds scolding to people who have been harmed by addicted people. Like like I'm harmed by addicted people. Like like I'm harmed by addicted people. Like like I'm saying you know you're we don't feel saying you know you're we don't feel saying you know you're we don't feel sorry for you. We feel sorry for this sorry for you. We feel sorry for this sorry for you. We feel sorry for this person. They're ill. And you know it's person. They're ill. And you know it's person. They're ill. And you know it's almost like how dare you be angry at almost like how dare you be angry at almost like how dare you be angry at your mother. She was ill. It wasn't at your mother. She was ill. It wasn't at your mother. She was ill. It wasn't her fault. It's like it still hurts. You her fault. It's like it still hurts. You her fault. It's like it still hurts. You know, it doesn't, you know, if know, it doesn't, you know, if know, it doesn't, you know, if someone who has dementia, uh, you know, someone who has dementia, uh, you know, someone who has dementia, uh, you know, goes on a, um, an angry rant and says a goes on a, um, an angry rant and says a goes on a, um, an angry rant and says a lot of nasty things, it still hurts. lot of nasty things, it still hurts. lot of nasty things, it still hurts. Still scary. The fact that it's a Still scary. The fact that it's a Still scary. The fact that it's a diseases doesn't change your experience, diseases doesn't change your experience, diseases doesn't change your experience, you know, as a person. And, uh, so I'm you know, as a person. And, uh, so I'm you know, as a person. And, uh, so I'm always I'm always uh trying and public always I'm always uh trying and public always I'm always uh trying and public messaging to acknowledge that the pain messaging to acknowledge that the pain messaging to acknowledge that the pain is enormous. It's really tough to live is enormous. It's really tough to live is enormous. It's really tough to live with an addicted person. It's hard. with an addicted person. It's hard. with an addicted person. It's hard. It's a complicated problem uh from a It's a complicated problem uh from a It's a complicated problem uh from a public health and uh psych just public health and uh psych just public health and uh psych just psychologically. I mean we're in the psychologically. I mean we're in the psychologically. I mean we're in the wake right now of the uh Robert Reiner wake right now of the uh Robert Reiner wake right now of the uh Robert Reiner and his and his wife being yeah and his and his wife being yeah and his and his wife being yeah &gt;&gt; killed by stabbing which is seems &gt;&gt; killed by stabbing which is seems &gt;&gt; killed by stabbing which is seems additionally violent and horrible by additionally violent and horrible by additionally violent and horrible by their son. It seems he's been charged their son. It seems he's been charged their son. It seems he's been charged anyway. Um who was an addict and the anyway. Um who was an addict and the anyway. Um who was an addict and the photos of him that are going up uh make photos of him that are going up uh make photos of him that are going up uh make him look quite angry and deranged him look quite angry and deranged him look quite angry and deranged frankly. It's going to be interesting to frankly. It's going to be interesting to frankly. It's going to be interesting to see how that shapes people's views of see how that shapes people's views of see how that shapes people's views of addicts and addiction and the fact that addicts and addiction and the fact that addicts and addiction and the fact that he was um supported by his parents for a he was um supported by his parents for a he was um supported by his parents for a long time in that addiction. They even long time in that addiction. They even long time in that addiction. They even made a movie together which wasn't a made a movie together which wasn't a made a movie together which wasn't a very good movie and everyone knew it. It very good movie and everyone knew it. It very good movie and everyone knew it. It was sort of like it felt like a was sort of like it felt like a was sort of like it felt like a desperate attempt to rescue his son desperate attempt to rescue his son desperate attempt to rescue his son through his profession and it just through his profession and it just through his profession and it just this ended as tragically as it possibly this ended as tragically as it possibly this ended as tragically as it possibly could. Mhm. could. Mhm. could. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um and then we have this home homeless &gt;&gt; Um and then we have this home homeless &gt;&gt; Um and then we have this home homeless quote unquote homeless problem which is quote unquote homeless problem which is quote unquote homeless problem which is perhaps also an addiction issue perhaps also an addiction issue perhaps also an addiction issue &gt;&gt; in part. Yes. &gt;&gt; in part. Yes. &gt;&gt; in part. Yes. &gt;&gt; In part. &gt;&gt; In part. &gt;&gt; In part. &gt;&gt; Thanks for mentioning that addicts are &gt;&gt; Thanks for mentioning that addicts are &gt;&gt; Thanks for mentioning that addicts are in pain but the people around them are in pain but the people around them are in pain but the people around them are in a lot of pain also. [clears throat] in a lot of pain also. [clears throat] in a lot of pain also. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Um be interesting if in the future &gt;&gt; Um be interesting if in the future &gt;&gt; Um be interesting if in the future addiction could be framed as like a addiction could be framed as like a addiction could be framed as like a context as opposed to like a person. Uh context as opposed to like a person. Uh context as opposed to like a person. Uh but it's hard to separate the behavior but it's hard to separate the behavior but it's hard to separate the behavior from the person. from the person. from the person. &gt;&gt; That's right. If you grow up with an &gt;&gt; That's right. If you grow up with an &gt;&gt; That's right. If you grow up with an addicted parent as a kid, you know, you addicted parent as a kid, you know, you addicted parent as a kid, you know, you won't understand all that anyway, right? won't understand all that anyway, right? won't understand all that anyway, right? You just know like you're wanting You just know like you're wanting You just know like you're wanting love and attention and you're not love and attention and you're not love and attention and you're not getting it. And um that's a very common getting it. And um that's a very common getting it. And um that's a very common experience to grow up with an addicted experience to grow up with an addicted experience to grow up with an addicted parent. And that can generate lifelong parent. And that can generate lifelong parent. And that can generate lifelong uh negative feelings about to people. uh negative feelings about to people. uh negative feelings about to people. And again, I say understandably And again, I say understandably And again, I say understandably um you know, even if you do eventually um you know, even if you do eventually um you know, even if you do eventually come to the view that yeah, you know, come to the view that yeah, you know, come to the view that yeah, you know, dad had a disease or mom had a disease, dad had a disease or mom had a disease, dad had a disease or mom had a disease, you still didn't get what you wanted at you still didn't get what you wanted at you still didn't get what you wanted at the time. And so there'll be, you know, the time. And so there'll be, you know, the time. And so there'll be, you know, grief and sadness about that. grief and sadness about that. grief and sadness about that. &gt;&gt; Asking why would you want to quit? &gt;&gt; Asking why would you want to quit? &gt;&gt; Asking why would you want to quit? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Is very interesting question. &gt;&gt; Is very interesting question. &gt;&gt; Is very interesting question. &gt;&gt; Seems strange, doesn't it? &gt;&gt; Seems strange, doesn't it? &gt;&gt; Seems strange, doesn't it? &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I want to talk for a moment &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I want to talk for a moment &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I want to talk for a moment about the carrots and the sticks. about the carrots and the sticks. about the carrots and the sticks. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um the sticks are kind of obvious in &gt;&gt; Um the sticks are kind of obvious in &gt;&gt; Um the sticks are kind of obvious in most cases. Well, if I wasn't smoking, I most cases. Well, if I wasn't smoking, I most cases. Well, if I wasn't smoking, I wouldn't have to pay for cigarettes. I wouldn't have to pay for cigarettes. I wouldn't have to pay for cigarettes. I wouldn't smell bad. I would I wouldn't smell bad. I would I wouldn't smell bad. I would I wouldn't cough so much. Um cough so much. Um cough so much. Um the carrots are often a little more the carrots are often a little more the carrots are often a little more cryptic and probably harder for people cryptic and probably harder for people cryptic and probably harder for people to think about for the addict to think to think about for the addict to think to think about for the addict to think about um if they're very far into their about um if they're very far into their about um if they're very far into their addiction. Um recently there observed addiction. Um recently there observed addiction. Um recently there observed some spectacularly some spectacularly some spectacularly enormous frankly weight loss enormous frankly weight loss enormous frankly weight loss achievements of some famous people. Uh achievements of some famous people. Uh achievements of some famous people. Uh country music singer Jelly Roll, forgive country music singer Jelly Roll, forgive country music singer Jelly Roll, forgive uh me that's his name. Um I didn't name uh me that's his name. Um I didn't name uh me that's his name. Um I didn't name him that. He that was his name. He was a him that. He that was his name. He was a him that. He that was his name. He was a giant man. and he was like close to in giant man. and he was like close to in giant man. and he was like close to in excess of like 400 lb or something. Lost excess of like 400 lb or something. Lost excess of like 400 lb or something. Lost over 300 lb and he's a transformed human over 300 lb and he's a transformed human over 300 lb and he's a transformed human being. The way he talks about what he's being. The way he talks about what he's being. The way he talks about what he's doing, he's running 5ks and half doing, he's running 5ks and half doing, he's running 5ks and half marathons. I mean, he's a completely marathons. I mean, he's a completely marathons. I mean, he's a completely different person. And um but for different person. And um but for different person. And um but for somebody who's still stuck in the very somebody who's still stuck in the very somebody who's still stuck in the very large body, they can't imagine those large body, they can't imagine those large body, they can't imagine those carrots because they've never really carrots because they've never really carrots because they've never really lived in them. And so, how do you make a lived in them. And so, how do you make a lived in them. And so, how do you make a carrot motivation, a positive a carrot motivation, a positive a carrot motivation, a positive motivation feel real for a patient um in motivation feel real for a patient um in motivation feel real for a patient um in a way that it can really pull them a way that it can really pull them a way that it can really pull them forward as opposed to just all the stuff forward as opposed to just all the stuff forward as opposed to just all the stuff that they're not going to feel because that they're not going to feel because that they're not going to feel because you have to be pretty close to losing it you have to be pretty close to losing it you have to be pretty close to losing it all for the sticks to really matter. all for the sticks to really matter. all for the sticks to really matter. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So all people to some &gt;&gt; Yeah. So all people to some &gt;&gt; Yeah. So all people to some extent, you know, discount future extent, you know, discount future extent, you know, discount future rewards to some, you know, like so we rewards to some, you know, like so we rewards to some, you know, like so we buy the $5 latte instead of putting it buy the $5 latte instead of putting it buy the $5 latte instead of putting it in our retirement, even though if we did in our retirement, even though if we did in our retirement, even though if we did that every day, we would have a million that every day, we would have a million that every day, we would have a million dollars, you know, when we were 65, dollars, you know, when we were 65, dollars, you know, when we were 65, right? And in addiction, they do it even right? And in addiction, they do it even right? And in addiction, they do it even more. So when in addiction, if you more. So when in addiction, if you more. So when in addiction, if you ask people about what, you know, what ask people about what, you know, what ask people about what, you know, what about something would you would you about something would you would you about something would you would you take, you know, uh $5 today or $20 take, you know, uh $5 today or $20 take, you know, uh $5 today or $20 tomorrow, they're more like to say $5 tomorrow, they're more like to say $5 tomorrow, they're more like to say $5 right now. Almost as if tomorrow doesn't right now. Almost as if tomorrow doesn't right now. Almost as if tomorrow doesn't exist. So this really is a problem and exist. So this really is a problem and exist. So this really is a problem and you can't really say to people, you can't really say to people, you can't really say to people, you know, if you if you get in recovery know, if you if you get in recovery know, if you if you get in recovery after like five years, you're probably after like five years, you're probably after like five years, you're probably going to I bet you'll meet a nice person going to I bet you'll meet a nice person going to I bet you'll meet a nice person and you you'll get married and settle and you you'll get married and settle and you you'll get married and settle down and you and then you'll go back to down and you and then you'll go back to down and you and then you'll go back to school and get it's like that's all school and get it's like that's all school and get it's like that's all like, you know, fantasy camp kinds of like, you know, fantasy camp kinds of like, you know, fantasy camp kinds of stuff, right? So you have to it's okay stuff, right? So you have to it's okay stuff, right? So you have to it's okay to have those long-term goals. sometimes to have those long-term goals. sometimes to have those long-term goals. sometimes those are very motivating. But you want those are very motivating. But you want those are very motivating. But you want to focus on things that are immediate to focus on things that are immediate to focus on things that are immediate because that's the world they're living because that's the world they're living because that's the world they're living in. A world of immediiacy that you know in. A world of immediiacy that you know in. A world of immediiacy that you know you know for example you will have more you know for example you will have more you know for example you will have more money every day. You know you will not money every day. You know you will not money every day. You know you will not if you're using illegal drug you your if you're using illegal drug you your if you're using illegal drug you your risk of arrest will drop to zero your risk of arrest will drop to zero your risk of arrest will drop to zero immediately once you stop engaging in immediately once you stop engaging in immediately once you stop engaging in these transactions. Um you will feel these transactions. Um you will feel these transactions. Um you will feel physically better um you know very physically better um you know very physically better um you know very quickly uh than you feel right now. quickly uh than you feel right now. quickly uh than you feel right now. And you know social reinforcement really And you know social reinforcement really And you know social reinforcement really matters too. This is one of the geniuses matters too. This is one of the geniuses matters too. This is one of the geniuses of the people who developed the 12step of the people who developed the 12step of the people who developed the 12step fellowships. The fact that you get fellowships. The fact that you get fellowships. The fact that you get literal status by how many days you have literal status by how many days you have literal status by how many days you have not you or years you have not used the not you or years you have not used the not you or years you have not used the substance and you get you know respect substance and you get you know respect substance and you get you know respect and we you know we care about those and we you know we care about those and we you know we care about those things for very good reasons. They've things for very good reasons. They've things for very good reasons. They've been central to the survival of the been central to the survival of the been central to the survival of the species. I' I've always thought it was species. I' I've always thought it was species. I' I've always thought it was clever of the of AA to have the um one clever of the of AA to have the um one clever of the of AA to have the um one day at a time concept. Um you know, day at a time concept. Um you know, day at a time concept. Um you know, which maybe seems like hokey, like a which maybe seems like hokey, like a which maybe seems like hokey, like a slogan, but you can't suddenly quit slogan, but you can't suddenly quit slogan, but you can't suddenly quit drinking for the rest of your life. It's drinking for the rest of your life. It's drinking for the rest of your life. It's not here yet, right? And that's just not here yet, right? And that's just not here yet, right? And that's just seems inconceivable. But can you not seems inconceivable. But can you not seems inconceivable. But can you not drink today? Not drink today and go to a drink today? Not drink today and go to a drink today? Not drink today and go to a meeting and get some reward for that. meeting and get some reward for that. meeting and get some reward for that. Yeah, you can probably do that. And so Yeah, you can probably do that. And so Yeah, you can probably do that. And so just do that every day and then you will just do that every day and then you will just do that every day and then you will have 30 years eventually. But you have 30 years eventually. But you have 30 years eventually. But you don't have to wait for all those rewards don't have to wait for all those rewards don't have to wait for all those rewards because it's very few people because it's very few people because it's very few people can do that. And of the ones who really can do that. And of the ones who really can do that. And of the ones who really can, they're probably not very prone to can, they're probably not very prone to can, they're probably not very prone to addiction. People who are think that far addiction. People who are think that far addiction. People who are think that far ahead all the time uh and have extremely ahead all the time uh and have extremely ahead all the time uh and have extremely high self-control say they'd be less high self-control say they'd be less high self-control say they'd be less likely. And what about the addictions likely. And what about the addictions likely. And what about the addictions where people either believe or it's where people either believe or it's where people either believe or it's actually true that it helps them be more actually true that it helps them be more actually true that it helps them be more functional in other areas of their life. functional in other areas of their life. functional in other areas of their life. Less social anxiety with two or three Less social anxiety with two or three Less social anxiety with two or three drinks. Um yeah, you know, taking a drinks. Um yeah, you know, taking a drinks. Um yeah, you know, taking a prescription stimulant and can get your prescription stimulant and can get your prescription stimulant and can get your work done. Uh maybe they are true ADHD, work done. Uh maybe they are true ADHD, work done. Uh maybe they are true ADHD, but you know, not revealing anything, but you know, not revealing anything, but you know, not revealing anything, you know, that isn't already known. I you know, that isn't already known. I you know, that isn't already known. I mean, stimulants raise levels of mean, stimulants raise levels of mean, stimulants raise levels of alertness. Alertness is a prerequisite alertness. Alertness is a prerequisite alertness. Alertness is a prerequisite for focus and you're out the gate. for focus and you're out the gate. for focus and you're out the gate. whether it's caffeine or people who whether it's caffeine or people who whether it's caffeine or people who are taking and I think even on our dear are taking and I think even on our dear are taking and I think even on our dear Stanford campus I would bet that there Stanford campus I would bet that there Stanford campus I would bet that there are students who are not prescribed are students who are not prescribed are students who are not prescribed aderall vivance and other stimulants aderall vivance and other stimulants aderall vivance and other stimulants that take them that take them that take them &gt;&gt; in order to get work done it's a very &gt;&gt; in order to get work done it's a very &gt;&gt; in order to get work done it's a very competitive place and they're driven and competitive place and they're driven and competitive place and they're driven and um no one wants to feel tired when you um no one wants to feel tired when you um no one wants to feel tired when you got work to do got work to do got work to do &gt;&gt; so this is also part of when you when &gt;&gt; so this is also part of when you when &gt;&gt; so this is also part of when you when you look at motivation so some people you look at motivation so some people you look at motivation so some people think what you do is you say drugs are think what you do is you say drugs are think what you do is you say drugs are bad look at all these things it's bad look at all these things it's bad look at all these things it's ruining you know it does this it's ruining you know it does this it's ruining you know it does this it's hurting you this way that way this way hurting you this way that way this way hurting you this way that way this way in effect you're kind of telling the in effect you're kind of telling the in effect you're kind of telling the person they're an idiot, right? If you person they're an idiot, right? If you person they're an idiot, right? If you if you actually do that. So, you get if you actually do that. So, you get if you actually do that. So, you get them to articulate. Well, clearly you them to articulate. Well, clearly you them to articulate. Well, clearly you like some things about it. What are like some things about it. What are like some things about it. What are they? And put them on the table. Well, they? And put them on the table. Well, they? And put them on the table. Well, you know, it's just like my friendship you know, it's just like my friendship you know, it's just like my friendship group has always drunk and I would just group has always drunk and I would just group has always drunk and I would just love those hunting trips. We all get, love those hunting trips. We all get, love those hunting trips. We all get, you know, shitfaced together and it's you know, shitfaced together and it's you know, shitfaced together and it's really fun. Okay. So, that'd be one really fun. Okay. So, that'd be one really fun. Okay. So, that'd be one thing you What else? Tell me. And you're thing you What else? Tell me. And you're thing you What else? Tell me. And you're take you're not framing this as a you're take you're not framing this as a you're take you're not framing this as a struggle between you as the punishing struggle between you as the punishing struggle between you as the punishing force that's going to deny that this force that's going to deny that this force that's going to deny that this person has enjoyed something about this person has enjoyed something about this person has enjoyed something about this or get something out of it socially and or get something out of it socially and or get something out of it socially and you say it's so this is why so this is you say it's so this is why so this is you say it's so this is why so this is what we need to decide these are the what we need to decide these are the what we need to decide these are the costs and these are the benefits it's costs and these are the benefits it's costs and these are the benefits it's your life not mine you know do you want your life not mine you know do you want your life not mine you know do you want to go for this or not and you let and to go for this or not and you let and to go for this or not and you let and you acknowledge the grief of those you acknowledge the grief of those you acknowledge the grief of those things like you know man I'm used to be things like you know man I'm used to be things like you know man I'm used to be so much closer to my college buddies and so much closer to my college buddies and so much closer to my college buddies and now I had to skip our annual trip the now I had to skip our annual trip the now I had to skip our annual trip the first time because I was afraid I would first time because I was afraid I would first time because I was afraid I would relapse like wow that's that is a real relapse like wow that's that is a real relapse like wow that's that is a real cost. I mean that has to be grieved. Um cost. I mean that has to be grieved. Um cost. I mean that has to be grieved. Um you know and there are many things you know and there are many things you know and there are many things like I know people with like I know people with like I know people with relationships where um one person nagged the other to where um one person nagged the other to where um one person nagged the other to quit drinking and then when the person quit drinking and then when the person quit drinking and then when the person got sober left them because they changed got sober left them because they changed got sober left them because they changed a lot in ways that they didn't like and a lot in ways that they didn't like and a lot in ways that they didn't like and they it turned out there were certain they it turned out there were certain they it turned out there were certain aspects of person you know their aspects of person you know their aspects of person you know their drinking problem that worked for that drinking problem that worked for that drinking problem that worked for that other person whether it was well I had other person whether it was well I had other person whether it was well I had more control over the checkbook because more control over the checkbook because more control over the checkbook because you were you were always drunk and I got you were you were always drunk and I got you were you were always drunk and I got to make my spending decisions by myself to make my spending decisions by myself to make my spending decisions by myself or um you know I didn't have to I find or um you know I didn't have to I find or um you know I didn't have to I find now that we're talking more I realize now that we're talking more I realize now that we're talking more I realize I don't like a lot of things you say. I don't like a lot of things you say. I don't like a lot of things you say. Didn't know that before. And that Didn't know that before. And that Didn't know that before. And that is all that's all real. I mean that is all that's all real. I mean that is all that's all real. I mean those kinds of things happen. those kinds of things happen. those kinds of things happen. Drugs always work in some crude sense, Drugs always work in some crude sense, Drugs always work in some crude sense, you know? I mean necessarily beneficial, you know? I mean necessarily beneficial, you know? I mean necessarily beneficial, but they have some function, right? And but they have some function, right? And but they have some function, right? And you got to figure that out because that you got to figure that out because that you got to figure that out because that will change if the drug use changes. will change if the drug use changes. will change if the drug use changes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The the partner example is &gt;&gt; Yeah. The the partner example is &gt;&gt; Yeah. The the partner example is interesting because there's this whole interesting because there's this whole interesting because there's this whole notion of codependents teaming up with notion of codependents teaming up with notion of codependents teaming up with or partnering up with addicts. This is or partnering up with addicts. This is or partnering up with addicts. This is why things like codependence anonymous why things like codependence anonymous why things like codependence anonymous and um and um and um &gt;&gt; yeah I think that's a bit overstated &gt;&gt; yeah I think that's a bit overstated &gt;&gt; yeah I think that's a bit overstated honestly but yeah one of the honestly but yeah one of the honestly but yeah one of the really interesting studies was done by really interesting studies was done by really interesting studies was done by Ruth Kronhite who was my colleague for a Ruth Kronhite who was my colleague for a Ruth Kronhite who was my colleague for a while and it was of women who were while and it was of women who were while and it was of women who were married to alcoholic men and um did you married to alcoholic men and um did you married to alcoholic men and um did you know all the things that fit the know all the things that fit the know all the things that fit the codependent thing but then the when the codependent thing but then the when the codependent thing but then the when the men got sober and they went back and men got sober and they went back and men got sober and they went back and studied them a year later the women studied them a year later the women studied them a year later the women looked exactly like women of men who had looked exactly like women of men who had looked exactly like women of men who had never been alcoholic. So, a lot of the never been alcoholic. So, a lot of the never been alcoholic. So, a lot of the things that are attributed to the things that are attributed to the things that are attributed to the personality of the codependent person is personality of the codependent person is personality of the codependent person is actually reaction to addiction. You actually reaction to addiction. You actually reaction to addiction. You know, they're hyper responsible. They know, they're hyper responsible. They know, they're hyper responsible. They have to be because the mortgage won't have to be because the mortgage won't have to be because the mortgage won't get paid. Um, you know, they're get paid. Um, you know, they're get paid. Um, you know, they're placating. Well, they have to be because placating. Well, they have to be because placating. Well, they have to be because they've got this volatile person, they've got this volatile person, they've got this volatile person, potentially dangerous person. That's potentially dangerous person. That's potentially dangerous person. That's where a lot of that comes from. And I where a lot of that comes from. And I where a lot of that comes from. And I think I think it was a bit unfair. I think I think it was a bit unfair. I think I think it was a bit unfair. I mean, obviously there people have bad mean, obviously there people have bad mean, obviously there people have bad tastes and partners. There's no doubt tastes and partners. There's no doubt tastes and partners. There's no doubt about that. But maybe a bit unfair to um about that. But maybe a bit unfair to um about that. But maybe a bit unfair to um not appreciate a lot of things families not appreciate a lot of things families not appreciate a lot of things families do are more reactive than something do are more reactive than something do are more reactive than something that was pre-existent and fit with an that was pre-existent and fit with an that was pre-existent and fit with an addiction. &gt;&gt; That's a really important point because &gt;&gt; That's a really important point because &gt;&gt; That's a really important point because I think um most people think the addict I think um most people think the addict I think um most people think the addict codependent pairing is almost like a codependent pairing is almost like a codependent pairing is almost like a prerequisite. Um and it actually reminds prerequisite. Um and it actually reminds prerequisite. Um and it actually reminds me of this whole literature which I me of this whole literature which I me of this whole literature which I think is an important literature uh that think is an important literature uh that think is an important literature uh that became popular about you know avoidant became popular about you know avoidant became popular about you know avoidant attachment versus anxious attachment and attachment versus anxious attachment and attachment versus anxious attachment and this idea that people always pair up this idea that people always pair up this idea that people always pair up along these dimensions. But the studies along these dimensions. But the studies along these dimensions. But the studies that have been carried out subsequent to that have been carried out subsequent to that have been carried out subsequent to the that those naming categories is that the that those naming categories is that the that those naming categories is that um put each of those people in a um put each of those people in a um put each of those people in a different context and they behave very different context and they behave very different context and they behave very differently. And you know, you can, you differently. And you know, you can, you differently. And you know, you can, you know, so it's so we're more plastic know, so it's so we're more plastic know, so it's so we're more plastic in our in our psychologies in our in our in our psychologies in our in our in our psychologies in our in our romantic pairings than perhaps we our romantic pairings than perhaps we our romantic pairings than perhaps we assume. &gt;&gt; And it's also true that, you know, there &gt;&gt; And it's also true that, you know, there &gt;&gt; And it's also true that, you know, there people who 10 years into addiction find people who 10 years into addiction find people who 10 years into addiction find they're not married to the person they they're not married to the person they they're not married to the person they married, you know, cuz that person has married, you know, cuz that person has married, you know, cuz that person has changed an awful lot. So, you know, changed an awful lot. So, you know, changed an awful lot. So, you know, maybe they were originally pretty maybe they were originally pretty maybe they were originally pretty social, pretty competent, pretty honest, social, pretty competent, pretty honest, social, pretty competent, pretty honest, and then after 10 years of heroin use and then after 10 years of heroin use and then after 10 years of heroin use or whatever, they are none of those or whatever, they are none of those or whatever, they are none of those things. And the, you know, it feels like things. And the, you know, it feels like things. And the, you know, it feels like to the marriage person, it's like to the marriage person, it's like to the marriage person, it's like this is this is just not the person I this is this is just not the person I this is this is just not the person I married in the first place. That's why I married in the first place. That's why I married in the first place. That's why we don't match. Not because I picked the we don't match. Not because I picked the we don't match. Not because I picked the wrong person, but that person changed. wrong person, but that person changed. wrong person, but that person changed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; In keeping with that and the original &gt;&gt; In keeping with that and the original &gt;&gt; In keeping with that and the original question, which was different stages of question, which was different stages of question, which was different stages of addiction perhaps requiring different addiction perhaps requiring different addiction perhaps requiring different approaches. There's this idea perhaps um trying to There's this idea perhaps um trying to There's this idea perhaps um trying to remove my neuroscientist lens here, but remove my neuroscientist lens here, but remove my neuroscientist lens here, but I believe I'll just be open about I believe I'll just be open about I believe I'll just be open about this. I believe that at some point if this. I believe that at some point if this. I believe that at some point if you use certain substances long enough, you use certain substances long enough, you use certain substances long enough, the brain is changed significantly the brain is changed significantly the brain is changed significantly enough that the opportunity for recovery enough that the opportunity for recovery enough that the opportunity for recovery is different depending on whether or not is different depending on whether or not is different depending on whether or not you go to a meeting, which certainly you go to a meeting, which certainly you go to a meeting, which certainly works for, let's just say, all of the works for, let's just say, all of the works for, let's just say, all of the addictions early on, probably most of addictions early on, probably most of addictions early on, probably most of them in the middle, but I know a few ex them in the middle, but I know a few ex them in the middle, but I know a few ex heroin addicts, heroin addicts, heroin addicts, &gt;&gt; they're different. &gt;&gt; they're different. &gt;&gt; they're different. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; They're still different even though &gt;&gt; They're still different even though &gt;&gt; They're still different even though they're sober. I knew them before. Now they're sober. I knew them before. Now they're sober. I knew them before. Now it's not a perfect experiment because it's not a perfect experiment because it's not a perfect experiment because there was time etc. But we know that there was time etc. But we know that there was time etc. But we know that certain drugs actually kill neurons. certain drugs actually kill neurons. certain drugs actually kill neurons. Certain drugs certain drugs rewire the Certain drugs certain drugs rewire the Certain drugs certain drugs rewire the reward circuitry and the person is reward circuitry and the person is reward circuitry and the person is different. It's not to say that they different. It's not to say that they different. It's not to say that they shouldn't quit. U they should. Um but shouldn't quit. U they should. Um but shouldn't quit. U they should. Um but it's harder to imagine sitting down with it's harder to imagine sitting down with it's harder to imagine sitting down with someone who's been using heroin or someone who's been using heroin or someone who's been using heroin or methamphetamines for a number of years methamphetamines for a number of years methamphetamines for a number of years and say all right let's think about how and say all right let's think about how and say all right let's think about how you're losing. to see what you could win you're losing. to see what you could win you're losing. to see what you could win in the circumstance. I mean, I hope in the circumstance. I mean, I hope in the circumstance. I mean, I hope that's the case. that's the case. that's the case. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; But it seems like they're rewired. &gt;&gt; But it seems like they're rewired. &gt;&gt; But it seems like they're rewired. They're a different beast. They're a different beast. They're a different beast. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that is fundamental to the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that is fundamental to the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that is fundamental to the understanding of the disorder. That is a understanding of the disorder. That is a understanding of the disorder. That is a change in the brain. And there's, you change in the brain. And there's, you change in the brain. And there's, you know, you can call it disease and call know, you can call it disease and call know, you can call it disease and call it disorder. I often think of it as um it disorder. I often think of it as um it disorder. I often think of it as um deeply maladaptive learning. You know, deeply maladaptive learning. You know, deeply maladaptive learning. You know, I'm like I'm like that rat who really I'm like I'm like that rat who really I'm like I'm like that rat who really believes the most important next really believes the most important next really believes the most important next thing for me to do is to consume this thing for me to do is to consume this thing for me to do is to consume this powder. and when I'm ignoring all the powder. and when I'm ignoring all the powder. and when I'm ignoring all the things that I'm evolved to do things that I'm evolved to do things that I'm evolved to do instead. Um so um is definitely true. instead. Um so um is definitely true. instead. Um so um is definitely true. You see these changes and you can You see these changes and you can You see these changes and you can observe them in the brain and it and observe them in the brain and it and observe them in the brain and it and it's amazing. You can even predict it's amazing. You can even predict it's amazing. You can even predict things that the person can't even report things that the person can't even report things that the person can't even report on. So we did some work uh myself, on. So we did some work uh myself, on. So we did some work uh myself, Claudia Padulla, Brian Kudson, Kelly Claudia Padulla, Brian Kudson, Kelly Claudia Padulla, Brian Kudson, Kelly McNan up at the uh the VA in Menllo Park McNan up at the uh the VA in Menllo Park McNan up at the uh the VA in Menllo Park of uh people who were in a residential of uh people who were in a residential of uh people who were in a residential program addicted to methamphetamine all program addicted to methamphetamine all program addicted to methamphetamine all of them off methamphetamine while of them off methamphetamine while of them off methamphetamine while they're in the residential thing and uh they're in the residential thing and uh they're in the residential thing and uh then uh giving them imaging them uh and then uh giving them imaging them uh and then uh giving them imaging them uh and showing them cues of meth associated showing them cues of meth associated showing them cues of meth associated things like the pipe or the powder and things like the pipe or the powder and things like the pipe or the powder and all that and asking them how much do you all that and asking them how much do you all that and asking them how much do you like that? What do you feel towards like that? What do you feel towards like that? What do you feel towards that? Well, independent of that, there's that? Well, independent of that, there's that? Well, independent of that, there's also nucleus encumbent activation that also nucleus encumbent activation that also nucleus encumbent activation that you can see and that predicted who you can see and that predicted who you can see and that predicted who relapsed. Not what they said, but what there was Not what they said, but what there was Not what they said, but what there was going on in their brain. They didn't going on in their brain. They didn't going on in their brain. They didn't even necessarily know it. We should say even necessarily know it. We should say even necessarily know it. We should say nucleus ccumbent is a critical node nucleus ccumbent is a critical node nucleus ccumbent is a critical node within the dopamine reward circuitry of within the dopamine reward circuitry of within the dopamine reward circuitry of the brain that underlies the path to the brain that underlies the path to the brain that underlies the path to addiction and many other things that addiction and many other things that addiction and many other things that initially feel good. initially feel good. initially feel good. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um Yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; Um Yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; Um Yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; So, so the brain was report could &gt;&gt; So, so the brain was report could &gt;&gt; So, so the brain was report could nucleus come. Let's just put in dopamine nucleus come. Let's just put in dopamine nucleus come. Let's just put in dopamine activation as a proxy. activation as a proxy. activation as a proxy. &gt;&gt; So levels of dopamine activation, so to &gt;&gt; So levels of dopamine activation, so to &gt;&gt; So levels of dopamine activation, so to speak. We're being neurosciency here, speak. We're being neurosciency here, speak. We're being neurosciency here, not technically precise. Levels of not technically precise. Levels of not technically precise. Levels of dopamine activation predicted whether or dopamine activation predicted whether or dopamine activation predicted whether or not the person would relapse better than not the person would relapse better than not the person would relapse better than their own self-report of the subjective their own self-report of the subjective their own self-report of the subjective feeling of whether or not they would feeling of whether or not they would feeling of whether or not they would relapse. &gt;&gt; I crave this. I like this. I want this. &gt;&gt; I crave this. I like this. I want this. &gt;&gt; I crave this. I like this. I want this. And it helps explain why um you know And it helps explain why um you know And it helps explain why um you know addicted people sometimes get unfair rap addicted people sometimes get unfair rap addicted people sometimes get unfair rap in terms of well they you know they lie in terms of well they you know they lie in terms of well they you know they lie you about what their desires are. I you about what their desires are. I you about what their desires are. I really want to stop using. Well really want to stop using. Well really want to stop using. Well you know I would assume if they're in a you know I would assume if they're in a you know I would assume if they're in a residential program for 28 days they residential program for 28 days they residential program for 28 days they do in fact want to stop using but they do in fact want to stop using but they do in fact want to stop using but they don't have complete insight to they don't have complete insight to they don't have complete insight to what's going on the inside of brain what's going on the inside of brain what's going on the inside of brain like anyone else is. So that like anyone else is. So that like anyone else is. So that person those two people would both say I person those two people would both say I person those two people would both say I really want to do this and one really want to do this and one really want to do this and one goes out and relapses and the other goes out and relapses and the other goes out and relapses and the other doesn't. It doesn't necessarily mean the doesn't. It doesn't necessarily mean the doesn't. It doesn't necessarily mean the one who relapsed lied. It may just the one who relapsed lied. It may just the one who relapsed lied. It may just be I didn't realize how deeply my brain be I didn't realize how deeply my brain be I didn't realize how deeply my brain has been changed. And it's pretty hard has been changed. And it's pretty hard has been changed. And it's pretty hard for me given, you know, the neighborhood for me given, you know, the neighborhood for me given, you know, the neighborhood I live in to walk around and see no one I live in to walk around and see no one I live in to walk around and see no one using drugs ever. Uh to see no uh using drugs ever. Uh to see no uh using drugs ever. Uh to see no uh illusions to drugs in TVs or movies, to illusions to drugs in TVs or movies, to illusions to drugs in TVs or movies, to see no pipes, to see no powders. Um and see no pipes, to see no powders. Um and see no pipes, to see no powders. Um and that and I'm going to relapse and that and I'm going to relapse and that and I'm going to relapse because I have rewired because I have rewired because I have rewired uh my reward system. So in 12step one uh my reward system. So in 12step one uh my reward system. So in 12step one they talk about your addict brain or they talk about your addict brain or they talk about your addict brain or one's addict brain. That's my addict one's addict brain. That's my addict one's addict brain. That's my addict brain. That's your that's your addict brain. That's your that's your addict brain. That's your that's your addict brain talking. That's not you. I think brain talking. That's not you. I think brain talking. That's not you. I think this study that you refer to I think this study that you refer to I think this study that you refer to I think pinpointed the addict brain is at least pinpointed the addict brain is at least pinpointed the addict brain is at least in part nucleus dopamine reward in part nucleus dopamine reward in part nucleus dopamine reward circuitry activation. circuitry activation. circuitry activation. &gt;&gt; Q elicited. Yes. &gt;&gt; Q elicited. Yes. &gt;&gt; Q elicited. Yes. &gt;&gt; Q elicited. So something that &gt;&gt; Q elicited. So something that &gt;&gt; Q elicited. So something that anticipates the uh or predicts the use. anticipates the uh or predicts the use. anticipates the uh or predicts the use. &gt;&gt; Yep. That's right. And and you think &gt;&gt; Yep. That's right. And and you think &gt;&gt; Yep. That's right. And and you think particularly when you get into legal particularly when you get into legal particularly when you get into legal products that is a hugely important products that is a hugely important products that is a hugely important thing. I mean when you can it's very thing. I mean when you can it's very thing. I mean when you can it's very hard to watch TV and not see an ad for hard to watch TV and not see an ad for hard to watch TV and not see an ad for beer for example beer for example beer for example &gt;&gt; or pharmaceuticals. &gt;&gt; or pharmaceuticals. &gt;&gt; or pharmaceuticals. &gt;&gt; Or pharmaceuticals. Yes. Right. Um and &gt;&gt; Or pharmaceuticals. Yes. Right. Um and &gt;&gt; Or pharmaceuticals. Yes. Right. Um and uh it's depending where you are around uh it's depending where you are around uh it's depending where you are around cigarettes. You know this is very driven cigarettes. You know this is very driven cigarettes. You know this is very driven by class but there's still a lot of by class but there's still a lot of by class but there's still a lot of neighborhoods where quite a few people neighborhoods where quite a few people neighborhoods where quite a few people smoke and it's pretty hard to get smoke and it's pretty hard to get smoke and it's pretty hard to get through the day without being exposed to through the day without being exposed to through the day without being exposed to the queue of the smell of tobacco smoke the queue of the smell of tobacco smoke the queue of the smell of tobacco smoke or the smell of cannabis smoke for that or the smell of cannabis smoke for that or the smell of cannabis smoke for that matter. Um and so Q elicited, you know, matter. Um and so Q elicited, you know, matter. Um and so Q elicited, you know, craving is going to be a driver of craving is going to be a driver of craving is going to be a driver of relapse and you and that is clearly relapse and you and that is clearly relapse and you and that is clearly something that you were not born with. something that you were not born with. something that you were not born with. That is something that you learn through That is something that you learn through That is something that you learn through a repeated exposure of your brain to a repeated exposure of your brain to a repeated exposure of your brain to a you know pretty powerful drug. So, for you know pretty powerful drug. So, for you know pretty powerful drug. So, for folks listening uh who pick up their folks listening uh who pick up their folks listening uh who pick up their phone and find themselves scrolling phone and find themselves scrolling phone and find themselves scrolling social media knowing they have other social media knowing they have other social media knowing they have other things to do or playing video games things to do or playing video games things to do or playing video games knowing there are other things they knowing there are other things they knowing there are other things they really need to do and feel like they really need to do and feel like they really need to do and feel like they quote unquote can't stop there. I think quote unquote can't stop there. I think quote unquote can't stop there. I think what you're pointing to really what you're pointing to really what you're pointing to really represents the divide between that represents the divide between that represents the divide between that inner voice that we think of as us inner voice that we think of as us inner voice that we think of as us telling us like why am I doing this? I telling us like why am I doing this? I telling us like why am I doing this? I know I shouldn't be doing this but I know I shouldn't be doing this but I know I shouldn't be doing this but I feel like I'm compelled to do it almost feel like I'm compelled to do it almost feel like I'm compelled to do it almost in a kind of automaton kind of way. It in a kind of automaton kind of way. It in a kind of automaton kind of way. It is extremely common experience just in is extremely common experience just in is extremely common experience just in life, right? You know, I know I life, right? You know, I know I life, right? You know, I know I shouldn't need that ho. I've been trying shouldn't need that ho. I've been trying shouldn't need that ho. I've been trying to lose weight, but I'm tired today and to lose weight, but I'm tired today and to lose weight, but I'm tired today and I'm going to have it. Like just the fact I'm going to have it. Like just the fact I'm going to have it. Like just the fact that we have a contradiction between our that we have a contradiction between our that we have a contradiction between our idealized self and our own head and our idealized self and our own head and our idealized self and our own head and our behavior. That's that's probably just behavior. That's that's probably just behavior. That's that's probably just being a person. But when it gets to the being a person. But when it gets to the being a person. But when it gets to the point that I'm actually I'm going to point that I'm actually I'm going to point that I'm actually I'm going to flunk this exam, which is important to flunk this exam, which is important to flunk this exam, which is important to me not to flunk if I don't start me not to flunk if I don't start me not to flunk if I don't start studying and I'm on my third hour of studying and I'm on my third hour of studying and I'm on my third hour of scrolling through TikTok and I know and scrolling through TikTok and I know and scrolling through TikTok and I know and I'm not that then you then you start to I'm not that then you then you start to I'm not that then you then you start to worry, right? because now you're going worry, right? because now you're going worry, right? because now you're going to do damage to yourself for the purpose to do damage to yourself for the purpose to do damage to yourself for the purpose of consuming this brain candy, you know, of consuming this brain candy, you know, of consuming this brain candy, you know, which has no nutritive value at all, um, which has no nutritive value at all, um, which has no nutritive value at all, um, but is clearly seductive. but is clearly seductive. but is clearly seductive. I'm out of the lab these days, but if I I'm out of the lab these days, but if I I'm out of the lab these days, but if I were to go back into the lab, I'd want were to go back into the lab, I'd want were to go back into the lab, I'd want to team up with clinicians like you and to team up with clinicians like you and to team up with clinicians like you and some of our engineering, bio-engineering some of our engineering, bio-engineering some of our engineering, bio-engineering friends and develop something which friends and develop something which friends and develop something which would be would be would be similar to what Nolan and company similar to what Nolan and company similar to what Nolan and company developed for depression, right? brain developed for depression, right? brain developed for depression, right? brain stimulation, not just willy-nilly, but stimulation, not just willy-nilly, but stimulation, not just willy-nilly, but of particular brain areas and circuits of particular brain areas and circuits of particular brain areas and circuits to try and undo major depression. to try and undo major depression. to try and undo major depression. Wouldn't it be wonderful if there was a Wouldn't it be wonderful if there was a Wouldn't it be wonderful if there was a brain stimulation device that could brain stimulation device that could brain stimulation device that could tweak the reward circuitry in the tweak the reward circuitry in the tweak the reward circuitry in the presence of a cue? presence of a cue? presence of a cue? &gt;&gt; Yep. that predicted methamphetamine for &gt;&gt; Yep. that predicted methamphetamine for &gt;&gt; Yep. that predicted methamphetamine for the amphetamine addict or alcohol for the amphetamine addict or alcohol for the amphetamine addict or alcohol for whatever process behavioral addictions whatever process behavioral addictions whatever process behavioral addictions and wouldn't eliminate the ability to and wouldn't eliminate the ability to and wouldn't eliminate the ability to experience reward but experience reward but experience reward but would eliminate the essentially the would eliminate the essentially the would eliminate the essentially the bad addiction or tamp it down. tamp bad addiction or tamp it down. tamp bad addiction or tamp it down. tamp down the rewarding properties of the bad down the rewarding properties of the bad down the rewarding properties of the bad addiction and at the same time do an addiction and at the same time do an addiction and at the same time do an experiment a parallel experiment where experiment a parallel experiment where experiment a parallel experiment where you ramp up the reward circuitry in uh you ramp up the reward circuitry in uh you ramp up the reward circuitry in uh in the presence of a uh something that in the presence of a uh something that in the presence of a uh something that cued for positive behavior because I cued for positive behavior because I cued for positive behavior because I don't think you can just tamp down don't think you can just tamp down don't think you can just tamp down reward circuitry. This is uh one of the reward circuitry. This is uh one of the reward circuitry. This is uh one of the challenges I have with the um you know challenges I have with the um you know challenges I have with the um you know okay obviously abstinence is going to be okay obviously abstinence is going to be okay obviously abstinence is going to be critical but critical but critical but for somebody that has a nucleus ccumbent for somebody that has a nucleus ccumbent for somebody that has a nucleus ccumbent and we all do uh it's going to want to and we all do uh it's going to want to and we all do uh it's going to want to latch on to something and I've seen so latch on to something and I've seen so latch on to something and I've seen so many addicts pivot to the next thing. many addicts pivot to the next thing. many addicts pivot to the next thing. Sometimes it's a healthy thing. Sometimes it's a healthy thing. Sometimes it's a healthy thing. &gt;&gt; Many ultrarunners are addicts. &gt;&gt; Many ultrarunners are addicts. &gt;&gt; Many ultrarunners are addicts. &gt;&gt; I've met people like that too. You can't &gt;&gt; I've met people like that too. You can't &gt;&gt; I've met people like that too. You can't go to a 12step meeting, and this is go to a 12step meeting, and this is go to a 12step meeting, and this is somewhat cultural and uh also, but you somewhat cultural and uh also, but you somewhat cultural and uh also, but you can't go to a 12step meeting and not see can't go to a 12step meeting and not see can't go to a 12step meeting and not see people with lots and lots of tattoos. If people with lots and lots of tattoos. If people with lots and lots of tattoos. If they have issues with um and I'm not they have issues with um and I'm not they have issues with um and I'm not demonizing tattoos, but uh if they have demonizing tattoos, but uh if they have demonizing tattoos, but uh if they have issues with drugs or alcohol, um issues with drugs or alcohol, um issues with drugs or alcohol, um typically smoking will pop up in its typically smoking will pop up in its typically smoking will pop up in its place. They need something. We need place. They need something. We need place. They need something. We need something. And ideally it would be, you something. And ideally it would be, you something. And ideally it would be, you know, school and family and connection know, school and family and connection know, school and family and connection and community and uh public service. and community and uh public service. and community and uh public service. Great. if we could, you know, but a Great. if we could, you know, but a Great. if we could, you know, but a device that could help um tune the device that could help um tune the device that could help um tune the specificity of reward, I don't think is specificity of reward, I don't think is specificity of reward, I don't think is outside the realm of possible. I'm outside the realm of possible. I'm outside the realm of possible. I'm thinking like a Stanford guy now. We we thinking like a Stanford guy now. We we thinking like a Stanford guy now. We we like to engineer everything, but why like to engineer everything, but why like to engineer everything, but why not? It's being done for OCD. It's being not? It's being done for OCD. It's being not? It's being done for OCD. It's being done for depression. It's being done for done for depression. It's being done for done for depression. It's being done for PTSD. It's being done for so many PTSD. It's being done for so many PTSD. It's being done for so many things. I mean, after all, it's things. I mean, after all, it's things. I mean, after all, it's plasticity that we're after. plasticity that we're after. plasticity that we're after. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean and you're right &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean and you're right &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean and you're right that the one of the challenges is you that the one of the challenges is you that the one of the challenges is you know addiction is it's not like it's know addiction is it's not like it's know addiction is it's not like it's introduce something new into the body. introduce something new into the body. introduce something new into the body. It's working on the very system we use It's working on the very system we use It's working on the very system we use to negotiate life. It is this thing we to negotiate life. It is this thing we to negotiate life. It is this thing we use for you know learning you know use for you know learning you know use for you know learning you know acquisition of knowledge acquisition of acquisition of knowledge acquisition of acquisition of knowledge acquisition of skills. So it's um it's not like if skills. So it's um it's not like if skills. So it's um it's not like if we just didn't have that we would be we just didn't have that we would be we just didn't have that we would be better off. We wouldn't be better off. better off. We wouldn't be better off. better off. We wouldn't be better off. We we couldn't survive without it. The We we couldn't survive without it. The We we couldn't survive without it. The only neurosurgery only neurosurgery only neurosurgery patient is at West Virginia University, patient is at West Virginia University, patient is at West Virginia University, you know, who had a very uncontrollable you know, who had a very uncontrollable you know, who had a very uncontrollable addiction and got not exactly sure the addiction and got not exactly sure the addiction and got not exactly sure the nature of the implant. If it's a stim nature of the implant. If it's a stim nature of the implant. If it's a stim stimulating implant, uh that's happened stimulating implant, uh that's happened stimulating implant, uh that's happened once. It was covered. People want to once. It was covered. People want to once. It was covered. People want to read about a Lenny Bernstein, a friend read about a Lenny Bernstein, a friend read about a Lenny Bernstein, a friend of mine at Washington Post who of mine at Washington Post who of mine at Washington Post who interviewed that patient and the interviewed that patient and the interviewed that patient and the team. But I think that is likely that we team. But I think that is likely that we team. But I think that is likely that we will see uh something like that. I will see uh something like that. I will see uh something like that. I suspect we will see more RTMS, you suspect we will see more RTMS, you suspect we will see more RTMS, you transmic stimulation because it's not so transmic stimulation because it's not so transmic stimulation because it's not so invasive, not so expensive, and not so invasive, not so expensive, and not so invasive, not so expensive, and not so risky. We're we're about to start led by risky. We're we're about to start led by risky. We're we're about to start led by Greg Salem who's a really good Greg Salem who's a really good Greg Salem who's a really good psychiatrist, a multi-sight study with u psychiatrist, a multi-sight study with u psychiatrist, a multi-sight study with u uh RTMS to the dorsal lateral prefrontal uh RTMS to the dorsal lateral prefrontal uh RTMS to the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex for um people who are cannabis cortex for um people who are cannabis cortex for um people who are cannabis use disorder addicted to cannabis. Um use disorder addicted to cannabis. Um use disorder addicted to cannabis. Um there are lots of people working on there are lots of people working on there are lots of people working on these uh protocols for alcohol, for these uh protocols for alcohol, for these uh protocols for alcohol, for cocaine doesn't always work. uh you know cocaine doesn't always work. uh you know cocaine doesn't always work. uh you know RTMS is kind almost saying like RTMS is RTMS is kind almost saying like RTMS is RTMS is kind almost saying like RTMS is almost like saying we put them on pills almost like saying we put them on pills almost like saying we put them on pills because there's you know what brain because there's you know what brain because there's you know what brain region at what intensity that kind of region at what intensity that kind of region at what intensity that kind of stuff but um that is a way you know to stuff but um that is a way you know to stuff but um that is a way you know to intervene far more directly you know to intervene far more directly you know to intervene far more directly you know to the brain than talk therapy for example the brain than talk therapy for example the brain than talk therapy for example um so um you know I think I think that um so um you know I think I think that um so um you know I think I think that is certainly possible uh in implants is certainly possible uh in implants is certainly possible uh in implants made possible this particular case was made possible this particular case was made possible this particular case was someone who was very had tried someone who was very had tried someone who was very had tried everything on earth and still couldn't everything on earth and still couldn't everything on earth and still couldn't stop and interestingly even with the stop and interestingly even with the stop and interestingly even with the implant still needs medications, goes to implant still needs medications, goes to implant still needs medications, goes to lots of 12step meetings. It's it lots of 12step meetings. It's it lots of 12step meetings. It's it didn't just made it make it disappear. didn't just made it make it disappear. didn't just made it make it disappear. Cancer though, I mean, we haven't talked Cancer though, I mean, we haven't talked Cancer though, I mean, we haven't talked about GLP1 agonist if we want to get in about GLP1 agonist if we want to get in about GLP1 agonist if we want to get in that. That is maybe something that would that. That is maybe something that would that. That is maybe something that would have the lasting effect on changing what have the lasting effect on changing what have the lasting effect on changing what one wanted. one wanted. one wanted. &gt;&gt; I definitely want to talk about GLP1s. I &gt;&gt; I definitely want to talk about GLP1s. I &gt;&gt; I definitely want to talk about GLP1s. I think be just before we pivot there. think be just before we pivot there. think be just before we pivot there. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, when I think about the quote unquote when I think about the quote unquote when I think about the quote unquote homeless problem, yes, homeless problem, yes, homeless problem, yes, &gt;&gt; living in California, you can't but see &gt;&gt; living in California, you can't but see &gt;&gt; living in California, you can't but see this. &gt;&gt; Um, I think of it as at least, you tell &gt;&gt; Um, I think of it as at least, you tell &gt;&gt; Um, I think of it as at least, you tell me where my numbers are off, 50% an me where my numbers are off, 50% an me where my numbers are off, 50% an addiction problem, either first or also addiction problem, either first or also addiction problem, either first or also &gt;&gt; um, &gt;&gt; um, &gt;&gt; um, &gt;&gt; in this economy. Yeah. &gt;&gt; in this economy. Yeah. &gt;&gt; in this economy. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, those folks aren't going &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, those folks aren't going &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, those folks aren't going to go to 12step meetings. to go to 12step meetings. to go to 12step meetings. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It maybe I would love for them to. &gt;&gt; It maybe I would love for them to. &gt;&gt; It maybe I would love for them to. They live outside my door and I talk to They live outside my door and I talk to They live outside my door and I talk to some of them and um they're not going to some of them and um they're not going to some of them and um they're not going to 12step meetings. No way. 12step meetings. No way. 12step meetings. No way. &gt;&gt; And many of them are their brain &gt;&gt; And many of them are their brain &gt;&gt; And many of them are their brain circuitry is altered. Maybe it was circuitry is altered. Maybe it was circuitry is altered. Maybe it was altered before. This is not all homeless altered before. This is not all homeless altered before. This is not all homeless people. In fact, I don't even know if people. In fact, I don't even know if people. In fact, I don't even know if homeless is the right word. And I'm not homeless is the right word. And I'm not homeless is the right word. And I'm not going to the unhoused thing. Like going to the unhoused thing. Like going to the unhoused thing. Like they're homeless, okay? They they don't they're homeless, okay? They they don't they're homeless, okay? They they don't have homes, you know? Um I don't think have homes, you know? Um I don't think have homes, you know? Um I don't think we need to split hairs with the naming. we need to split hairs with the naming. we need to split hairs with the naming. Many of them have serious substance Many of them have serious substance Many of them have serious substance abuse issues. abuse issues. abuse issues. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And or mental health issues that may &gt;&gt; And or mental health issues that may &gt;&gt; And or mental health issues that may have stemmed from that. have stemmed from that. have stemmed from that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I'm not asking you to solve the whole &gt;&gt; I'm not asking you to solve the whole &gt;&gt; I'm not asking you to solve the whole problem here in, you know, 5 minutes or problem here in, you know, 5 minutes or problem here in, you know, 5 minutes or less, but like how do we wrap our less, but like how do we wrap our less, but like how do we wrap our ourselves around the legislature? I ourselves around the legislature? I ourselves around the legislature? I know you've been involved in things know you've been involved in things know you've been involved in things related to this. related to this. related to this. &gt;&gt; I mean, how do you get somebody on the &gt;&gt; I mean, how do you get somebody on the &gt;&gt; I mean, how do you get somebody on the street to understand what's going on and street to understand what's going on and street to understand what's going on and rescue themselves? rescue themselves? rescue themselves? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So first off, yeah, it is a very &gt;&gt; Yeah. So first off, yeah, it is a very &gt;&gt; Yeah. So first off, yeah, it is a very high rate of substance use and mental high rate of substance use and mental high rate of substance use and mental illness, higher now than in other illness, higher now than in other illness, higher now than in other periods because unemployment is low. Um, periods because unemployment is low. Um, periods because unemployment is low. Um, you know, if you when the economy is you know, if you when the economy is you know, if you when the economy is really terrible, there are a lot more really terrible, there are a lot more really terrible, there are a lot more people who don't have anywhere to live people who don't have anywhere to live people who don't have anywhere to live who are, you know, just need a job who are, you know, just need a job who are, you know, just need a job basically. You know, they're not they basically. You know, they're not they basically. You know, they're not they didn't fall out of a you housing or a didn't fall out of a you housing or a didn't fall out of a you housing or a family. They, you know, there just they family. They, you know, there just they family. They, you know, there just they need work. Um, but since, you know, need work. Um, but since, you know, need work. Um, but since, you know, unemployment is historically quite low unemployment is historically quite low unemployment is historically quite low now. So who's left are the people who now. So who's left are the people who now. So who's left are the people who cannot even when we're near, you know, cannot even when we're near, you know, cannot even when we're near, you know, full employment cannot find a shelter. full employment cannot find a shelter. full employment cannot find a shelter. And those tend to be people who have And those tend to be people who have And those tend to be people who have problems like mental illness, like problems like mental illness, like problems like mental illness, like addiction. You can do some things and addiction. You can do some things and addiction. You can do some things and we've good evidence you can do some we've good evidence you can do some we've good evidence you can do some things by combining housing, you know, things by combining housing, you know, things by combining housing, you know, nice housing that people would want with nice housing that people would want with nice housing that people would want with uh recovery culture. So uh you know uh recovery culture. So uh you know uh recovery culture. So uh you know there's a model called Oxford House there's a model called Oxford House there's a model called Oxford House which is run by the people who live which is run by the people who live which is run by the people who live there and uh they all contribute a bit there and uh they all contribute a bit there and uh they all contribute a bit to the rent and they have a culture to the rent and they have a culture to the rent and they have a culture which is basically you can't you can't which is basically you can't you can't which is basically you can't you can't fight you can't be violent and you can't fight you can't be violent and you can't fight you can't be violent and you can't use substances or bring them in but use substances or bring them in but use substances or bring them in but otherwise that's it and they have otherwise that's it and they have otherwise that's it and they have sort of recovery communities like 10,000 sort of recovery communities like 10,000 sort of recovery communities like 10,000 of those things. Those kind of things of those things. Those kind of things of those things. Those kind of things have really good evidence of benefit. have really good evidence of benefit. have really good evidence of benefit. So some people will for that leave you So some people will for that leave you So some people will for that leave you know the streets and live there and make know the streets and live there and make know the streets and live there and make and make that trade. You can't use your and make that trade. You can't use your and make that trade. You can't use your drugs anymore. you can't drink anymore, drugs anymore. you can't drink anymore, drugs anymore. you can't drink anymore, but you can at least have a nice clean but you can at least have a nice clean but you can at least have a nice clean place with nice people who like you and place with nice people who like you and place with nice people who like you and will support you. Um, that can help will support you. Um, that can help will support you. Um, that can help people. Some people in my opinion uh people. Some people in my opinion uh people. Some people in my opinion uh have to uh it would be a courtmandated have to uh it would be a courtmandated have to uh it would be a courtmandated uh thing. And there's two mechanisms for uh thing. And there's two mechanisms for uh thing. And there's two mechanisms for that. If someone is so impaired that that. If someone is so impaired that that. If someone is so impaired that they are imminent grave imminently they are imminent grave imminently they are imminent grave imminently gravely disabled, an imminent threat to gravely disabled, an imminent threat to gravely disabled, an imminent threat to themselves or others, you can through themselves or others, you can through themselves or others, you can through the civil commitment process make them the civil commitment process make them the civil commitment process make them go to treatment. Um if someone has go to treatment. Um if someone has go to treatment. Um if someone has committed a crime and many people do committed a crime and many people do committed a crime and many people do like you know grab someone's iPhone, like you know grab someone's iPhone, like you know grab someone's iPhone, knock them over and run away and you get knock them over and run away and you get knock them over and run away and you get caught that is a different type of caught that is a different type of caught that is a different type of leverage we can do through things like leverage we can do through things like leverage we can do through things like drug court where you say look you know drug court where you say look you know drug court where you say look you know you shove that person you assaulted you shove that person you assaulted you shove that person you assaulted them you stole their phone we could send them you stole their phone we could send them you stole their phone we could send you to jail for this but we don't want you to jail for this but we don't want you to jail for this but we don't want to send you to jail instead you know if to send you to jail instead you know if to send you to jail instead you know if you will comply with this treatment you will comply with this treatment you will comply with this treatment regimen you will not have to serve the regimen you will not have to serve the regimen you will not have to serve the penalty for that and we'll expune penalty for that and we'll expune penalty for that and we'll expune your record at the end those kinds of your record at the end those kinds of your record at the end those kinds of things are going to be necessary for things are going to be necessary for things are going to be necessary for some people now there are many people some people now there are many people some people now there are many people uncomfort with that? Like, are you going uncomfort with that? Like, are you going uncomfort with that? Like, are you going to use pressure to put someone into to use pressure to put someone into to use pressure to put someone into treatment? Isn't that really unethical? treatment? Isn't that really unethical? treatment? Isn't that really unethical? Um, well, if someone with Alzheimer's Um, well, if someone with Alzheimer's Um, well, if someone with Alzheimer's disease wanders away from a nursing disease wanders away from a nursing disease wanders away from a nursing home, uh, we go find them and we bring home, uh, we go find them and we bring home, uh, we go find them and we bring them back whether they want to or not them back whether they want to or not them back whether they want to or not because we assume that the disease because we assume that the disease because we assume that the disease is affecting their judgment. So, if they is affecting their judgment. So, if they is affecting their judgment. So, if they think they can survive out there, think they can survive out there, think they can survive out there, they're wrong. And so, we take them back they're wrong. And so, we take them back they're wrong. And so, we take them back whether they want to or not. Well, the whether they want to or not. Well, the whether they want to or not. Well, the same thing is true, absolutely true of same thing is true, absolutely true of same thing is true, absolutely true of addiction. It dramatically changes our addiction. It dramatically changes our addiction. It dramatically changes our judgment, impairs our judgment, and judgment, impairs our judgment, and judgment, impairs our judgment, and without pressure, many people will not without pressure, many people will not without pressure, many people will not stop using. There's a study I like to stop using. There's a study I like to stop using. There's a study I like to quote by Doug Pollson and colleagues of quote by Doug Pollson and colleagues of quote by Doug Pollson and colleagues of people seeking help for alcohol people seeking help for alcohol people seeking help for alcohol treatment. And why this is a good one is treatment. And why this is a good one is treatment. And why this is a good one is because alcohol is legal, right? So it's because alcohol is legal, right? So it's because alcohol is legal, right? So it's not the war on alcohol made them go. not the war on alcohol made them go. not the war on alcohol made them go. Well, alcohol is legal. But he asked all Well, alcohol is legal. But he asked all Well, alcohol is legal. But he asked all of them, "Has anyone leaned on you of them, "Has anyone leaned on you of them, "Has anyone leaned on you basically to quit drinking in the past basically to quit drinking in the past basically to quit drinking in the past year?" And 91% of them said yes. The year?" And 91% of them said yes. The year?" And 91% of them said yes. The wife said, "I'm moving out with the wife said, "I'm moving out with the wife said, "I'm moving out with the kids. If this continues." The boss said, kids. If this continues." The boss said, kids. If this continues." The boss said, "You show up drunk one more time, you're "You show up drunk one more time, you're "You show up drunk one more time, you're fired." My uh you the my lawyer said, fired." My uh you the my lawyer said, fired." My uh you the my lawyer said, "This is your third drunk driving "This is your third drunk driving "This is your third drunk driving arrest. You better get into treatment arrest. You better get into treatment arrest. You better get into treatment because so the judge might take some because so the judge might take some because so the judge might take some mercy on you." They're pressed in some mercy on you." They're pressed in some mercy on you." They're pressed in a way you don't have to press people in a way you don't have to press people in a way you don't have to press people to seek care for say chronic pain. You to seek care for say chronic pain. You to seek care for say chronic pain. You like chronic pain sucks. Everyone was like chronic pain sucks. Everyone was like chronic pain sucks. Everyone was happy to leave chronic pain, but people happy to leave chronic pain, but people happy to leave chronic pain, but people are ambivalent about giving up are ambivalent about giving up are ambivalent about giving up substances because again, it's substances because again, it's substances because again, it's rewarding. That's why people do it. And rewarding. That's why people do it. And rewarding. That's why people do it. And so that press is necessary. And so we're so that press is necessary. And so we're so that press is necessary. And so we're going to have to do that with the sort going to have to do that with the sort going to have to do that with the sort of criminally involved homeless addicted of criminally involved homeless addicted of criminally involved homeless addicted population. We're going to have to get population. We're going to have to get population. We're going to have to get comfortable with protections for comfortable with protections for comfortable with protections for sure, protections for civil rights, need sure, protections for civil rights, need sure, protections for civil rights, need to give them quality care, but to push to give them quality care, but to push to give them quality care, but to push um them into treatment where they can um them into treatment where they can um them into treatment where they can regain their reason and then make better regain their reason and then make better regain their reason and then make better decisions for themselves. I know you've decisions for themselves. I know you've decisions for themselves. I know you've been involved in legislature and it's been involved in legislature and it's been involved in legislature and it's always nice when I guess I can say you always nice when I guess I can say you always nice when I guess I can say you did that under a Republican did that under a Republican did that under a Republican administration and a Democrat a administration and a Democrat a administration and a Democrat a Democratic administration. So, uh we Democratic administration. So, uh we Democratic administration. So, uh we don't have to get into partisan politics don't have to get into partisan politics don't have to get into partisan politics here. Uh two administrations uh opposite here. Uh two administrations uh opposite here. Uh two administrations uh opposite sides of the aisle. Your goal there was sides of the aisle. Your goal there was sides of the aisle. Your goal there was to get better legislature as it relates to get better legislature as it relates to get better legislature as it relates to addiction and treatment of addiction. to addiction and treatment of addiction. to addiction and treatment of addiction. &gt;&gt; Correct. Y &gt;&gt; Correct. Y &gt;&gt; Correct. Y &gt;&gt; So, where are we at? What do we need &gt;&gt; So, where are we at? What do we need &gt;&gt; So, where are we at? What do we need &gt;&gt; since like 2008 up to the present &gt;&gt; since like 2008 up to the present &gt;&gt; since like 2008 up to the present moment? has been the best addiction moment? has been the best addiction moment? has been the best addiction treatment policy we've had as a country. treatment policy we've had as a country. treatment policy we've had as a country. And that was because 2008 is when parody And that was because 2008 is when parody And that was because 2008 is when parody legislation came in. This means like legislation came in. This means like legislation came in. This means like Blue Cross, Etna and all those when they Blue Cross, Etna and all those when they Blue Cross, Etna and all those when they cover stuff, they have to cover mental cover stuff, they have to cover mental cover stuff, they have to cover mental health and addiction too at a health and addiction too at a health and addiction too at a comparable level. And those laws have comparable level. And those laws have comparable level. And those laws have expanded to cover more and more people expanded to cover more and more people expanded to cover more and more people on the private side. Then on the public on the private side. Then on the public on the private side. Then on the public side, the expansion particularly of side, the expansion particularly of side, the expansion particularly of Medicaid has become the backbone of Medicaid has become the backbone of Medicaid has become the backbone of a substance use treatment system. like a substance use treatment system. like a substance use treatment system. like in places where I'm from, West Virginia in places where I'm from, West Virginia in places where I'm from, West Virginia have known it's the biggest spender, you have known it's the biggest spender, you have known it's the biggest spender, you know, of the addiction treatment system. know, of the addiction treatment system. know, of the addiction treatment system. That is good. That has made treatment um That is good. That has made treatment um That is good. That has made treatment um better quality, easier to access, and better quality, easier to access, and better quality, easier to access, and because Medicaid is a mainstream health because Medicaid is a mainstream health because Medicaid is a mainstream health care player, it helps integrate care player, it helps integrate care player, it helps integrate addiction care better into the rest of addiction care better into the rest of addiction care better into the rest of the healthare system. the healthare system. the healthare system. &gt;&gt; So, excuse me for interrupting, but &gt;&gt; So, excuse me for interrupting, but &gt;&gt; So, excuse me for interrupting, but practically speaking, so somebody's got practically speaking, so somebody's got practically speaking, so somebody's got a son or a daughter who's got an opioid a son or a daughter who's got an opioid a son or a daughter who's got an opioid issue or an alcohol issue, and they want issue or an alcohol issue, and they want issue or an alcohol issue, and they want help. Um, if they have insurance, they help. Um, if they have insurance, they help. Um, if they have insurance, they can go to a treatment center and it will can go to a treatment center and it will can go to a treatment center and it will mostly or completely be covered by mostly or completely be covered by mostly or completely be covered by insurance. &gt;&gt; It depends on the plan. I want to &gt;&gt; It depends on the plan. I want to &gt;&gt; It depends on the plan. I want to promise anyone in particular. But here's promise anyone in particular. But here's promise anyone in particular. But here's what used to be legal. It used to be a what used to be legal. It used to be a what used to be legal. It used to be a plan could say your co-ayment for an plan could say your co-ayment for an plan could say your co-ayment for an outpatient visit is five bucks unless outpatient visit is five bucks unless outpatient visit is five bucks unless it's mental health or substance use. In it's mental health or substance use. In it's mental health or substance use. In that case, it's 25 bucks. Or you're that case, it's 25 bucks. Or you're that case, it's 25 bucks. Or you're allowed to have up to, you know, six allowed to have up to, you know, six allowed to have up to, you know, six months of hospitalization a year. Unless months of hospitalization a year. Unless months of hospitalization a year. Unless it's mental health and substance use, it's mental health and substance use, it's mental health and substance use, and you're allowed to have 14 days. and you're allowed to have 14 days. and you're allowed to have 14 days. Those kinds of things which made very Those kinds of things which made very Those kinds of things which made very skimpy benefits are now illegal in skimpy benefits are now illegal in skimpy benefits are now illegal in almost all plans. almost all plans. almost all plans. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; So the odds as a mom or dad when you &gt;&gt; So the odds as a mom or dad when you &gt;&gt; So the odds as a mom or dad when you open up the plan today that your open up the plan today that your open up the plan today that your whatever you got through your work or whatever you got through your work or whatever you got through your work or wherever &gt;&gt; will give your kid something that they &gt;&gt; will give your kid something that they &gt;&gt; will give your kid something that they need is just way higher than it's need is just way higher than it's need is just way higher than it's ever been before. And that was due to ever been before. And that was due to ever been before. And that was due to advocacy and in changing the law and advocacy and in changing the law and advocacy and in changing the law and changing the regulations because changing the regulations because changing the regulations because obviously covering care costs money. obviously covering care costs money. obviously covering care costs money. Insurers don't like to you know cover Insurers don't like to you know cover Insurers don't like to you know cover care. they you know they have to but care. they you know they have to but care. they you know they have to but they also don't want to and so you know they also don't want to and so you know they also don't want to and so you know keeping the pressure on they have to keeping the pressure on they have to keeping the pressure on they have to follow the law so in that sense we're in follow the law so in that sense we're in follow the law so in that sense we're in a better place on the private side the a better place on the private side the a better place on the private side the challenge on the public side will be the challenge on the public side will be the challenge on the public side will be the uh contraction of Medicaid so you know uh contraction of Medicaid so you know uh contraction of Medicaid so you know the budget bill that was passed this the budget bill that was passed this the budget bill that was passed this last year takes about a trillion dollars last year takes about a trillion dollars last year takes about a trillion dollars roughly out of Medicaid over the coming roughly out of Medicaid over the coming roughly out of Medicaid over the coming years and you know a number of people on years and you know a number of people on years and you know a number of people on Medicaid have substance use problems so Medicaid have substance use problems so Medicaid have substance use problems so how they will get substance use care and how they will get substance use care and how they will get substance use care and other care that they need is not and other care that they need is not and other care that they need is not entirely clear. So, I'm quite uh I'm entirely clear. So, I'm quite uh I'm entirely clear. So, I'm quite uh I'm worried about the impact of that, worried about the impact of that, worried about the impact of that, especially on low-income Americans who especially on low-income Americans who especially on low-income Americans who are dealing with addiction. are dealing with addiction. are dealing with addiction. What are the options for people without What are the options for people without What are the options for people without insurance andor who don't want to go to insurance andor who don't want to go to insurance andor who don't want to go to a treatment facility? Um I'll just be a treatment facility? Um I'll just be a treatment facility? Um I'll just be direct about this. What's your opinion? direct about this. What's your opinion? direct about this. What's your opinion? What are the data on 12step programs? What are the data on 12step programs? What are the data on 12step programs? because 12step programs um have this because 12step programs um have this because 12step programs um have this phenomenal aspect to them which is they're aspect to them which is they're aspect to them which is they're happening every day and night online and happening every day and night online and happening every day and night online and in person. It is anonymous um every city in person. It is anonymous um every city in person. It is anonymous um every city all over the world. It if you go to a all over the world. It if you go to a all over the world. It if you go to a meeting, you don't like it, you leave, meeting, you don't like it, you leave, meeting, you don't like it, you leave, you find a different meeting. Um you find a different meeting. Um you find a different meeting. Um you don't have to pay for it. You can you don't have to pay for it. You can you don't have to pay for it. You can donate to support. I mean, there's just donate to support. I mean, there's just donate to support. I mean, there's just so many things about 12step that make it so many things about 12step that make it so many things about 12step that make it arguably the most accessible arguably the most accessible arguably the most accessible addiction treatment program ever. addiction treatment program ever. addiction treatment program ever. [clears throat] And if anything, it's [clears throat] And if anything, it's [clears throat] And if anything, it's growing right now. growing right now. growing right now. &gt;&gt; Uh, but what are your thoughts? Does it &gt;&gt; Uh, but what are your thoughts? Does it &gt;&gt; Uh, but what are your thoughts? Does it work? Is it a cult? What's the upside? work? Is it a cult? What's the upside? work? Is it a cult? What's the upside? What's the downside? What's the downside? What's the downside? &gt;&gt; It is not irrelevant that those programs &gt;&gt; It is not irrelevant that those programs &gt;&gt; It is not irrelevant that those programs were designed by people who have the were designed by people who have the were designed by people who have the problem and therefore understood what it problem and therefore understood what it problem and therefore understood what it is, what you need when you've got that is, what you need when you've got that is, what you need when you've got that problem. So, I think about this like problem. So, I think about this like problem. So, I think about this like where I am in Palo Alto. Let's say some where I am in Palo Alto. Let's say some where I am in Palo Alto. Let's say some engineer wakes up in Palo Alto on a engineer wakes up in Palo Alto on a engineer wakes up in Palo Alto on a Saturday morning with a, you know, his Saturday morning with a, you know, his Saturday morning with a, you know, his 20th or 30th or 40th beastly hangover of 20th or 30th or 40th beastly hangover of 20th or 30th or 40th beastly hangover of the year and says, you know, what am I the year and says, you know, what am I the year and says, you know, what am I doing? You know, I've got a great, you doing? You know, I've got a great, you doing? You know, I've got a great, you know, I've got this great life. I have know, I've got this great life. I have know, I've got this great life. I have this, you know, $200 million one-bedroom this, you know, $200 million one-bedroom this, you know, $200 million one-bedroom condo that I really like and you condo that I really like and you condo that I really like and you know, and I'm messing up my life out know, and I'm messing up my life out know, and I'm messing up my life out call. Let's call Stanford psychiatry call. Let's call Stanford psychiatry call. Let's call Stanford psychiatry department, okay? And try to get some department, okay? And try to get some department, okay? And try to get some help out. Well, they're closed in the help out. Well, they're closed in the help out. Well, they're closed in the weekend. You know, you you'll get a weekend. You know, you you'll get a weekend. You know, you you'll get a message. you can then on Monday you message. you can then on Monday you message. you can then on Monday you can call back and then you'll get on a can call back and then you'll get on a can call back and then you'll get on a waiting list and eventually you might waiting list and eventually you might waiting list and eventually you might get in. So for a condition characterized get in. So for a condition characterized get in. So for a condition characterized by ambivalence and impulsiveness I want by ambivalence and impulsiveness I want by ambivalence and impulsiveness I want to quit now two hours later I don't. to quit now two hours later I don't. to quit now two hours later I don't. That's like the health care system is That's like the health care system is That's like the health care system is the worst possible design. Whereas how the worst possible design. Whereas how the worst possible design. Whereas how is AA design be like I'd like to go to is AA design be like I'd like to go to is AA design be like I'd like to go to AA. You can go on the AA website look in AA. You can go on the AA website look in AA. You can go on the AA website look in the area. Oh my god there's like 15 the area. Oh my god there's like 15 the area. Oh my god there's like 15 meetings today. And not only are there meetings today. And not only are there meetings today. And not only are there 50 meetings, but there's like a woman's 50 meetings, but there's like a woman's 50 meetings, but there's like a woman's meeting, a men's meeting, you know, a meeting, a men's meeting, you know, a meeting, a men's meeting, you know, a spiritual focus meeting, a you know, spiritual focus meeting, a you know, spiritual focus meeting, a you know, LGBT meeting and you can just go and LGBT meeting and you can just go and LGBT meeting and you can just go and that moment you have at this moment that moment you have at this moment that moment you have at this moment I want to change. You can just you I want to change. You can just you I want to change. You can just you know follow through and then you can get know follow through and then you can get know follow through and then you can get immediate reward, social reward for immediate reward, social reward for immediate reward, social reward for taking positive steps towards it. you taking positive steps towards it. you taking positive steps towards it. you know, the treatment system will never be know, the treatment system will never be know, the treatment system will never be that good at sort of, you know, that good at sort of, you know, that good at sort of, you know, being that accessible. And of course, no being that accessible. And of course, no being that accessible. And of course, no health insurance, no paperwork, no health insurance, no paperwork, no health insurance, no paperwork, no pre-approval. That's amazing. Does it pre-approval. That's amazing. Does it pre-approval. That's amazing. Does it actually work when people get there? So, actually work when people get there? So, actually work when people get there? So, I started my career. I didn't really I started my career. I didn't really I started my career. I didn't really know anything about addiction. My first know anything about addiction. My first know anything about addiction. My first job, I took it because I was literally job, I took it because I was literally job, I took it because I was literally flipping burgers and there was a job flipping burgers and there was a job flipping burgers and there was a job that paid another dollar an hour in the that paid another dollar an hour in the that paid another dollar an hour in the medical school where I didn't have to medical school where I didn't have to medical school where I didn't have to wear a costume, a Wendy's outfit. So, wear a costume, a Wendy's outfit. So, wear a costume, a Wendy's outfit. So, that's why I got into the addiction that's why I got into the addiction that's why I got into the addiction field. That's the truth. So, I didn't field. That's the truth. So, I didn't field. That's the truth. So, I didn't know anything about it. And I met while know anything about it. And I met while know anything about it. And I met while I was on this job, uh, I met some people I was on this job, uh, I met some people I was on this job, uh, I met some people said they were in AA and I thought said they were in AA and I thought said they were in AA and I thought they were like the people who get your they were like the people who get your they were like the people who get your car battery for you on a cold, you know, car battery for you on a cold, you know, car battery for you on a cold, you know, that's what I think of when I think of that's what I think of when I think of that's what I think of when I think of AA. And I didn't know what AA was. and AA. And I didn't know what AA was. and AA. And I didn't know what AA was. and they explained it to me and I they explained it to me and I they explained it to me and I talked to my mentors about it and my talked to my mentors about it and my talked to my mentors about it and my mentors were professors in medicine and mentors were professors in medicine and mentors were professors in medicine and they were very dismissive you know they were very dismissive you know they were very dismissive you know they're like well you know they don't they're like well you know they don't they're like well you know they don't have doctors they don't have medications have doctors they don't have medications have doctors they don't have medications it's kind of folk medicine you know that it's kind of folk medicine you know that it's kind of folk medicine you know that kind of you know um you bit of kind of you know um you bit of kind of you know um you bit of professional snobbery there um but I professional snobbery there um but I professional snobbery there um but I wasn't so far along in my education that wasn't so far along in my education that wasn't so far along in my education that I was incapable of learning so I was incapable of learning so I was incapable of learning so I thought well will you take me can I go thought well will you take me can I go thought well will you take me can I go and they're like well you can't go to a and they're like well you can't go to a and they're like well you can't go to a closed meeting but there are these closed meeting but there are these closed meeting but there are these openings okay because I want to see this openings okay because I want to see this openings okay because I want to see this and I was so impressed with just the and I was so impressed with just the and I was so impressed with just the authentic icity and the caring and the authentic icity and the caring and the authentic icity and the caring and the warmth and the wisdom really just you warmth and the wisdom really just you warmth and the wisdom really just you know um uh made me think maybe there is know um uh made me think maybe there is know um uh made me think maybe there is something here and so I did I started something here and so I did I started something here and so I did I started doing research on it as a number of doing research on it as a number of doing research on it as a number of other people were at that time and you other people were at that time and you other people were at that time and you know it just keeps coming out really know it just keeps coming out really know it just keeps coming out really good in studies you know and so really good in studies you know and so really good in studies you know and so finally few years ago me John Kelly and finally few years ago me John Kelly and finally few years ago me John Kelly and Mara Ferry did what's called a Cochran Mara Ferry did what's called a Cochran Mara Ferry did what's called a Cochran collaboration uh review this is the collaboration uh review this is the collaboration uh review this is the creme de la creme most rigorous review creme de la creme most rigorous review creme de la creme most rigorous review of evidence in medicine as a method and of evidence in medicine as a method and of evidence in medicine as a method and uh looked at all these studies of uh looked at all these studies of uh looked at all these studies of alcoholics anonymous done in diff by alcoholics anonymous done in diff by alcoholics anonymous done in diff by different people with different people with different people with different viewpoints in different cities and viewpoints in different cities and viewpoints in different cities and different countries even and it came out different countries even and it came out different countries even and it came out extremely well relative to very good extremely well relative to very good extremely well relative to very good therapies like the one I was trained to therapies like the one I was trained to therapies like the one I was trained to do like cognitive behavioral therapy do like cognitive behavioral therapy do like cognitive behavioral therapy motivation enhancement therapy on motivation enhancement therapy on motivation enhancement therapy on abstinence outcomes if you ask like do abstinence outcomes if you ask like do abstinence outcomes if you ask like do people stop entirely AA and also 12step people stop entirely AA and also 12step people stop entirely AA and also 12step facilitation kinds of counseling to help facilitation kinds of counseling to help facilitation kinds of counseling to help people get into AA was winning you know people get into AA was winning you know people get into AA was winning you know by 50% higher rates routinely of that. by 50% higher rates routinely of that. by 50% higher rates routinely of that. And then when you looked at other And then when you looked at other And then when you looked at other outcomes like did the person at least outcomes like did the person at least outcomes like did the person at least cut their drinking or reduce the damage cut their drinking or reduce the damage cut their drinking or reduce the damage of drinking or less dependent or better of drinking or less dependent or better of drinking or less dependent or better family, you know, functioning, whatever, family, you know, functioning, whatever, family, you know, functioning, whatever, it was as good as it was as good as it was as good as amazing for something that's free, you amazing for something that's free, you amazing for something that's free, you know, and um so anyone still left know, and um so anyone still left know, and um so anyone still left saying, "Hey, it doesn't work." They saying, "Hey, it doesn't work." They saying, "Hey, it doesn't work." They really and often people think there's no really and often people think there's no really and often people think there's no evidence. There's a ton of evidence. There's a ton of evidence. There's a ton of evidence. There's randomized trials all over. There's randomized trials all over. There's randomized trials all over. There are quasi experimental studies. There are quasi experimental studies. There are quasi experimental studies. there are healthcare utilization there are healthcare utilization there are healthcare utilization studies. It's amazing. Um studies. It's amazing. Um studies. It's amazing. Um and I so I always I always say to and I so I always I always say to and I so I always I always say to anybody whether it's a patient or just a anybody whether it's a patient or just a anybody whether it's a patient or just a person I care about, you know, if you person I care about, you know, if you person I care about, you know, if you want to stop drinking, that'd be a place want to stop drinking, that'd be a place want to stop drinking, that'd be a place to try. You know, um there's to try. You know, um there's to try. You know, um there's it's really no harm to it, right? You it's really no harm to it, right? You it's really no harm to it, right? You know, if you if you go to a bad movie, know, if you if you go to a bad movie, know, if you if you go to a bad movie, you're out in the evening and 15 bucks. you're out in the evening and 15 bucks. you're out in the evening and 15 bucks. You go to a bad a meeting, you know, You go to a bad a meeting, you know, You go to a bad a meeting, you know, you're just out in the evening. It's a you're just out in the evening. It's a you're just out in the evening. It's a it's not like a high-risisk endeavor to it's not like a high-risisk endeavor to it's not like a high-risisk endeavor to just give it a go. And there are some just give it a go. And there are some just give it a go. And there are some alternatives, too, by the way. are alternatives, too, by the way. are alternatives, too, by the way. are smaller. But if you live in a area like smaller. But if you live in a area like smaller. But if you live in a area like San Francisco Bay area where there's a San Francisco Bay area where there's a San Francisco Bay area where there's a there's more choices, you know, there's more choices, you know, there's more choices, you know, there's also like uh smart recovery and women also like uh smart recovery and women also like uh smart recovery and women for sobriety and uh and I forget for sobriety and uh and I forget for sobriety and uh and I forget I'm forgetting some of the other names, I'm forgetting some of the other names, I'm forgetting some of the other names, but choices if you don't like but choices if you don't like but choices if you don't like particular a model, but that experience particular a model, but that experience particular a model, but that experience of mutual support, people are on the of mutual support, people are on the of mutual support, people are on the same journey with me, they're further same journey with me, they're further same journey with me, they're further along the same journey and they're doing along the same journey and they're doing along the same journey and they're doing well. It spires hope. They've given me well. It spires hope. They've given me well. It spires hope. They've given me useful information. All of that is useful information. All of that is useful information. All of that is really potent and that's why it's really potent and that's why it's really potent and that's why it's survived and thrived as an organization. survived and thrived as an organization. survived and thrived as an organization. My 195 countries or something have AA in My 195 countries or something have AA in My 195 countries or something have AA in it. Just want to mention if people are it. Just want to mention if people are it. Just want to mention if people are interested in AA and this isn't it's not interested in AA and this isn't it's not interested in AA and this isn't it's not like I've been sent here to advocate for like I've been sent here to advocate for like I've been sent here to advocate for AA but they have uh Keith mentioned open AA but they have uh Keith mentioned open AA but they have uh Keith mentioned open meetings. If you look up, you know, an meetings. If you look up, you know, an meetings. If you look up, you know, an AA an open meeting is one that anyone AA an open meeting is one that anyone AA an open meeting is one that anyone can go to even if you are not an addict can go to even if you are not an addict can go to even if you are not an addict and you're just curious or you have a and you're just curious or you have a and you're just curious or you have a different addiction and you want to go different addiction and you want to go different addiction and you want to go to an AA meeting because the AA meetings to an AA meeting because the AA meetings to an AA meeting because the AA meetings is are tend to be more established and is are tend to be more established and is are tend to be more established and they're more of them than the other um they're more of them than the other um they're more of them than the other um uh letter anonymous meetings, you know, uh letter anonymous meetings, you know, uh letter anonymous meetings, you know, for gambling and other sorts of for gambling and other sorts of for gambling and other sorts of addiction. Um addiction. Um addiction. Um I've been to many meetings. I'm super I've been to many meetings. I'm super I've been to many meetings. I'm super impressed by how AA can do what it does. impressed by how AA can do what it does. impressed by how AA can do what it does. is really um it's is just a shining is really um it's is just a shining is really um it's is just a shining example of humans self-organizing into example of humans self-organizing into example of humans self-organizing into something that keeps going, doesn't walk something that keeps going, doesn't walk something that keeps going, doesn't walk around with a basket. There's no around with a basket. There's no around with a basket. There's no GoFundMe. Uh GoFundMe. Uh GoFundMe. Uh &gt;&gt; no tax dollars. &gt;&gt; no tax dollars. &gt;&gt; no tax dollars. &gt;&gt; No tax dollars. They just they stay &gt;&gt; No tax dollars. They just they stay &gt;&gt; No tax dollars. They just they stay out of politics. It's it's really cool. out of politics. It's it's really cool. out of politics. It's it's really cool. And um I know some people that couldn't And um I know some people that couldn't And um I know some people that couldn't get sober any other way that did it. I'm get sober any other way that did it. I'm get sober any other way that did it. I'm curious what the data are on the other curious what the data are on the other curious what the data are on the other addictions that are treated through the addictions that are treated through the addictions that are treated through the 12step model. So, um, narcotics 12step model. So, um, narcotics 12step model. So, um, narcotics anonymous, overeaters anonymous, overeaters anonymous, overeaters anonymous, gamblers anonymous. Uh, there's so many gamblers anonymous. Uh, there's so many gamblers anonymous. Uh, there's so many of them now. of them now. of them now. &gt;&gt; Um, and I imagine there aren't as many &gt;&gt; Um, and I imagine there aren't as many &gt;&gt; Um, and I imagine there aren't as many studies, uh, but the model is pretty studies, uh, but the model is pretty studies, uh, but the model is pretty much the same. much the same. much the same. &gt;&gt; Um, so I wonder how they hold up. &gt;&gt; Um, so I wonder how they hold up. &gt;&gt; Um, so I wonder how they hold up. &gt;&gt; I was very interested in this question &gt;&gt; I was very interested in this question &gt;&gt; I was very interested in this question for the drug groups. There's there's for the drug groups. There's there's for the drug groups. There's there's very little on gambling and sexual very little on gambling and sexual very little on gambling and sexual addicts, those things. So, the addicts, those things. So, the addicts, those things. So, the other big pool of data we have to extend other big pool of data we have to extend other big pool of data we have to extend we have is on the NAC cocaine anonymous, we have is on the NAC cocaine anonymous, we have is on the NAC cocaine anonymous, narcotics anonymous. There were a couple narcotics anonymous. There were a couple narcotics anonymous. There were a couple things were interesting. One was it's things were interesting. One was it's things were interesting. One was it's harder to get people into those groups. harder to get people into those groups. harder to get people into those groups. So, we were looking at studies where So, we were looking at studies where So, we were looking at studies where there was uh what's called 12step there was uh what's called 12step there was uh what's called 12step facilitation counseling. So, where facilitation counseling. So, where facilitation counseling. So, where you're in there, you've you're in there, you've you're in there, you've got somebody who knows the program is got somebody who knows the program is got somebody who knows the program is introducing you to it, encouraging you introducing you to it, encouraging you introducing you to it, encouraging you to go and then talking about, you know, to go and then talking about, you know, to go and then talking about, you know, how did the meeting go and did you get a how did the meeting go and did you get a how did the meeting go and did you get a sponsor and all that kind of stuff. And sponsor and all that kind of stuff. And sponsor and all that kind of stuff. And the uptake was much lower. So, if you do the uptake was much lower. So, if you do the uptake was much lower. So, if you do that in a in an alcohol program, you that in a in an alcohol program, you that in a in an alcohol program, you know, you get these, you know, doubling know, you get these, you know, doubling know, you get these, you know, doubling or tripling of the rate of patients or tripling of the rate of patients or tripling of the rate of patients going into AA. and the effect was much going into AA. and the effect was much going into AA. and the effect was much smaller to with the elicit much smaller to with the elicit much smaller to with the elicit drugs to get people to attend C. And we drugs to get people to attend C. And we drugs to get people to attend C. And we don't know why, but it wasn't as easy to don't know why, but it wasn't as easy to don't know why, but it wasn't as easy to get people in. Um that definitely there get people in. Um that definitely there get people in. Um that definitely there were correlations pretty consistently were correlations pretty consistently were correlations pretty consistently that people who were going, you know, that people who were going, you know, that people who were going, you know, longer were doing better, but the longer were doing better, but the longer were doing better, but the evidence wasn't quite as strong from a, evidence wasn't quite as strong from a, evidence wasn't quite as strong from a, you know, external validity, I'm sorry, you know, external validity, I'm sorry, you know, external validity, I'm sorry, internal validity point of view. In internal validity point of view. In internal validity point of view. In other words, they're not the same kind other words, they're not the same kind other words, they're not the same kind of trials, you know, randomized trials of trials, you know, randomized trials of trials, you know, randomized trials that we like to have, you know, when we that we like to have, you know, when we that we like to have, you know, when we draw inferences. So, I characterize draw inferences. So, I characterize draw inferences. So, I characterize the evidence on uh 12step groups for the evidence on uh 12step groups for the evidence on uh 12step groups for drugs as positive, encouraging. I would drugs as positive, encouraging. I would drugs as positive, encouraging. I would certainly try it, you know, so not certainly try it, you know, so not certainly try it, you know, so not harmful, but it's not as strong. I harmful, but it's not as strong. I harmful, but it's not as strong. I don't feel I feel comfortable saying AI don't feel I feel comfortable saying AI don't feel I feel comfortable saying AI know positively has a causal effect on know positively has a causal effect on know positively has a causal effect on alcohol. I have no doubt about it. And alcohol. I have no doubt about it. And alcohol. I have no doubt about it. And um I'm less sure about that whether um I'm less sure about that whether um I'm less sure about that whether that's true uh for the maybe in Andrew's that's true uh for the maybe in Andrew's that's true uh for the maybe in Andrew's case but on average it was harder to case but on average it was harder to case but on average it was harder to demonstrate that effect. I was being demonstrate that effect. I was being demonstrate that effect. I was being somewhat facitious when I asked whether somewhat facitious when I asked whether somewhat facitious when I asked whether you think AA is a cult. But one of the you think AA is a cult. But one of the you think AA is a cult. But one of the reasons why sometimes people will call reasons why sometimes people will call reasons why sometimes people will call it a cult is I'm just going to be very it a cult is I'm just going to be very it a cult is I'm just going to be very blunt here is that often, not always, blunt here is that often, not always, blunt here is that often, not always, but often enough I should say, uh people but often enough I should say, uh people but often enough I should say, uh people who get into AA, discover sobriety in who get into AA, discover sobriety in who get into AA, discover sobriety in the AA community or other uh 12step the AA community or other uh 12step the AA community or other uh 12step communities will talk a lot about it and communities will talk a lot about it and communities will talk a lot about it and how much it's changed their life and how much it's changed their life and how much it's changed their life and they've got a new set of people they they've got a new set of people they they've got a new set of people they hang out with and uh in the name of hang out with and uh in the name of hang out with and uh in the name of sobriety and they um and then that can sobriety and they um and then that can sobriety and they um and then that can uh be if it's not handled correctly, it uh be if it's not handled correctly, it uh be if it's not handled correctly, it can be seen as somewhat of a separator can be seen as somewhat of a separator can be seen as somewhat of a separator by people around them. That's one. Um by people around them. That's one. Um by people around them. That's one. Um they'll there will always be instances they'll there will always be instances they'll there will always be instances where certain groups are not in a where certain groups are not in a where certain groups are not in a healthy dynamic, but I would say 95% of healthy dynamic, but I would say 95% of healthy dynamic, but I would say 95% of the time it seems to be healthy the time it seems to be healthy the time it seems to be healthy dynamics. Um but there's this other dynamics. Um but there's this other dynamics. Um but there's this other piece that I think sometimes gets tucked piece that I think sometimes gets tucked piece that I think sometimes gets tucked away and no one wants to talk about, away and no one wants to talk about, away and no one wants to talk about, which is that a critical component of which is that a critical component of which is that a critical component of 12step is that um the addict acknowledge 12step is that um the addict acknowledge 12step is that um the addict acknowledge that they're not in control of that they're not in control of that they're not in control of everything. They certainly can't control everything. They certainly can't control everything. They certainly can't control other people but perhaps they can't even other people but perhaps they can't even other people but perhaps they can't even control their own mind and they have to control their own mind and they have to control their own mind and they have to have a higher power in uh notion you and have a higher power in uh notion you and have a higher power in uh notion you and I think some people interpret this to I think some people interpret this to I think some people interpret this to think that one has to suddenly become uh think that one has to suddenly become uh think that one has to suddenly become uh formally religious formally religious formally religious &gt;&gt; either Christian or just or to believe &gt;&gt; either Christian or just or to believe &gt;&gt; either Christian or just or to believe in God as an entity and um in God as an entity and um in God as an entity and um &gt;&gt; uh but that my understanding is that &gt;&gt; uh but that my understanding is that &gt;&gt; uh but that my understanding is that 12step well I know because I I've been 12step well I know because I I've been 12step well I know because I I've been to a lot of meetings uh 12step to a lot of meetings uh 12step to a lot of meetings uh 12step hinges on the acknowledgement of hinges on the acknowledgement of hinges on the acknowledgement of some sort of higher power, but people some sort of higher power, but people some sort of higher power, but people can self assign what that higher power can self assign what that higher power can self assign what that higher power is. Some people say God, some people say is. Some people say God, some people say is. Some people say God, some people say Jesus Christ, some people will say u Jesus Christ, some people will say u Jesus Christ, some people will say u nature, some people say the universe, nature, some people say the universe, nature, some people say the universe, some people will say um the collective. some people will say um the collective. some people will say um the collective. So I think that's not discussed often So I think that's not discussed often So I think that's not discussed often enough. And then people say, well, I enough. And then people say, well, I enough. And then people say, well, I don't want to go 12step because like don't want to go 12step because like don't want to go 12step because like it's going to be a bunch of, it's going to be a bunch of, it's going to be a bunch of, &gt;&gt; you know, Jesus freaks coming at me &gt;&gt; you know, Jesus freaks coming at me &gt;&gt; you know, Jesus freaks coming at me about and I'm going to have to do a about and I'm going to have to do a about and I'm going to have to do a bunch of other things and you know bunch of other things and you know bunch of other things and you know what's happening. what's happening. what's happening. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So there's a lot there in &gt;&gt; Yeah. So there's a lot there in &gt;&gt; Yeah. So there's a lot there in those questions. So on the cult thing, those questions. So on the cult thing, those questions. So on the cult thing, why I wouldn't call it a cult. Cults do why I wouldn't call it a cult. Cults do why I wouldn't call it a cult. Cults do two things AA doesn't do. One is cults two things AA doesn't do. One is cults two things AA doesn't do. One is cults take everybody's money. AA literally take everybody's money. AA literally take everybody's money. AA literally won't let you give them money. I mean won't let you give them money. I mean won't let you give them money. I mean it's amazing. They've survived it's amazing. They've survived it's amazing. They've survived orization. They were Rockefeller off the orization. They were Rockefeller off the orization. They were Rockefeller off the money. They said, "No, we should limit money. They said, "No, we should limit money. They said, "No, we should limit that. That would be too grandiose." So that. That would be too grandiose." So that. That would be too grandiose." So it's very, you know, and they're it's very, you know, and they're it's very, you know, and they're perpetually broke by design. They have perpetually broke by design. They have perpetually broke by design. They have just enough to keep going. just enough to keep going. just enough to keep going. &gt;&gt; You pass the hat. Do you want to or not? &gt;&gt; You pass the hat. Do you want to or not? &gt;&gt; You pass the hat. Do you want to or not? You don't. But if you don't, you are not You don't. But if you don't, you are not You don't. But if you don't, you are not looked down upon. looked down upon. looked down upon. &gt;&gt; Yes. They give away the literature, you &gt;&gt; Yes. They give away the literature, you &gt;&gt; Yes. They give away the literature, you know. So they're they don't do that. The know. So they're they don't do that. The know. So they're they don't do that. The other thing is they don't stop anybody other thing is they don't stop anybody other thing is they don't stop anybody from leaving. Literally any meeting you from leaving. Literally any meeting you from leaving. Literally any meeting you can you can literally stand and say I'm can you can literally stand and say I'm can you can literally stand and say I'm gonna go get drunk. It was bye, you gonna go get drunk. It was bye, you gonna go get drunk. It was bye, you know, and that's different than a know, and that's different than a know, and that's different than a call. &gt;&gt; You just can't show up drunk. This is &gt;&gt; You just can't show up drunk. This is &gt;&gt; You just can't show up drunk. This is important. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The desire to quit drinking or the &gt;&gt; Yeah. The desire to quit drinking or the &gt;&gt; Yeah. The desire to quit drinking or the other behavior or substance and you other behavior or substance and you other behavior or substance and you can't show up intoxicated. can't show up intoxicated. can't show up intoxicated. &gt;&gt; You can you can they will usually let &gt;&gt; You can you can they will usually let &gt;&gt; You can you can they will usually let people sit as long as they don't as long people sit as long as they don't as long people sit as long as they don't as long as they're quiet if they're drunk rather as they're quiet if they're drunk rather as they're quiet if they're drunk rather than throw them out. If they start than throw them out. If they start than throw them out. If they start talking, then that's a different thing, talking, then that's a different thing, talking, then that's a different thing, but usually they will. Um, and you know, but usually they will. Um, and you know, but usually they will. Um, and you know, relapse is a normal part of recovery and relapse is a normal part of recovery and relapse is a normal part of recovery and every nobody knows that better than every nobody knows that better than every nobody knows that better than people in AA. I mean, they people in AA. I mean, they people in AA. I mean, they appreciate that. Uh, even though they appreciate that. Uh, even though they appreciate that. Uh, even though they don't want to hear from a drunk person, don't want to hear from a drunk person, don't want to hear from a drunk person, obviously. Um, but then the religious obviously. Um, but then the religious obviously. Um, but then the religious thing, yeah, they got the word God thing, yeah, they got the word God thing, yeah, they got the word God there, right? And so there are um people there, right? And so there are um people there, right? And so there are um people who just have had bad experiences, you who just have had bad experiences, you who just have had bad experiences, you know, and just that word is a know, and just that word is a know, and just that word is a repellent to them. um you know it repellent to them. um you know it repellent to them. um you know it doesn't really in a sense it doesn't really in a sense it doesn't really in a sense it doesn't even matter how if they know how the even matter how if they know how the even matter how if they know how the organization defines it they just like organization defines it they just like organization defines it they just like look I was you know I went to Catholic look I was you know I went to Catholic look I was you know I went to Catholic school I hated Catholic school I hate I school I hated Catholic school I hate I school I hated Catholic school I hate I hate religion and this sounds like hate religion and this sounds like hate religion and this sounds like religion so I don't want to go some of religion so I don't want to go some of religion so I don't want to go some of those people might be happier than in those people might be happier than in those people might be happier than in programs like smart recovery which programs like smart recovery which programs like smart recovery which doesn't have that component uh to it um doesn't have that component uh to it um doesn't have that component uh to it um but yeah it is incredibly but yeah it is incredibly but yeah it is incredibly um flexible you know in terms of how um flexible you know in terms of how um flexible you know in terms of how that's why it's really a spiritual not that's why it's really a spiritual not that's why it's really a spiritual not religious organization it is you know religious organization it is you know religious organization it is you know you know the it says In the text, the 12 you know the it says In the text, the 12 you know the it says In the text, the 12 steps are but suggestions. Okay? Can you steps are but suggestions. Okay? Can you steps are but suggestions. Okay? Can you imagine that in a Christian church imagine that in a Christian church imagine that in a Christian church saying, you know, Jesus was the son of saying, you know, Jesus was the son of saying, you know, Jesus was the son of God or maybe he wasn't. Who knows? It's God or maybe he wasn't. Who knows? It's God or maybe he wasn't. Who knows? It's really up to you, right? You know, really up to you, right? You know, really up to you, right? You know, that's what in a religion, no. He was that's what in a religion, no. He was that's what in a religion, no. He was period. That's non-negotiable point. Aa period. That's non-negotiable point. Aa period. That's non-negotiable point. Aa everything is negotiable other than you everything is negotiable other than you everything is negotiable other than you what you believe. It's like it's like what you believe. It's like it's like what you believe. It's like it's like it's what you do. You know, you go to it's what you do. You know, you go to it's what you do. You know, you go to meetings, stay sober. They don't really meetings, stay sober. They don't really meetings, stay sober. They don't really care. My my friend Barry Rosen uh passed care. My my friend Barry Rosen uh passed care. My my friend Barry Rosen uh passed away too young. Unfortunately, was away too young. Unfortunately, was away too young. Unfortunately, was addiction psychiatrist. He said would addiction psychiatrist. He said would addiction psychiatrist. He said would say to people look the god na can be say to people look the god na can be say to people look the god na can be anything. It could be Buddha. It could anything. It could be Buddha. It could anything. It could be Buddha. It could be Jesus. It could be your group. It be Jesus. It could be your group. It be Jesus. It could be your group. It could be the doororknob. It just can't could be the doororknob. It just can't could be the doororknob. It just can't be you. You narcissistic so. [laughter] be you. You narcissistic so. [laughter] be you. You narcissistic so. [laughter] And that's what they were really And that's what they were really And that's what they were really concerned about with the people who concerned about with the people who concerned about with the people who founded is that it was the hubris the founded is that it was the hubris the founded is that it was the hubris the ego of I am in control and I don't need ego of I am in control and I don't need ego of I am in control and I don't need any help. I am the god basically. and uh any help. I am the god basically. and uh any help. I am the god basically. and uh breaking that belief it's like no you're breaking that belief it's like no you're breaking that belief it's like no you're whipped you know you have lost your whipped you know you have lost your whipped you know you have lost your control out of the sub you and admitting control out of the sub you and admitting control out of the sub you and admitting that is the critical point how you end that is the critical point how you end that is the critical point how you end up explaining the spiritual part is up explaining the spiritual part is up explaining the spiritual part is really up to you but that part is really up to you but that part is really up to you but that part is non-negotiable why else would you be non-negotiable why else would you be non-negotiable why else would you be there if you thought no I can still there if you thought no I can still there if you thought no I can still control my drinking they would say well control my drinking they would say well control my drinking they would say well then you shouldn't come here then you shouldn't come here then you shouldn't come here because we can't that's why we're here because we can't that's why we're here because we can't that's why we're here &gt;&gt; Bill and Bob the founders were good &gt;&gt; Bill and Bob the founders were good &gt;&gt; Bill and Bob the founders were good psychologists they understand understood psychologists they understand understood psychologists they understand understood the juxosition of the narcissism and the juxosition of the narcissism and the juxosition of the narcissism and the shame that is addiction. the shame that is addiction. the shame that is addiction. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, they were they &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, they were they &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, they were they were really uh great Americans. I were really uh great Americans. I were really uh great Americans. I mean, they changed uh they changed the mean, they changed uh they changed the mean, they changed uh they changed the country. &gt;&gt; Before moving on from this, again, if &gt;&gt; Before moving on from this, again, if &gt;&gt; Before moving on from this, again, if you're curious, you can go to an open AA you're curious, you can go to an open AA you're curious, you can go to an open AA meeting if you want to. It's meeting if you want to. It's meeting if you want to. It's interesting. And when they go around the interesting. And when they go around the interesting. And when they go around the room and people say, "I'm so and so. I'm room and people say, "I'm so and so. I'm room and people say, "I'm so and so. I'm an alcoholic." Some people say, "I'm so an alcoholic." Some people say, "I'm so an alcoholic." Some people say, "I'm so and so." And I'm their first name only. and so." And I'm their first name only. and so." And I'm their first name only. Uh, of course, and they're an addict. Uh, of course, and they're an addict. Uh, of course, and they're an addict. But if you're a visitor, you just say uh But if you're a visitor, you just say uh But if you're a visitor, you just say uh you could say nothing. You could say you could say nothing. You could say you could say nothing. You could say pass. No one would pay much mind to it. pass. No one would pay much mind to it. pass. No one would pay much mind to it. Or you could say your name and just say, Or you could say your name and just say, Or you could say your name and just say, "I'm just here to learn." "I'm just here to learn." "I'm just here to learn." &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And that I've seen that a number of &gt;&gt; And that I've seen that a number of &gt;&gt; And that I've seen that a number of times. And it's usually family times. And it's usually family times. And it's usually family members of addicts or family members of addicts or family members of addicts or family members that want someone in their family or a that want someone in their family or a that want someone in their family or a friend to go to 12step. And this is an friend to go to 12step. And this is an friend to go to 12step. And this is an interesting little trick tool. Sometimes interesting little trick tool. Sometimes interesting little trick tool. Sometimes it's easier to get someone to go to it's easier to get someone to go to it's easier to get someone to go to 12step if you yourself have gone. And if 12step if you yourself have gone. And if 12step if you yourself have gone. And if you're not an addict and you want you're not an addict and you want you're not an addict and you want someone to go, saying, "I went." someone to go, saying, "I went." someone to go, saying, "I went." &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's it's and I'll go with you. Right. I &gt;&gt; It's it's and I'll go with you. Right. I &gt;&gt; It's it's and I'll go with you. Right. I mean, uh, this sounds very, uh, kind of mean, uh, this sounds very, uh, kind of mean, uh, this sounds very, uh, kind of hokey on the one hand, but I've seen the hokey on the one hand, but I've seen the hokey on the one hand, but I've seen the incredible things that 12step can do. incredible things that 12step can do. incredible things that 12step can do. It's so awesome. It's free. How many It's so awesome. It's free. How many It's so awesome. It's free. How many things are completely free, accessible things are completely free, accessible things are completely free, accessible all the time? It's a wild It's a It's a all the time? It's a wild It's a It's a all the time? It's a wild It's a It's a wild invention. wild invention. wild invention. &gt;&gt; It's the closest by John Kelly and my &gt;&gt; It's the closest by John Kelly and my &gt;&gt; It's the closest by John Kelly and my friend who did the review said, "It is friend who did the review said, "It is friend who did the review said, "It is the closest thing we have to a free the closest thing we have to a free the closest thing we have to a free lunch in public health." lunch in public health." lunch in public health." &gt;&gt; Speaking of lunch, let's talk about &gt;&gt; Speaking of lunch, let's talk about &gt;&gt; Speaking of lunch, let's talk about GLPS. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, I'm struck by how many people &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, I'm struck by how many people &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, I'm struck by how many people have lost a lot of weight who couldn't have lost a lot of weight who couldn't have lost a lot of weight who couldn't lose weight previously. I'm also lose weight previously. I'm also lose weight previously. I'm also delighted, thrilled, so relieved that delighted, thrilled, so relieved that delighted, thrilled, so relieved that I don't have to look at these stupid I don't have to look at these stupid I don't have to look at these stupid arguments online anymore about whether arguments online anymore about whether arguments online anymore about whether or not obesity was the consequence of or not obesity was the consequence of or not obesity was the consequence of some other thing besides overconumption some other thing besides overconumption some other thing besides overconumption of calories relative to caloric of calories relative to caloric of calories relative to caloric expenditure. Mhm. expenditure. Mhm. expenditure. Mhm. &gt;&gt; You know, there's no blame in that &gt;&gt; You know, there's no blame in that &gt;&gt; You know, there's no blame in that statement, but it like people were going statement, but it like people were going statement, but it like people were going back and forth and back and forth and um back and forth and back and forth and um back and forth and back and forth and um the laws of thermodynamics apply. We now the laws of thermodynamics apply. We now the laws of thermodynamics apply. We now know thanks to GLPs, if you eat less know thanks to GLPs, if you eat less know thanks to GLPs, if you eat less than you burn, you lose weight. It's than you burn, you lose weight. It's than you burn, you lose weight. It's just very hard for people who are very just very hard for people who are very just very hard for people who are very overweight to eat less and burn more. overweight to eat less and burn more. overweight to eat less and burn more. &gt;&gt; And it runs against all the &gt;&gt; And it runs against all the &gt;&gt; And it runs against all the evolutionarily, you know, uh hardwired evolutionarily, you know, uh hardwired evolutionarily, you know, uh hardwired circuitry of desiring over consumption. circuitry of desiring over consumption. circuitry of desiring over consumption. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So here we are at a time where &gt;&gt; Yeah. So here we are at a time where &gt;&gt; Yeah. So here we are at a time where there are these peptides that people can there are these peptides that people can there are these peptides that people can take to lose significant amounts of take to lose significant amounts of take to lose significant amounts of weight. The cost on those peptides is weight. The cost on those peptides is weight. The cost on those peptides is coming down now through the coming down now through the coming down now through the compoundingies and people are taking compoundingies and people are taking compoundingies and people are taking half doses. People, by the way, people half doses. People, by the way, people half doses. People, by the way, people are sharing their GLPS. People are sharing their GLPS. People are sharing their GLPS. People are splitting them. Not supposed to do that. splitting them. Not supposed to do that. splitting them. Not supposed to do that. It's illegal. That's not a suggestion. It's illegal. That's not a suggestion. It's illegal. That's not a suggestion. It's incredible how low a dose of GLP is It's incredible how low a dose of GLP is It's incredible how low a dose of GLP is required for people to get the desired required for people to get the desired required for people to get the desired effect. And people are picking up on effect. And people are picking up on effect. And people are picking up on this. The pharmaceutical companies hate this. The pharmaceutical companies hate this. The pharmaceutical companies hate this. &gt;&gt; But um people are getting them through &gt;&gt; But um people are getting them through &gt;&gt; But um people are getting them through compoundingies. They're um uh extending their dosages. They're um uh extending their dosages. They're um uh extending their dosages. They're sharing their don't share They're sharing their don't share They're sharing their don't share prescriptions, but they're doing it. And prescriptions, but they're doing it. And prescriptions, but they're doing it. And people are just losing weight easily. people are just losing weight easily. people are just losing weight easily. &gt;&gt; Some are losing muscle and everyone &gt;&gt; Some are losing muscle and everyone &gt;&gt; Some are losing muscle and everyone gets, you know, inflamed about that, but gets, you know, inflamed about that, but gets, you know, inflamed about that, but you can do some resistance training to you can do some resistance training to you can do some resistance training to offset that. And they're awesome weight offset that. And they're awesome weight offset that. And they're awesome weight loss drugs. loss drugs. loss drugs. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're amazing. Um and they &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're amazing. Um and they &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're amazing. Um and they &gt;&gt; I'm not on them, by the way, but I would &gt;&gt; I'm not on them, by the way, but I would &gt;&gt; I'm not on them, by the way, but I would take them if I needed them. take them if I needed them. take them if I needed them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. [clears throat] Um and they may &gt;&gt; Yeah. [clears throat] Um and they may &gt;&gt; Yeah. [clears throat] Um and they may have other benefits, too. You know, we have other benefits, too. You know, we have other benefits, too. You know, we haven't fully figured out. Yeah. So, I'm haven't fully figured out. Yeah. So, I'm haven't fully figured out. Yeah. So, I'm extremely interested in them. their I'm extremely interested in them. their I'm extremely interested in them. their effects on substance use. Um, you know, effects on substance use. Um, you know, effects on substance use. Um, you know, it I have a friend who's addiction it I have a friend who's addiction it I have a friend who's addiction psychiatrist. She said what my patients psychiatrist. She said what my patients psychiatrist. She said what my patients desire is they want not to want. desire is they want not to want. desire is they want not to want. &gt;&gt; So, which is different than like I want &gt;&gt; So, which is different than like I want &gt;&gt; So, which is different than like I want to conquer my desire. Like, I just wish to conquer my desire. Like, I just wish to conquer my desire. Like, I just wish I didn't desire this drug as much as I didn't desire this drug as much as I didn't desire this drug as much as I do. And I link that with something a do. And I link that with something a do. And I link that with something a friend of mine said to me over lunch. A friend of mine said to me over lunch. A friend of mine said to me over lunch. A friend of mine who I noticed had lost a friend of mine who I noticed had lost a friend of mine who I noticed had lost a lot of weight. And I said, "Wow, you've lot of weight. And I said, "Wow, you've lot of weight. And I said, "Wow, you've lost a weight?" He goes, "Yeah, I'm on lost a weight?" He goes, "Yeah, I'm on lost a weight?" He goes, "Yeah, I'm on JP's." And he said, "I used to spend all JP's." And he said, "I used to spend all JP's." And he said, "I used to spend all day not eating and now I don't think day not eating and now I don't think day not eating and now I don't think about it." it was effortful all day about it." it was effortful all day about it." it was effortful all day long. Don't eat, don't eat, don't eat, long. Don't eat, don't eat, don't eat, long. Don't eat, don't eat, don't eat, don't eat. And and now that voice don't eat. And and now that voice don't eat. And and now that voice is just gone. And so what if we could do is just gone. And so what if we could do is just gone. And so what if we could do that for say cocaine or alcohol? that for say cocaine or alcohol? that for say cocaine or alcohol? You know, they are sort of in the same You know, they are sort of in the same You know, they are sort of in the same kind of family of behaviors. And uh kind of family of behaviors. And uh kind of family of behaviors. And uh there are some interesting studies. Now there are some interesting studies. Now there are some interesting studies. Now to be clear, there's some studies that to be clear, there's some studies that to be clear, there's some studies that are negative. You know, it's not, you are negative. You know, it's not, you are negative. You know, it's not, you know, not nothing ever works out know, not nothing ever works out know, not nothing ever works out perfectly for everybody. But when I look perfectly for everybody. But when I look perfectly for everybody. But when I look through animal studies, small trials, through animal studies, small trials, through animal studies, small trials, and um opportunistic epidemiological and um opportunistic epidemiological and um opportunistic epidemiological studies, so like you go through the studies, so like you go through the studies, so like you go through the hospital, you know, here's 10,000 people hospital, you know, here's 10,000 people hospital, you know, here's 10,000 people who uh, you know, had a diagnosis of who uh, you know, had a diagnosis of who uh, you know, had a diagnosis of cocaine use disorder and let's see if cocaine use disorder and let's see if cocaine use disorder and let's see if the ones on JPS went to the emergency the ones on JPS went to the emergency the ones on JPS went to the emergency room less, something like that. None of room less, something like that. None of room less, something like that. None of these, you know, they're vulnerable to these, you know, they're vulnerable to these, you know, they're vulnerable to different kinds of selection effects. different kinds of selection effects. different kinds of selection effects. But still you I see this pattern But still you I see this pattern But still you I see this pattern particularly with simaglletide which is particularly with simaglletide which is particularly with simaglletide which is the GLP that is in uh wave and uh ompic the GLP that is in uh wave and uh ompic the GLP that is in uh wave and uh ompic and alcohol uh drops in alcohol use and alcohol uh drops in alcohol use and alcohol uh drops in alcohol use and so I'm and the other thing I think so I'm and the other thing I think so I'm and the other thing I think is perhaps important and what why I'm is perhaps important and what why I'm is perhaps important and what why I'm working now with the VA and Novo and I'm working now with the VA and Novo and I'm working now with the VA and Novo and a philanthropist to do something and a philanthropist to do something and a philanthropist to do something like this is that alcohol is the most like this is that alcohol is the most like this is that alcohol is the most like eating of drug behaviors. Right? like eating of drug behaviors. Right? like eating of drug behaviors. Right? So to the extent these drugs create a So to the extent these drugs create a So to the extent these drugs create a sense of satiety and fullness, right? sense of satiety and fullness, right? sense of satiety and fullness, right? &gt;&gt; To me that seems more likely to change &gt;&gt; To me that seems more likely to change &gt;&gt; To me that seems more likely to change you know swallowing something a drink you know swallowing something a drink you know swallowing something a drink versus say injecting myself or snorting versus say injecting myself or snorting versus say injecting myself or snorting a powder and you know the most it's you a powder and you know the most it's you a powder and you know the most it's you know eating like behavior. And so that's know eating like behavior. And so that's know eating like behavior. And so that's why I was optimistic at least that's why I was optimistic at least that's why I was optimistic at least that's where I want to want to start. If that where I want to want to start. If that where I want to want to start. If that works, it'd be fantastic because we works, it'd be fantastic because we works, it'd be fantastic because we have, you know, if you have a drinking have, you know, if you have a drinking have, you know, if you have a drinking problem, you're about 70% more likely to problem, you're about 70% more likely to problem, you're about 70% more likely to also be overweight and Americans already also be overweight and Americans already also be overweight and Americans already pretty overweight. Just think of the pretty overweight. Just think of the pretty overweight. Just think of the twofur benefit of this uh you know, for twofur benefit of this uh you know, for twofur benefit of this uh you know, for you know, transforming people's for you know, transforming people's for you know, transforming people's life. You know, lose 30 pounds and stop life. You know, lose 30 pounds and stop life. You know, lose 30 pounds and stop your drinking problem. And in the last your drinking problem. And in the last your drinking problem. And in the last one, you mentioned my dear friend Anna one, you mentioned my dear friend Anna one, you mentioned my dear friend Anna Lumpia, my uh colleague, she said, Lumpia, my uh colleague, she said, Lumpia, my uh colleague, she said, "What's great is there are patients, I "What's great is there are patients, I "What's great is there are patients, I don't really want to stop drinking, but don't really want to stop drinking, but don't really want to stop drinking, but you know, I just love losing weight." you know, I just love losing weight." you know, I just love losing weight." So, you know, because I've been So, you know, because I've been So, you know, because I've been overweight my whole life and so I will overweight my whole life and so I will overweight my whole life and so I will take the ompic here in the addiction take the ompic here in the addiction take the ompic here in the addiction clinic, not because I'm that motivated clinic, not because I'm that motivated clinic, not because I'm that motivated for the addiction part, but boy, when it for the addiction part, but boy, when it for the addiction part, but boy, when it comes with this other thing I really comes with this other thing I really comes with this other thing I really value, then I'm going to do it and then value, then I'm going to do it and then value, then I'm going to do it and then they get the benefit, you know, they saw they get the benefit, you know, they saw they get the benefit, you know, they saw they their drinking cuts back. So, it's they their drinking cuts back. So, it's they their drinking cuts back. So, it's really thrilling. Um, the another nice really thrilling. Um, the another nice really thrilling. Um, the another nice thing is these are old drugs. They've thing is these are old drugs. They've thing is these are old drugs. They've been around like 20 years. People don't been around like 20 years. People don't been around like 20 years. People don't realize that. So, and millions and realize that. So, and millions and realize that. So, and millions and millions of people have taken them. So millions of people have taken them. So millions of people have taken them. So that makes it less likely that there's that makes it less likely that there's that makes it less likely that there's some awful side effect, you know, that some awful side effect, you know, that some awful side effect, you know, that doesn't show up for 10 years to them. So doesn't show up for 10 years to them. So doesn't show up for 10 years to them. So there's just a lot of lot of potential there's just a lot of lot of potential there's just a lot of lot of potential upside here. And I think the next couple upside here. And I think the next couple upside here. And I think the next couple years of science in this area are going years of science in this area are going years of science in this area are going to be super exciting. to be super exciting. to be super exciting. &gt;&gt; What aspect of alcohol craving is sugar &gt;&gt; What aspect of alcohol craving is sugar &gt;&gt; What aspect of alcohol craving is sugar craving? &gt;&gt; I don't think very much. I mean maybe &gt;&gt; I don't think very much. I mean maybe &gt;&gt; I don't think very much. I mean maybe some I mean certainly the lore is you some I mean certainly the lore is you some I mean certainly the lore is you know when you're hung you know when know when you're hung you know when know when you're hung you know when do you uh are likely to relapse you know do you uh are likely to relapse you know do you uh are likely to relapse you know in fact a people say this you know uh in fact a people say this you know uh in fact a people say this you know uh hungry angry lonely tired you know um hungry angry lonely tired you know um hungry angry lonely tired you know um and some people feel that way like if and some people feel that way like if and some people feel that way like if they actually also some feel this way they actually also some feel this way they actually also some feel this way about carbs you know when they you know about carbs you know when they you know about carbs you know when they you know are short of carbs they want a beer so are short of carbs they want a beer so are short of carbs they want a beer so maybe it's something in there but I maybe it's something in there but I maybe it's something in there but I don't think that's the fundamental thing don't think that's the fundamental thing don't think that's the fundamental thing that is the driver I think it's more the that is the driver I think it's more the that is the driver I think it's more the subjective effect of consuming subjective effect of consuming subjective effect of consuming There's a movement toward removing uh There's a movement toward removing uh There's a movement toward removing uh advertisements for pharmaceuticals on advertisements for pharmaceuticals on advertisements for pharmaceuticals on television um online. I mean on television um online. I mean on television um online. I mean on television. Does anyone watch television television. Does anyone watch television television. Does anyone watch television anymore? You know, anymore? You know, anymore? You know, &gt;&gt; that's a good question. I don't know &gt;&gt; that's a good question. I don't know &gt;&gt; that's a good question. I don't know what effect it's going to have now that what effect it's going to have now that what effect it's going to have now that so few people watch television, but what so few people watch television, but what so few people watch television, but what are your thoughts on that? I mean, what are your thoughts on that? I mean, what are your thoughts on that? I mean, and of course there are medications for and of course there are medications for and of course there are medications for hives and allergies and all these hives and allergies and all these hives and allergies and all these things. So, it's a broad category, but things. So, it's a broad category, but things. So, it's a broad category, but I'm specifically thinking of things that I'm specifically thinking of things that I'm specifically thinking of things that have an addictive potential. the Lancet have an addictive potential. the Lancet have an addictive potential. the Lancet Commission on Stanford Lancet Commission on Stanford Lancet Commission on Stanford Lancet Commission that I led, you know, partnership that I led, you know, partnership that I led, you know, partnership between Lancet and the medical between Lancet and the medical between Lancet and the medical school. That was one of the points we school. That was one of the points we school. That was one of the points we made is that there's only two countries made is that there's only two countries made is that there's only two countries on earth that have television ads all on earth that have television ads all on earth that have television ads all the time, which is us and New Zealand. I the time, which is us and New Zealand. I the time, which is us and New Zealand. I have no idea why New Zealand, but it's have no idea why New Zealand, but it's have no idea why New Zealand, but it's just us. And when people from other just us. And when people from other just us. And when people from other countries come here, that's always a countries come here, that's always a countries come here, that's always a jolt to them. like you know what you jolt to them. like you know what you jolt to them. like you know what you know come you go to your super like god know come you go to your super like god know come you go to your super like god all these ads for ask your doctor about all these ads for ask your doctor about all these ads for ask your doctor about this ask your doctor about this ask your this ask your doctor about this ask your this ask your doctor about this ask your doctor about this I think it can doctor about this I think it can doctor about this I think it can create I can't prove this but I think it create I can't prove this but I think it create I can't prove this but I think it can create a sense that everything can create a sense that everything can create a sense that everything is perfectable if you just bully your is perfectable if you just bully your is perfectable if you just bully your doctor enough and you know and that is doctor enough and you know and that is doctor enough and you know and that is just not the truth so that's the just not the truth so that's the just not the truth so that's the downside I think the worry about them downside I think the worry about them downside I think the worry about them particularly for you know uh like you particularly for you know uh like you particularly for you know uh like you know we don't have thank you oxycontton know we don't have thank you oxycontton know we don't have thank you oxycontton ads on television, but we do have ads on television, but we do have ads on television, but we do have bankshot commercials. Like, so by that I bankshot commercials. Like, so by that I bankshot commercials. Like, so by that I mean there was one actually in the Super mean there was one actually in the Super mean there was one actually in the Super Bowl of an ad for opioid induced Bowl of an ad for opioid induced Bowl of an ad for opioid induced constipation. So who is that, you know, constipation. So who is that, you know, constipation. So who is that, you know, really for? I mean, that's a way of really for? I mean, that's a way of really for? I mean, that's a way of bringing up the subject of, you know, bringing up the subject of, you know, bringing up the subject of, you know, are you on, you know, opioid are you on, you know, opioid are you on, you know, opioid painkillers? But mostly we don't have painkillers? But mostly we don't have painkillers? But mostly we don't have that. And I think that's good. Um, you that. And I think that's good. Um, you that. And I think that's good. Um, you know, we need opioids clearly. Um and uh know, we need opioids clearly. Um and uh know, we need opioids clearly. Um and uh we uh and you know they they're I I've we uh and you know they they're I I've we uh and you know they they're I I've worked in hospice for 10 years. No one worked in hospice for 10 years. No one worked in hospice for 10 years. No one needs to tell me how incredibly valuable needs to tell me how incredibly valuable needs to tell me how incredibly valuable they are. But at the same time, you they are. But at the same time, you they are. But at the same time, you know, overpromotion was clearly part of know, overpromotion was clearly part of know, overpromotion was clearly part of what triggered the opio crisis. And I what triggered the opio crisis. And I what triggered the opio crisis. And I don't just mean TV. I mean everything. I don't just mean TV. I mean everything. I don't just mean TV. I mean everything. I mean people uh you know gifts and uh you mean people uh you know gifts and uh you mean people uh you know gifts and uh you know other types of promotions, gifts to know other types of promotions, gifts to know other types of promotions, gifts to schools um that weren't separated enough schools um that weren't separated enough schools um that weren't separated enough from the industry. Um, all those things from the industry. Um, all those things from the industry. Um, all those things we highlighted in the uh Lancet we highlighted in the uh Lancet we highlighted in the uh Lancet Commission. &gt;&gt; Social media probably doesn't have its &gt;&gt; Social media probably doesn't have its &gt;&gt; Social media probably doesn't have its own 12step yet. It probably will soon. own 12step yet. It probably will soon. own 12step yet. It probably will soon. Um, social media is here to stay. Let's Um, social media is here to stay. Let's Um, social media is here to stay. Let's be blunt. I'm sure there's um been be blunt. I'm sure there's um been be blunt. I'm sure there's um been discussions in the past about television discussions in the past about television discussions in the past about television is ruining society and now everyone's is ruining society and now everyone's is ruining society and now everyone's staring at a box in the evening. You staring at a box in the evening. You staring at a box in the evening. You know, this I mean, this has happened know, this I mean, this has happened know, this I mean, this has happened multiple times throughout history. Uh, multiple times throughout history. Uh, multiple times throughout history. Uh, but do you see social true social media but do you see social true social media but do you see social true social media addicts or video game or YouTube addicts or video game or YouTube addicts or video game or YouTube addicts? Uh, do you ever observe um like addicts? Uh, do you ever observe um like addicts? Uh, do you ever observe um like intervention working? Uh, what does that intervention working? Uh, what does that intervention working? Uh, what does that look like given that it's not quite like look like given that it's not quite like look like given that it's not quite like eating, meaning you have to eat at some eating, meaning you have to eat at some eating, meaning you have to eat at some point? But to tell a young person or an point? But to tell a young person or an point? But to tell a young person or an older person, but to tell a young older person, but to tell a young older person, but to tell a young person, look, you can't ever be on person, look, you can't ever be on person, look, you can't ever be on social media isn't reasonable. It's like social media isn't reasonable. It's like social media isn't reasonable. It's like saying you're not going to talk to your saying you're not going to talk to your saying you're not going to talk to your friends unless they're standing right in friends unless they're standing right in friends unless they're standing right in front of you. And uh it's not going to front of you. And uh it's not going to front of you. And uh it's not going to work. It's just work. It's just work. It's just &gt;&gt; so I will quote a perceptive uh Stanford &gt;&gt; so I will quote a perceptive uh Stanford &gt;&gt; so I will quote a perceptive uh Stanford freshman who said to me, "I hate uh I freshman who said to me, "I hate uh I freshman who said to me, "I hate uh I hate social media. I think it's bad for hate social media. I think it's bad for hate social media. I think it's bad for my mental health, but I have to be on it my mental health, but I have to be on it my mental health, but I have to be on it because everybody else is." And that is because everybody else is." And that is because everybody else is." And that is really tragic. And I think lots of really tragic. And I think lots of really tragic. And I think lots of people are in there. And I read people are in there. And I read people are in there. And I read another study actually was on the on the another study actually was on the on the another study actually was on the on the plane coming here of plane coming here of plane coming here of &gt;&gt; how much would you have to how much &gt;&gt; how much would you have to how much &gt;&gt; how much would you have to how much would you demand if you had to leave would you demand if you had to leave would you demand if you had to leave social media and people will say a social media and people will say a social media and people will say a certain money you know certain money you know certain money you know &gt;&gt; but you say if everybody else were &gt;&gt; but you say if everybody else were &gt;&gt; but you say if everybody else were leaving it leaving it leaving it &gt;&gt; the same people would say I would pay &gt;&gt; the same people would say I would pay &gt;&gt; the same people would say I would pay money to be one of them. [laughter] money to be one of them. [laughter] money to be one of them. [laughter] [gasps] &gt;&gt; So that is why things like the &gt;&gt; So that is why things like the &gt;&gt; So that is why things like the Australian social media ban are going to Australian social media ban are going to Australian social media ban are going to be really interesting because it's not be really interesting because it's not be really interesting because it's not really an individual punishment. You're really an individual punishment. You're really an individual punishment. You're not being exiled from the party. It's not being exiled from the party. It's not being exiled from the party. It's more of life is going to happen in more of life is going to happen in more of life is going to happen in person for teenagers. person for teenagers. person for teenagers. &gt;&gt; And so that you know that will &gt;&gt; And so that you know that will &gt;&gt; And so that you know that will make that real life more appealing than make that real life more appealing than make that real life more appealing than being online. So I'm really than being online. So I'm really than being online. So I'm really fascinated. I mean we don't know what's fascinated. I mean we don't know what's fascinated. I mean we don't know what's going to happen but really fascinated to going to happen but really fascinated to going to happen but really fascinated to see what happens. We do see all across see what happens. We do see all across see what happens. We do see all across the country more people coming in with the country more people coming in with the country more people coming in with these types of problems, you know, like these types of problems, you know, like these types of problems, you know, like feeling like they can't stop looking at feeling like they can't stop looking at feeling like they can't stop looking at their phone. um that there or games or their phone. um that there or games or their phone. um that there or games or pornography is a really big one, you pornography is a really big one, you pornography is a really big one, you know, delivered through uh these know, delivered through uh these know, delivered through uh these media. And of course, there are now media. And of course, there are now media. And of course, there are now gambling apps you can use on your phone gambling apps you can use on your phone gambling apps you can use on your phone and that kind of thing. And really um and that kind of thing. And really um and that kind of thing. And really um have extremely um uh difficult lives. I have extremely um uh difficult lives. I have extremely um uh difficult lives. I mean, they really have become absolutely mean, they really have become absolutely mean, they really have become absolutely consuming uh for them. We don't know yet consuming uh for them. We don't know yet consuming uh for them. We don't know yet of what the natural course is of this um of what the natural course is of this um of what the natural course is of this um you know what um because it's new like you know what um because it's new like you know what um because it's new like so what is the five-year course of so what is the five-year course of so what is the five-year course of social media that's really literally social media that's really literally social media that's really literally impossible to answer at this moment. impossible to answer at this moment. impossible to answer at this moment. What for what portion of people is a What for what portion of people is a What for what portion of people is a developmental thing that they will get developmental thing that they will get developmental thing that they will get out of for you for example if you go out of for you for example if you go out of for you for example if you go into a college campus you will see a lot into a college campus you will see a lot into a college campus you will see a lot of people drinking at levels that would of people drinking at levels that would of people drinking at levels that would qualify them for some level of alcohol qualify them for some level of alcohol qualify them for some level of alcohol use disorder and a huge number of them use disorder and a huge number of them use disorder and a huge number of them five years later will be married and five years later will be married and five years later will be married and have a job and drink very little. I mean have a job and drink very little. I mean have a job and drink very little. I mean there are you those kinds of there are you those kinds of there are you those kinds of maturing out effects. Is there a maturing out effects. Is there a maturing out effects. Is there a maturing out effect in social media or maturing out effect in social media or maturing out effect in social media or not? Um you know for me it was easy to I not? Um you know for me it was easy to I not? Um you know for me it was easy to I used to do a lot of X and then and then used to do a lot of X and then and then used to do a lot of X and then and then I stopped or I just do a teeny bit. Now I stopped or I just do a teeny bit. Now I stopped or I just do a teeny bit. Now that was particularly easy but of course that was particularly easy but of course that was particularly easy but of course I had 40 years of my brain not touching I had 40 years of my brain not touching I had 40 years of my brain not touching it. Will that be as easy for whatever it. Will that be as easy for whatever it. Will that be as easy for whatever the most popular thing kids probably Tik the most popular thing kids probably Tik the most popular thing kids probably Tik Tok or Instagram or something. If you've Tok or Instagram or something. If you've Tok or Instagram or something. If you've been doing that, again, thinking in that been doing that, again, thinking in that been doing that, again, thinking in that plastic, you know, neuroplasticity from plastic, you know, neuroplasticity from plastic, you know, neuroplasticity from the time you were 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, is the time you were 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, is the time you were 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, is it developmental? When you're 25, will it developmental? When you're 25, will it developmental? When you're 25, will you be ignoring your kids? Uh or will you be ignoring your kids? Uh or will you be ignoring your kids? Uh or will you not have kids because you not have kids because you not have kids because you don't have sex because you don't have a don't have sex because you don't have a don't have sex because you don't have a date because you're in all day looking date because you're in all day looking date because you're in all day looking at the phone? Like, what will that at the phone? Like, what will that at the phone? Like, what will that course be? We don't know that yet. course be? We don't know that yet. course be? We don't know that yet. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I see a lot of adults addicted to &gt;&gt; Yeah. I see a lot of adults addicted to &gt;&gt; Yeah. I see a lot of adults addicted to social media. I don't I don't know if social media. I don't I don't know if social media. I don't I don't know if I'm addicted. I don't think so. Um I'm addicted. I don't think so. Um I'm addicted. I don't think so. Um because if I say I'm not, sounds like an because if I say I'm not, sounds like an because if I say I'm not, sounds like an addict, right? So, I'm just going to say addict, right? So, I'm just going to say addict, right? So, I'm just going to say I don't think so. But I found great I don't think so. But I found great I don't think so. But I found great benefit to taking an old phone when I benefit to taking an old phone when I benefit to taking an old phone when I upgraded my phone, which I do far too upgraded my phone, which I do far too upgraded my phone, which I do far too seldom, but I finally upgraded my phone seldom, but I finally upgraded my phone seldom, but I finally upgraded my phone and I took my old phone and I put X and I took my old phone and I put X and I took my old phone and I put X and Instagram on that phone and it remains Instagram on that phone and it remains Instagram on that phone and it remains much of the time in a um Supermax prison much of the time in a um Supermax prison much of the time in a um Supermax prison lock box that you can't code out of. So, lock box that you can't code out of. So, lock box that you can't code out of. So, you put like one day or you know 19 you put like one day or you know 19 you put like one day or you know 19 hours or something. You click that and hours or something. You click that and hours or something. You click that and you'd have to saw it open and that you'd have to saw it open and that you'd have to saw it open and that wouldn't even work. And uh it's very wouldn't even work. And uh it's very wouldn't even work. And uh it's very helpful cuz once it's locked away and helpful cuz once it's locked away and helpful cuz once it's locked away and there's no opportunity to uh look at it. there's no opportunity to uh look at it. there's no opportunity to uh look at it. If people send me things, I can't open If people send me things, I can't open If people send me things, I can't open it on my other phone and the impulse to it on my other phone and the impulse to it on my other phone and the impulse to pick it up is blocked. It's very useful. pick it up is blocked. It's very useful. pick it up is blocked. It's very useful. It's a portable box and it doesn't It's a portable box and it doesn't It's a portable box and it doesn't require I mean the box costs 30 bucks. require I mean the box costs 30 bucks. require I mean the box costs 30 bucks. I'm sure I recovered more than that in I'm sure I recovered more than that in I'm sure I recovered more than that in work output and recreation output and work output and recreation output and work output and recreation output and just hanging out uh with my girlfriend just hanging out uh with my girlfriend just hanging out uh with my girlfriend and not looking at my phone. and not looking at my phone. and not looking at my phone. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know other people who have done &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know other people who have done &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know other people who have done things like that or switched back to a things like that or switched back to a things like that or switched back to a dumb phone. Um, and uh to avoid the dumb phone. Um, and uh to avoid the dumb phone. Um, and uh to avoid the constant Bing notification da or constant Bing notification da or constant Bing notification da or there's also software you can there's also software you can there's also software you can get that like you know will suppress a get that like you know will suppress a get that like you know will suppress a lot of that stuff unless you lot of that stuff unless you lot of that stuff unless you specifically go in and enter a code and specifically go in and enter a code and specifically go in and enter a code and say bring it all to me. Um you know and say bring it all to me. Um you know and say bring it all to me. Um you know and those are you know useful things like those are you know useful things like those are you know useful things like it's so new right that we haven't got a it's so new right that we haven't got a it's so new right that we haven't got a lot of social norms about it but you lot of social norms about it but you lot of social norms about it but you know uh think of something like drinking know uh think of something like drinking know uh think of something like drinking before noon all right there's no law before noon all right there's no law before noon all right there's no law against drinking before noon and yet a against drinking before noon and yet a against drinking before noon and yet a huge number of people abide that norm huge number of people abide that norm huge number of people abide that norm right in like oh well don't it's not right in like oh well don't it's not right in like oh well don't it's not noon you know and we might over time noon you know and we might over time noon you know and we might over time evolve some kinds of things about social evolve some kinds of things about social evolve some kinds of things about social media I would hope you know like you media I would hope you know like you media I would hope you know like you know things that we all find sensible know things that we all find sensible know things that we all find sensible like don't do social media at the dinner like don't do social media at the dinner like don't do social media at the dinner table would be I think a good one table would be I think a good one table would be I think a good one or people or don't do social media in a or people or don't do social media in a or people or don't do social media in a restaurant or whatever. I you know I restaurant or whatever. I you know I restaurant or whatever. I you know I hope we'll do something because you hope we'll do something because you hope we'll do something because you can't solve this problem just through can't solve this problem just through can't solve this problem just through individual clinical medicine. That's individual clinical medicine. That's individual clinical medicine. That's crazy. I mean there has to be some just crazy. I mean there has to be some just crazy. I mean there has to be some just like we've built a lot of norms around like we've built a lot of norms around like we've built a lot of norms around alcohol. We've built norms you know alcohol. We've built norms you know alcohol. We've built norms you know don't drink and drive. That's don't drink and drive. That's don't drink and drive. That's that's one that most people now broadly that's one that most people now broadly that's one that most people now broadly find believable. building some about find believable. building some about find believable. building some about social media I think is going to be sort social media I think is going to be sort social media I think is going to be sort of the task of you know this generation of the task of you know this generation of the task of you know this generation that has grown up with them. that has grown up with them. that has grown up with them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I have three real life examples of &gt;&gt; Yeah. I have three real life examples of &gt;&gt; Yeah. I have three real life examples of young guys whose parents I know who um young guys whose parents I know who um young guys whose parents I know who um essentially contacted me because um essentially contacted me because um essentially contacted me because um different situation for each but there's different situation for each but there's different situation for each but there's I'll just describe the overlap. Each one I'll just describe the overlap. Each one I'll just describe the overlap. Each one of them was looking like a failure to of them was looking like a failure to of them was looking like a failure to launch. you know, graduated high school, launch. you know, graduated high school, launch. you know, graduated high school, was not highly motivated to go off to was not highly motivated to go off to was not highly motivated to go off to college or went to community college, college or went to community college, college or went to community college, then stopped doing that, was working, then stopped doing that, was working, then stopped doing that, was working, then lost their job or they were not in then lost their job or they were not in then lost their job or they were not in a career path that was going to sustain a career path that was going to sustain a career path that was going to sustain them independently. Um, YouTube or video them independently. Um, YouTube or video them independently. Um, YouTube or video game enthusiasts to say the least, and game enthusiasts to say the least, and game enthusiasts to say the least, and all were convinced they had ADHD, all were convinced they had ADHD, all were convinced they had ADHD, all medicated by now. um happy to say uh with some by now. um happy to say uh with some by now. um happy to say uh with some explanation of reward circuitry and explanation of reward circuitry and explanation of reward circuitry and Anna's book, giving them Anna's book, Anna's book, giving them Anna's book, Anna's book, giving them Anna's book, Dopamine Nation, and obviously really Dopamine Nation, and obviously really Dopamine Nation, and obviously really hard work on their part uh is really hard work on their part uh is really hard work on their part uh is really what did it. All three of them in higher what did it. All three of them in higher what did it. All three of them in higher education situations, great education situations, great education situations, great universities, off medication. They all universities, off medication. They all universities, off medication. They all had to quit video games or YouTube for had to quit video games or YouTube for had to quit video games or YouTube for some extended period of time um and some extended period of time um and some extended period of time um and recapture their attentional capabilities recapture their attentional capabilities recapture their attentional capabilities and most importantly recapture their and most importantly recapture their and most importantly recapture their sense that they have agency in the world sense that they have agency in the world sense that they have agency in the world that they can make things happen for that they can make things happen for that they can make things happen for themselves. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Not incidentally all of their parents &gt;&gt; Not incidentally all of their parents &gt;&gt; Not incidentally all of their parents are reasonably high achieving um and are reasonably high achieving um and are reasonably high achieving um and none of them have patterns of addiction none of them have patterns of addiction none of them have patterns of addiction that would have predicted any of this. that would have predicted any of this. that would have predicted any of this. So there is a way to escape the So there is a way to escape the So there is a way to escape the vortex of this stuff. But I mention vortex of this stuff. But I mention vortex of this stuff. But I mention those stories because I think a they're those stories because I think a they're those stories because I think a they're success stories and I'm proud of those success stories and I'm proud of those success stories and I'm proud of those guys and um but often times it's guys and um but often times it's guys and um but often times it's multiffactorial. I can't say oh it was multiffactorial. I can't say oh it was multiffactorial. I can't say oh it was the medication or oh but the medication or oh but the medication or oh but the medication didn't rescue them or oh it medication didn't rescue them or oh it medication didn't rescue them or oh it was YouTube or oh it was video games is was YouTube or oh it was video games is was YouTube or oh it was video games is there's a sort of a pattern of there's a sort of a pattern of there's a sort of a pattern of progressive languishing that's set in progressive languishing that's set in progressive languishing that's set in this context of media. They weren't this context of media. They weren't this context of media. They weren't talking to me about porn, although I talking to me about porn, although I talking to me about porn, although I suspect that was in the backdrop of some suspect that was in the backdrop of some suspect that was in the backdrop of some of these cases. And and um and they're of these cases. And and um and they're of these cases. And and um and they're kicking butt right now. All three of kicking butt right now. All three of kicking butt right now. All three of them in healthy relationships, working them in healthy relationships, working them in healthy relationships, working hard, working out, hard, working out, hard, working out, &gt;&gt; happy, which is the most important &gt;&gt; happy, which is the most important &gt;&gt; happy, which is the most important thing. I mean, they're one kicked thing. I mean, they're one kicked thing. I mean, they're one kicked cannabis, the other cannabis, the other cannabis, the other &gt;&gt; doesn't drink, the other one can drink, &gt;&gt; doesn't drink, the other one can drink, &gt;&gt; doesn't drink, the other one can drink, it seems, without any issues. I mean, it seems, without any issues. I mean, it seems, without any issues. I mean, when I think about what they have to when I think about what they have to when I think about what they have to deal with relative to what I had to deal with relative to what I had to deal with relative to what I had to deal with growing up when we didn't even with growing up when we didn't even with growing up when we didn't even really understand what addiction was, really understand what addiction was, really understand what addiction was, there's just so many more things coming there's just so many more things coming there's just so many more things coming at them to impair them. It's like at them to impair them. It's like at them to impair them. It's like they've unshackled themselves from five they've unshackled themselves from five they've unshackled themselves from five or six different ball and chains. or six different ball and chains. or six different ball and chains. &gt;&gt; That's great. And and um the point you &gt;&gt; That's great. And and um the point you &gt;&gt; That's great. And and um the point you make too about there's so many pathways make too about there's so many pathways make too about there's so many pathways out of this, you just you see that, you out of this, you just you see that, you out of this, you just you see that, you know, everywhere. Many many pathways to know, everywhere. Many many pathways to know, everywhere. Many many pathways to recovery. I mean, I know people who recovery. I mean, I know people who recovery. I mean, I know people who like, you know, a dear friend of mine, like, you know, a dear friend of mine, like, you know, a dear friend of mine, um, you know, just tried to quit smoking um, you know, just tried to quit smoking um, you know, just tried to quit smoking for for, you know, years and years and for for, you know, years and years and for for, you know, years and years and years and was very just felt totally years and was very just felt totally years and was very just felt totally defeated by it until he saw his baby. defeated by it until he saw his baby. defeated by it until he saw his baby. You know, as soon as he was a father, You know, as soon as he was a father, You know, as soon as he was a father, he's just like, man, I got to stay he's just like, man, I got to stay he's just like, man, I got to stay around for this beautiful being and quit around for this beautiful being and quit around for this beautiful being and quit that day. um you know there's you know that day. um you know there's you know that day. um you know there's you know changes in the sort of homo racial changes in the sort of homo racial changes in the sort of homo racial system because of life changes that um system because of life changes that um system because of life changes that um that I have another friend a dear friend that I have another friend a dear friend that I have another friend a dear friend who um it was going to prison you know who um it was going to prison you know who um it was going to prison you know which is a terrible thing you think how which is a terrible thing you think how which is a terrible thing you think how would anybody benefit from being in would anybody benefit from being in would anybody benefit from being in prison but he said I just needed like prison but he said I just needed like prison but he said I just needed like you know uh you know many months you know uh you know many months you know uh you know many months off of methamphetamine for my brain to off of methamphetamine for my brain to off of methamphetamine for my brain to heal and I sort of realized wow that was heal and I sort of realized wow that was heal and I sort of realized wow that was really crazy um and you know and he really crazy um and you know and he really crazy um and you know and he didn't get any treatment it was just didn't get any treatment it was just didn't get any treatment it was just being away from the drug for an extended being away from the drug for an extended being away from the drug for an extended period and there's you know, infinite period and there's you know, infinite period and there's you know, infinite number of stories like that because this number of stories like that because this number of stories like that because this is a condition, you know, experienced by is a condition, you know, experienced by is a condition, you know, experienced by tens of millions of people, right? So, tens of millions of people, right? So, tens of millions of people, right? So, there's going to be lots and lots of there's going to be lots and lots of there's going to be lots and lots of pathways out. That is one thing, by the pathways out. That is one thing, by the pathways out. That is one thing, by the way, surprises a lot of people of people way, surprises a lot of people of people way, surprises a lot of people of people who had a substance problem and are now who had a substance problem and are now who had a substance problem and are now doing well in big representative doing well in big representative doing well in big representative surveys. Very few of them actually went surveys. Very few of them actually went surveys. Very few of them actually went to see anybody like Stanford psychiatry. to see anybody like Stanford psychiatry. to see anybody like Stanford psychiatry. That is an unusual pathway to go through That is an unusual pathway to go through That is an unusual pathway to go through addiction treatment. People change in addiction treatment. People change in addiction treatment. People change in all kinds of ways for all kinds of all kinds of ways for all kinds of all kinds of ways for all kinds of reasons. &gt;&gt; Yeah, one of our team members here has &gt;&gt; Yeah, one of our team members here has &gt;&gt; Yeah, one of our team members here has been open about this. So I feel been open about this. So I feel been open about this. So I feel comfortable saying it. He managed to comfortable saying it. He managed to comfortable saying it. He managed to kick alcohol and a pretty almost kick alcohol and a pretty almost kick alcohol and a pretty almost lifelong alcohol and cannabis addiction. lifelong alcohol and cannabis addiction. lifelong alcohol and cannabis addiction. Didn't go to meetings, made the but made Didn't go to meetings, made the but made Didn't go to meetings, made the but made the decision and um lost a bunch of the decision and um lost a bunch of the decision and um lost a bunch of weight too. He was already super weight too. He was already super weight too. He was already super productive. You know he was doing well productive. You know he was doing well productive. You know he was doing well enough that wasn't a forced thing but he enough that wasn't a forced thing but he enough that wasn't a forced thing but he was just tired of you know yeah tired of was just tired of you know yeah tired of was just tired of you know yeah tired of being tired as they say and he flipped being tired as they say and he flipped being tired as they say and he flipped the switch in one day has never gone the switch in one day has never gone the switch in one day has never gone back. And I remember asking him recently back. And I remember asking him recently back. And I remember asking him recently I was like wait did you go to meetings? I was like wait did you go to meetings? I was like wait did you go to meetings? He's like no I went to the gym. He found He's like no I went to the gym. He found He's like no I went to the gym. He found a replacement behavior. He got healthy. a replacement behavior. He got healthy. a replacement behavior. He got healthy. He kept doing all the other things he He kept doing all the other things he He kept doing all the other things he was doing. And I don't want to take the was doing. And I don't want to take the was doing. And I don't want to take the words out of his mouth, but he's gone on words out of his mouth, but he's gone on words out of his mouth, but he's gone on a few podcasts talking about the a few podcasts talking about the a few podcasts talking about the relationship with his kids improving relationship with his kids improving relationship with his kids improving tremendously professionally and his tremendously professionally and his tremendously professionally and his relationship to himself, you know, just relationship to himself, you know, just relationship to himself, you know, just and broke a long family line of and broke a long family line of and broke a long family line of alcoholism. I mean, I think that's what alcoholism. I mean, I think that's what alcoholism. I mean, I think that's what sometimes people forget is that you can sometimes people forget is that you can sometimes people forget is that you can break the chain in one generation, which break the chain in one generation, which break the chain in one generation, which is really spectacular. is really spectacular. is really spectacular. &gt;&gt; Yeah. G genes are risk. They're &gt;&gt; Yeah. G genes are risk. They're &gt;&gt; Yeah. G genes are risk. They're not destiny. And that's very important. not destiny. And that's very important. not destiny. And that's very important. Even if you come from, you know, a Even if you come from, you know, a Even if you come from, you know, a hundred generations worth, that doesn't hundred generations worth, that doesn't hundred generations worth, that doesn't mean that your life is necessarily going mean that your life is necessarily going mean that your life is necessarily going to going to come out that way. And and to going to come out that way. And and to going to come out that way. And and you're raising another point, too, about you're raising another point, too, about you're raising another point, too, about what is beautiful for a lot of people what is beautiful for a lot of people what is beautiful for a lot of people about recovery. Is then you start about recovery. Is then you start about recovery. Is then you start acquiring more reasons not to use that acquiring more reasons not to use that acquiring more reasons not to use that you didn't have at the moment you didn't have at the moment you didn't have at the moment you started because you burned those started because you burned those started because you burned those relationships out or you'd never form relationships out or you'd never form relationships out or you'd never form them because you have been living in them because you have been living in them because you have been living in your mom's basement smoking cannabis and your mom's basement smoking cannabis and your mom's basement smoking cannabis and being online all day. And then you start being online all day. And then you start being online all day. And then you start to get like, "Oh, wow. Having a like job to get like, "Oh, wow. Having a like job to get like, "Oh, wow. Having a like job where I'm respected and I feel important where I'm respected and I feel important where I'm respected and I feel important is nice. Getting paid is nice. Um, you is nice. Getting paid is nice. Um, you is nice. Getting paid is nice. Um, you know, being uh, you know, mentally know, being uh, you know, mentally know, being uh, you know, mentally present, you know, and instead of high present, you know, and instead of high present, you know, and instead of high all the time is nice. And then it just all the time is nice. And then it just all the time is nice. And then it just makes it easier month by month, year by makes it easier month by month, year by makes it easier month by month, year by year to just live the rest of your life year to just live the rest of your life year to just live the rest of your life that way." that way." that way." &gt;&gt; There was a question that I forgot to &gt;&gt; There was a question that I forgot to &gt;&gt; There was a question that I forgot to &gt;&gt; ask earlier. Okay. &gt;&gt; ask earlier. Okay. &gt;&gt; ask earlier. Okay. &gt;&gt; And it's a somewhat of a touchy subject. &gt;&gt; And it's a somewhat of a touchy subject. &gt;&gt; And it's a somewhat of a touchy subject. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um &gt;&gt; Okay. Um &gt;&gt; Okay. Um I've observed and I've heard that I've observed and I've heard that I've observed and I've heard that sometimes the smarter the person is or sometimes the smarter the person is or sometimes the smarter the person is or the more intellectual they tend to be or the more intellectual they tend to be or the more intellectual they tend to be or ideas oriented um the worse 12step works ideas oriented um the worse 12step works ideas oriented um the worse 12step works for them. Whereas people who just kind for them. Whereas people who just kind for them. Whereas people who just kind of go, "Okay, like chop wood, carry of go, "Okay, like chop wood, carry of go, "Okay, like chop wood, carry water. I can do that. Follow step one, water. I can do that. Follow step one, water. I can do that. Follow step one, follow step two, follow step three, step follow step two, follow step three, step follow step two, follow step three, step four is pretty uncomfortable. Do that. four is pretty uncomfortable. Do that. four is pretty uncomfortable. Do that. Okay, fine. That one's harder than the Okay, fine. That one's harder than the Okay, fine. That one's harder than the other ones." And they just kind of do other ones." And they just kind of do other ones." And they just kind of do it. They don't overthink it. Um, I've it. They don't overthink it. Um, I've it. They don't overthink it. Um, I've observed this quite a lot. observed this quite a lot. observed this quite a lot. &gt;&gt; And I don't want to get into notions of &gt;&gt; And I don't want to get into notions of &gt;&gt; And I don't want to get into notions of IQ. I think it's just some people have IQ. I think it's just some people have IQ. I think it's just some people have this prefrontal cortex that lets them this prefrontal cortex that lets them this prefrontal cortex that lets them see five different strategies see five different strategies see five different strategies simultaneously. Other people are like simultaneously. Other people are like simultaneously. Other people are like more plugandchug. more plugandchug. more plugandchug. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; and um neither is better or worse. is &gt;&gt; and um neither is better or worse. is &gt;&gt; and um neither is better or worse. is just different. And um I have observed just different. And um I have observed just different. And um I have observed that for people who just kind of like that for people who just kind of like that for people who just kind of like ratchet into the work and don't ratchet into the work and don't ratchet into the work and don't overthink it. What's this about? Is it a overthink it. What's this about? Is it a overthink it. What's this about? Is it a cult? What do they want? Like but cult? What do they want? Like but cult? What do they want? Like but there's this one instance like will I there's this one instance like will I there's this one instance like will I ever drink it? They don't think about ever drink it? They don't think about ever drink it? They don't think about too much. They just do the steps and too much. They just do the steps and too much. They just do the steps and they're out. they're out. they're out. &gt;&gt; That is what a asks. I mean one &gt;&gt; That is what a asks. I mean one &gt;&gt; That is what a asks. I mean one expression is your best thinking got you expression is your best thinking got you expression is your best thinking got you here and [laughter] and in other words here and [laughter] and in other words here and [laughter] and in other words keep it simple. like you don't have keep it simple. like you don't have keep it simple. like you don't have to you know do a philosophical critique to you know do a philosophical critique to you know do a philosophical critique of the 12 steps you just have to don't of the 12 steps you just have to don't of the 12 steps you just have to don't drink go to meetings don't drink go to drink go to meetings don't drink go to drink go to meetings don't drink go to meetings it's that you know and it is an meetings it's that you know and it is an meetings it's that you know and it is an action program whereas so it's different action program whereas so it's different action program whereas so it's different in that sense from a lot of in that sense from a lot of in that sense from a lot of psychotherapy styles which are you know psychotherapy styles which are you know psychotherapy styles which are you know more intellectual and analytical um you more intellectual and analytical um you more intellectual and analytical um you know and less focused on you're actually know and less focused on you're actually know and less focused on you're actually going to do certain behaviors um and so going to do certain behaviors um and so going to do certain behaviors um and so if you dislike that yeah I can see why if you dislike that yeah I can see why if you dislike that yeah I can see why AA would bother you. I mean, that AA would bother you. I mean, that AA would bother you. I mean, that said, AA is it's just not one thing. So, said, AA is it's just not one thing. So, said, AA is it's just not one thing. So, you can find, I'm sure, within a few you can find, I'm sure, within a few you can find, I'm sure, within a few miles of where we are sitting, you miles of where we are sitting, you miles of where we are sitting, you can find an AA meeting over a gas can find an AA meeting over a gas can find an AA meeting over a gas station with guys who are smoking station with guys who are smoking station with guys who are smoking tobacco and have jail house tattoos who tobacco and have jail house tattoos who tobacco and have jail house tattoos who are who are talking about the steps. And are who are talking about the steps. And are who are talking about the steps. And you will find meetings with you will find meetings with you will find meetings with professionals who will talk about, you professionals who will talk about, you professionals who will talk about, you know, enst and things like that. And and know, enst and things like that. And and know, enst and things like that. And and you sort of find your own people. And you sort of find your own people. And you sort of find your own people. And I've known some very intellectual people I've known some very intellectual people I've known some very intellectual people like professors who go to an AA meeting like professors who go to an AA meeting like professors who go to an AA meeting with other people like that and they with other people like that and they with other people like that and they they're still working the steps and all they're still working the steps and all they're still working the steps and all that but they are also you know they're that but they are also you know they're that but they are also you know they're going to talk about kirkugard you know going to talk about kirkugard you know going to talk about kirkugard you know it's like and again like a is like it's like and again like a is like it's like and again like a is like fine you talk about kard just remember fine you talk about kard just remember fine you talk about kard just remember don't drink and go to meetings you talk don't drink and go to meetings you talk don't drink and go to meetings you talk about whatever you want and you need to about whatever you want and you need to about whatever you want and you need to find your peeps and I and that's find your peeps and I and that's find your peeps and I and that's also why I when people are thinking of also why I when people are thinking of also why I when people are thinking of going I say think of this like dating going I say think of this like dating going I say think of this like dating like you know you wouldn't go on one like you know you wouldn't go on one like you know you wouldn't go on one date and say I didn't like that person I date and say I didn't like that person I date and say I didn't like that person I guess I'm going to be alone the rest of guess I'm going to be alone the rest of guess I'm going to be alone the rest of my life. You go on a group of dates, my life. You go on a group of dates, my life. You go on a group of dates, right? So, pick some different meetings right? So, pick some different meetings right? So, pick some different meetings at different times of day and different at different times of day and different at different times of day and different places and they will be different. places and they will be different. places and they will be different. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And then go back to the one that felt &gt;&gt; And then go back to the one that felt &gt;&gt; And then go back to the one that felt like home. like home. like home. &gt;&gt; Speaking of carrots, uh you know, &gt;&gt; Speaking of carrots, uh you know, &gt;&gt; Speaking of carrots, uh you know, there's no wisdom like the kind of there's no wisdom like the kind of there's no wisdom like the kind of wisdom you can get from a really good wisdom you can get from a really good wisdom you can get from a really good share from someone at an AA meeting that share from someone at an AA meeting that share from someone at an AA meeting that you thought when they stood up and you thought when they stood up and you thought when they stood up and started their share that you had nothing started their share that you had nothing started their share that you had nothing in common with this person. you are in common with this person. you are in common with this person. you are from two univer different universes and from two univer different universes and from two univer different universes and inevitably there's some kernel of inevitably there's some kernel of inevitably there's some kernel of truth for you or something that you truth for you or something that you truth for you or something that you disagree with and therefore you have disagree with and therefore you have disagree with and therefore you have insight it's a spectacular thing insight it's a spectacular thing insight it's a spectacular thing really &gt;&gt; yeah I mean and they were very conscious &gt;&gt; yeah I mean and they were very conscious &gt;&gt; yeah I mean and they were very conscious about that if you read you know that about that if you read you know that about that if you read you know that it's you know called the big book it's you know called the big book it's you know called the big book it's actually just ac was called the big book actually just ac was called the big book actually just ac was called the big book because it was printed on cheap paper so because it was printed on cheap paper so because it was printed on cheap paper so it was sort of fat and pulpy this was it was sort of fat and pulpy this was it was sort of fat and pulpy this was back in the depression right um it says back in the depression right um it says back in the depression right um it says flat out this book is mostly stories and flat out this book is mostly stories and flat out this book is mostly stories and we tell stories in the hopes that we tell stories in the hopes that we tell stories in the hopes that something in them will catch you and something in them will catch you and something in them will catch you and say, "Gosh, that life is like mine and say, "Gosh, that life is like mine and say, "Gosh, that life is like mine and look where he or she is. Boy, I wish I look where he or she is. Boy, I wish I look where he or she is. Boy, I wish I were there. Well, if they're kind of were there. Well, if they're kind of were there. Well, if they're kind of like me and they got to that good spot, like me and they got to that good spot, like me and they got to that good spot, maybe I can get to that good spot." And maybe I can get to that good spot." And maybe I can get to that good spot." And so they it's a conscious and very, I so they it's a conscious and very, I so they it's a conscious and very, I think, clever organizational strategy to think, clever organizational strategy to think, clever organizational strategy to tell people, you know, there's a place tell people, you know, there's a place tell people, you know, there's a place for you here. There's people like you for you here. There's people like you for you here. There's people like you here. &gt;&gt; I want to ask you about death. &gt;&gt; I want to ask you about death. &gt;&gt; I want to ask you about death. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, you worked in hospice. you worked in hospice. you worked in hospice. &gt;&gt; Great experience. &gt;&gt; Great experience. &gt;&gt; Great experience. &gt;&gt; As Americans, we're not comfortable &gt;&gt; As Americans, we're not comfortable &gt;&gt; As Americans, we're not comfortable talking about death. Um, [clears throat] talking about death. Um, [clears throat] talking about death. Um, [clears throat] it, uh, it evokes it, uh, it evokes it, uh, it evokes sadness, um, fear. Um, but I think sadness, um, fear. Um, but I think sadness, um, fear. Um, but I think there's a lot to learn about it um, there's a lot to learn about it um, there's a lot to learn about it um, [clears throat] from hearing about [clears throat] from hearing about [clears throat] from hearing about someone who's been close to it a lot. someone who's been close to it a lot. someone who's been close to it a lot. And one can't live very long without And one can't live very long without And one can't live very long without losing someone. and we're all going to losing someone. and we're all going to losing someone. and we're all going to go eventually and that's you know hard go eventually and that's you know hard go eventually and that's you know hard truth but why did you go into hard truth but why did you go into hard truth but why did you go into hospice and then um what did you learn hospice and then um what did you learn hospice and then um what did you learn about in hospice that has informed your about in hospice that has informed your about in hospice that has informed your sense of life and death sense of life and death sense of life and death &gt;&gt; yeah so I loved being a hospice &gt;&gt; yeah so I loved being a hospice &gt;&gt; yeah so I loved being a hospice counselor I did it for about 10 years uh counselor I did it for about 10 years uh counselor I did it for about 10 years uh and there's so many beautiful things and there's so many beautiful things and there's so many beautiful things about it first off when I tell people about it first off when I tell people about it first off when I tell people they go like oh god that must be really they go like oh god that must be really they go like oh god that must be really depressing hospice staff were the most depressing hospice staff were the most depressing hospice staff were the most upbeat people I've ever worked with upbeat people I've ever worked with upbeat people I've ever worked with &gt;&gt; optimistic compassionate seen everything &gt;&gt; optimistic compassionate seen everything &gt;&gt; optimistic compassionate seen everything and in a way I could sort of understand and in a way I could sort of understand and in a way I could sort of understand it because you know it's accepted the it because you know it's accepted the it because you know it's accepted the person's going to die like so what's the person's going to die like so what's the person's going to die like so what's the worst that could happen right you know worst that could happen right you know worst that could happen right you know you don't think like oh if I say the you don't think like oh if I say the you don't think like oh if I say the wrong thing maybe you know in our wrong thing maybe you know in our wrong thing maybe you know in our session you know it'll take an extra 3 session you know it'll take an extra 3 session you know it'll take an extra 3 months to develop more trust like months to develop more trust like months to develop more trust like they're not going to be alive that long they're not going to be alive that long they're not going to be alive that long there that is we've accepted the worst there that is we've accepted the worst there that is we've accepted the worst right and so then we can just do well right and so then we can just do well right and so then we can just do well and help this person have a good death and help this person have a good death and help this person have a good death and help their family have a good death and help their family have a good death and help their family have a good death and work you know through their and work you know through their and work you know through their grief experience and So they're just grief experience and So they're just grief experience and So they're just very upbeat and so I never found it very upbeat and so I never found it very upbeat and so I never found it depressing at all. I did it partly depressing at all. I did it partly depressing at all. I did it partly because I had um I'd shifted to doing because I had um I'd shifted to doing because I had um I'd shifted to doing more research and I just missed taking more research and I just missed taking more research and I just missed taking care of patients and I thought I wanted care of patients and I thought I wanted care of patients and I thought I wanted to you know obviously been well why to you know obviously been well why to you know obviously been well why didn't I just do more addiction thing I didn't I just do more addiction thing I didn't I just do more addiction thing I think I just do something different and think I just do something different and think I just do something different and the other part was I was scared of death the other part was I was scared of death the other part was I was scared of death and I don't like being afraid. I'm a and I don't like being afraid. I'm a and I don't like being afraid. I'm a countobic person. I am not brave but I'm countobic person. I am not brave but I'm countobic person. I am not brave but I'm afraid of being afraid so I do things afraid of being afraid so I do things afraid of being afraid so I do things that look brave. So when I and I know that look brave. So when I and I know that look brave. So when I and I know about phobia like the most basic thing about phobia like the most basic thing about phobia like the most basic thing is exposure, you know, reduces fear and is exposure, you know, reduces fear and is exposure, you know, reduces fear and anxiety. Running away from things makes anxiety. Running away from things makes anxiety. Running away from things makes them scarier. So I thought like, all them scarier. So I thought like, all them scarier. So I thought like, all right, I'm scared I'm scared of death. right, I'm scared I'm scared of death. right, I'm scared I'm scared of death. Um I So how do I solve that problem? I'm Um I So how do I solve that problem? I'm Um I So how do I solve that problem? I'm going to spend as much time around death going to spend as much time around death going to spend as much time around death as I can. And uh it's a very intimate as I can. And uh it's a very intimate as I can. And uh it's a very intimate experience. You know, you're in people's experience. You know, you're in people's experience. You know, you're in people's homes. It's not like when they're homes. It's not like when they're homes. It's not like when they're sitting in your office, but you know, sitting in your office, but you know, sitting in your office, but you know, people's, you know, bedroom could have people's, you know, bedroom could have people's, you know, bedroom could have like, you know, what is that? Well, like, you know, what is that? Well, like, you know, what is that? Well, that's my, you know, I was a high that's my, you know, I was a high that's my, you know, I was a high school baseball player. We won the, you school baseball player. We won the, you school baseball player. We won the, you know, the nationals and, you know, or know, the nationals and, you know, or know, the nationals and, you know, or what's that? That's my wedding picture. what's that? That's my wedding picture. what's that? That's my wedding picture. That's my wife and I 40 years ago. You That's my wife and I 40 years ago. You That's my wife and I 40 years ago. You know, it's very intimate and sweet. And being the last friend somebody ever being the last friend somebody ever being the last friend somebody ever makes is an incredible honor. makes is an incredible honor. makes is an incredible honor. And I always felt that when I had And I always felt that when I had And I always felt that when I had to say goodbye, I had been honored by to say goodbye, I had been honored by to say goodbye, I had been honored by them in that way. The last friend they them in that way. The last friend they them in that way. The last friend they made. So I uh I just found it profoundly made. So I uh I just found it profoundly made. So I uh I just found it profoundly a moving experience and it took away a moving experience and it took away a moving experience and it took away that fear and then I was able to help that fear and then I was able to help that fear and then I was able to help other people uh get free of that fear other people uh get free of that fear other people uh get free of that fear cuz when you've been around it for a cuz when you've been around it for a cuz when you've been around it for a while and then the family you know comes while and then the family you know comes while and then the family you know comes in and they're scared or maybe some in and they're scared or maybe some in and they're scared or maybe some doctors are scared of death. You can be doctors are scared of death. You can be doctors are scared of death. You can be the person who says this is what's going the person who says this is what's going the person who says this is what's going on. This is what your mom, your dad, on. This is what your mom, your dad, on. This is what your mom, your dad, your uncle's going through. Um here's your uncle's going through. Um here's your uncle's going through. Um here's what's going to happen likely. here's what's going to happen likely. here's what's going to happen likely. here's how long he's likely to live. Here's how long he's likely to live. Here's how long he's likely to live. Here's what we're doing for him. And you and what we're doing for him. And you and what we're doing for him. And you and then that helps them because you are then that helps them because you are then that helps them because you are radiating that acceptance that they need radiating that acceptance that they need radiating that acceptance that they need to come to, which is hard. So, um I'm to come to, which is hard. So, um I'm to come to, which is hard. So, um I'm just so glad I did that and I I'm just so glad I did that and I I'm just so glad I did that and I really would recommend that to anybody really would recommend that to anybody really would recommend that to anybody who wants to like give back to who wants to like give back to who wants to like give back to community, but also just come to a place community, but also just come to a place community, but also just come to a place of peace with dying. The way to do of peace with dying. The way to do of peace with dying. The way to do that is to is to be with the dying, not that is to is to be with the dying, not that is to is to be with the dying, not to run from them. to run from them. to run from them. &gt;&gt; You got me, &gt;&gt; You got me, &gt;&gt; You got me, man. Um, maybe it's cuz we both know man. Um, maybe it's cuz we both know man. Um, maybe it's cuz we both know Nolan. I think I just got uh was just Nolan. I think I just got uh was just Nolan. I think I just got uh was just feeling your feeling your feelings. Um, feeling your feeling your feelings. Um, feeling your feeling your feelings. Um, yeah, death is it's like he the way yeah, death is it's like he the way yeah, death is it's like he the way you describe is like heavy and you describe is like heavy and you describe is like heavy and you wo some lightness in there, which wo some lightness in there, which wo some lightness in there, which clearly I'm not a hospice worker. I clearly I'm not a hospice worker. I clearly I'm not a hospice worker. I don't I don't have that relationship to don't I don't have that relationship to don't I don't have that relationship to death. But um thank you for sharing death. But um thank you for sharing death. But um thank you for sharing that. &gt;&gt; I think um it is a universal experience &gt;&gt; I think um it is a universal experience &gt;&gt; I think um it is a universal experience and um being in there with people and um being in there with people and um being in there with people alongside them. Um [clears throat] alongside them. Um [clears throat] alongside them. Um [clears throat] clearly something that I think many clearly something that I think many clearly something that I think many people young and old run from. It's it's people young and old run from. It's it's people young and old run from. It's it's like uh &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something there, &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something there, &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something there, &gt;&gt; you know, and we can in the society, you &gt;&gt; you know, and we can in the society, you &gt;&gt; you know, and we can in the society, you know, I've done work in developing know, I've done work in developing know, I've done work in developing countries. You can't not see death. It's countries. You can't not see death. It's countries. You can't not see death. It's it's you know everywhere people die in it's you know everywhere people die in it's you know everywhere people die in the street literally and so there is the street literally and so there is the street literally and so there is less odd oddly enough there is more less odd oddly enough there is more less odd oddly enough there is more death and less fear than there is in our death and less fear than there is in our death and less fear than there is in our advanced technological society where advanced technological society where advanced technological society where death is hidden and denied. So death is hidden and denied. So death is hidden and denied. So Americans I find are much more terrified Americans I find are much more terrified Americans I find are much more terrified of it than you know people I met in Iraq of it than you know people I met in Iraq of it than you know people I met in Iraq for example. Um so um that's why you for example. Um so um that's why you for example. Um so um that's why you really have to make an effort you know really have to make an effort you know really have to make an effort you know because you're so you know that to um because you're so you know that to um because you're so you know that to um get past those norms and those get past those norms and those get past those norms and those structures if you want to be in structures if you want to be in structures if you want to be in companion connection to people who are companion connection to people who are companion connection to people who are dying. &gt;&gt; I didn't anticipate asking what I'm &gt;&gt; I didn't anticipate asking what I'm &gt;&gt; I didn't anticipate asking what I'm about to ask but it's been on my mind a about to ask but it's been on my mind a about to ask but it's been on my mind a very long time and it's directly related very long time and it's directly related very long time and it's directly related to the two major topics we've covered to the two major topics we've covered to the two major topics we've covered which are addiction and death. Um, I've which are addiction and death. Um, I've which are addiction and death. Um, I've heard it said by a gambling addict that heard it said by a gambling addict that heard it said by a gambling addict that all addiction is gambling of some sort. all addiction is gambling of some sort. all addiction is gambling of some sort. You know, am I going to get trouble this You know, am I going to get trouble this You know, am I going to get trouble this time? Am I, you know, am I going to get time? Am I, you know, am I going to get time? Am I, you know, am I going to get fired this time? And, you know, and I've fired this time? And, you know, and I've fired this time? And, you know, and I've thought a lot about addiction. And I've thought a lot about addiction. And I've thought a lot about addiction. And I've wondered if all addiction is an attempt to escape if all addiction is an attempt to escape if all addiction is an attempt to escape our fear of death. And this is not an our fear of death. And this is not an our fear of death. And this is not an attempt to get philosophical or um attempt to get philosophical or um attempt to get philosophical or um deeply psychological, but um I mean it's deeply psychological, but um I mean it's deeply psychological, but um I mean it's a weird thing. We don't know what other a weird thing. We don't know what other a weird thing. We don't know what other species think, but it's a weird thing species think, but it's a weird thing species think, but it's a weird thing that the portions of our brain that let that the portions of our brain that let that the portions of our brain that let us think into the future and plan and us think into the future and plan and us think into the future and plan and build technologies that made us the build technologies that made us the build technologies that made us the curators of the earth and not like the curators of the earth and not like the curators of the earth and not like the house cats or the elephants or something house cats or the elephants or something house cats or the elephants or something um can logically know that we're going um can logically know that we're going um can logically know that we're going to die someday. And to die someday. And to die someday. And if we really drop into that feeling, for if we really drop into that feeling, for if we really drop into that feeling, for most people, it is scary. It's really most people, it is scary. It's really most people, it is scary. It's really scary and really sad. And and I think if scary and really sad. And and I think if scary and really sad. And and I think if any of us dropped really deeply into any of us dropped really deeply into any of us dropped really deeply into that and we've created any sort of that and we've created any sort of that and we've created any sort of connection to anything or anyone, it's connection to anything or anyone, it's connection to anything or anyone, it's deeply terrifying. Mhm. deeply terrifying. Mhm. deeply terrifying. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And one thing I can say about addiction &gt;&gt; And one thing I can say about addiction &gt;&gt; And one thing I can say about addiction is that um the states of being high, is that um the states of being high, is that um the states of being high, whatever the thing is for that person, whatever the thing is for that person, whatever the thing is for that person, um they have a timelessness to them. um they have a timelessness to them. um they have a timelessness to them. You're out of the real world where You're out of the real world where You're out of the real world where you're operating in the real world as if you're operating in the real world as if you're operating in the real world as if you had superpowers. I mean, in the in you had superpowers. I mean, in the in you had superpowers. I mean, in the in the one's mind. And so I wonder whether the one's mind. And so I wonder whether the one's mind. And so I wonder whether or not the fear of death uh is something or not the fear of death uh is something or not the fear of death uh is something that addicts in particular are running that addicts in particular are running that addicts in particular are running from. And that raises the question is from. And that raises the question is from. And that raises the question is embracing death as a very real thing, embracing death as a very real thing, embracing death as a very real thing, overcoming that fear, overcoming that fear, overcoming that fear, the counter phobia. Um do you think that the counter phobia. Um do you think that the counter phobia. Um do you think that perhaps could be used to help treat perhaps could be used to help treat perhaps could be used to help treat addiction or avoid it? addiction or avoid it? addiction or avoid it? &gt;&gt; Well, that's a really interesting idea. &gt;&gt; Well, that's a really interesting idea. &gt;&gt; Well, that's a really interesting idea. I mean, I mean, I mean, I think I think I think very broadly speaking, a lot of heavy very broadly speaking, a lot of heavy very broadly speaking, a lot of heavy substance use is some desire for substance use is some desire for substance use is some desire for um oblivion uh to get away from um oblivion uh to get away from um oblivion uh to get away from unpleasant truths. And I think I one unpleasant truths. And I think I one unpleasant truths. And I think I one of those is death and suffering, but I of those is death and suffering, but I of those is death and suffering, but I think it's broader than that. So, it think it's broader than that. So, it think it's broader than that. So, it could be I just can't be in this uh PTSD could be I just can't be in this uh PTSD could be I just can't be in this uh PTSD anymore or I can't um you know, I was anymore or I can't um you know, I was anymore or I can't um you know, I was sexually abused as a child and I just sexually abused as a child and I just sexually abused as a child and I just need to stamp out those visions and need to stamp out those visions and need to stamp out those visions and those memories for an hour. Uh you know, those memories for an hour. Uh you know, those memories for an hour. Uh you know, and step outside them. Um my marriage and step outside them. Um my marriage and step outside them. Um my marriage has disintegrated and I'm miserable and has disintegrated and I'm miserable and has disintegrated and I'm miserable and uh my spouse and I hate each other and uh my spouse and I hate each other and uh my spouse and I hate each other and this is the one moment where I am above this is the one moment where I am above this is the one moment where I am above that or unconcerned about that. that or unconcerned about that. that or unconcerned about that. that often times there's something awful uh often times there's something awful uh often times there's something awful uh that and frightening or humiliating that and frightening or humiliating that and frightening or humiliating or painful that this is the escape or painful that this is the escape or painful that this is the escape from. Mhm. from. Mhm. from. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And you know, and they do provide that, &gt;&gt; And you know, and they do provide that, &gt;&gt; And you know, and they do provide that, you know, at least in the short term, you know, at least in the short term, you know, at least in the short term, the high high-term costs are hard, the high high-term costs are hard, the high high-term costs are hard, but in the short term, you know, but in the short term, you know, but in the short term, you know, everything can be falling down around everything can be falling down around everything can be falling down around you, and if you're high on a stimulant, you, and if you're high on a stimulant, you, and if you're high on a stimulant, you can still feel, you know, euphoria, you can still feel, you know, euphoria, you can still feel, you know, euphoria, at least for that brief moment. And what at least for that brief moment. And what at least for that brief moment. And what can be tough about recovery is when you can be tough about recovery is when you can be tough about recovery is when you stop using, those things are not gone. stop using, those things are not gone. stop using, those things are not gone. You're still going to die. If your You're still going to die. If your You're still going to die. If your marriage is bad, your marriage is bad. marriage is bad, your marriage is bad. marriage is bad, your marriage is bad. If you were abused, you were still If you were abused, you were still If you were abused, you were still abused. And that is enough to persuade some And that is enough to persuade some And that is enough to persuade some people never to stop because it's a lot people never to stop because it's a lot people never to stop because it's a lot harder to actually deal with those harder to actually deal with those harder to actually deal with those things um head on uh than avoiding them um head on uh than avoiding them um head on uh than avoiding them through uh intoxication. through uh intoxication. through uh intoxication. Thank you so much for this discussion. Thank you so much for this discussion. Thank you so much for this discussion. Um you shed so much light on Um you shed so much light on Um you shed so much light on substances, routes to sobriety, uh substances, routes to sobriety, uh substances, routes to sobriety, uh stages of addiction. um very interesting stages of addiction. um very interesting stages of addiction. um very interesting work on the GLPS work on the GLPS work on the GLPS um 12step. We'll provide links to all these 12step. We'll provide links to all these 12step. We'll provide links to all these resources and papers. Um if you're resources and papers. Um if you're resources and papers. Um if you're willing, before we walked in here, I willing, before we walked in here, I willing, before we walked in here, I solicited um X of all places uh for solicited um X of all places uh for solicited um X of all places uh for questions about addiction. questions about addiction. questions about addiction. &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. &gt;&gt; So, thanks to you, most of the questions &gt;&gt; So, thanks to you, most of the questions &gt;&gt; So, thanks to you, most of the questions that were asked um are already answered that were asked um are already answered that were asked um are already answered material covered uh before, but there material covered uh before, but there material covered uh before, but there were three that I think are worth uh were three that I think are worth uh were three that I think are worth uh touching in on uh that weren't. And the touching in on uh that weren't. And the touching in on uh that weren't. And the first one is uh first one is uh first one is uh are men getting addicted to things more are men getting addicted to things more are men getting addicted to things more than women or are they just showing up than women or are they just showing up than women or are they just showing up for help more often? for help more often? for help more often? &gt;&gt; Men are larger consumers of addictive uh &gt;&gt; Men are larger consumers of addictive uh &gt;&gt; Men are larger consumers of addictive uh substances in every culture on earth and substances in every culture on earth and substances in every culture on earth and are over represented uh in all the major are over represented uh in all the major are over represented uh in all the major addictions. You know, opioids probably addictions. You know, opioids probably addictions. You know, opioids probably for a man to every one woman. uh alcohol for a man to every one woman. uh alcohol for a man to every one woman. uh alcohol probably about 60 40 um you know used to probably about 60 40 um you know used to probably about 60 40 um you know used to be higher but uh women have been be higher but uh women have been be higher but uh women have been drinking more. The one thing you see in drinking more. The one thing you see in drinking more. The one thing you see in clinics that is close the one is clinics that is close the one is clinics that is close the one is prescription medication that those are prescription medication that those are prescription medication that those are those are a little closer to 50/50 but those are a little closer to 50/50 but those are a little closer to 50/50 but otherwise it's predominantly male. otherwise it's predominantly male. otherwise it's predominantly male. &gt;&gt; Why the relationship between addiction &gt;&gt; Why the relationship between addiction &gt;&gt; Why the relationship between addiction and lying and lying and lying &gt;&gt; and not just lying about the addiction? &gt;&gt; and not just lying about the addiction? &gt;&gt; and not just lying about the addiction? Uh Anna our colleague has talked about Uh Anna our colleague has talked about Uh Anna our colleague has talked about this before. Is there overlapping this before. Is there overlapping this before. Is there overlapping circuitry there? circuitry there? circuitry there? &gt;&gt; No I don't think so. I think it's just &gt;&gt; No I don't think so. I think it's just &gt;&gt; No I don't think so. I think it's just you end up in these situations that are you end up in these situations that are you end up in these situations that are possible to cover over without lying. possible to cover over without lying. possible to cover over without lying. So, you know, where you know you So, you know, where you know you So, you know, where you know you were supposed to, Dad, you were supposed were supposed to, Dad, you were supposed were supposed to, Dad, you were supposed to pick me up after school. Where were to pick me up after school. Where were to pick me up after school. Where were you? Uh I what I was drunk, right? But you? Uh I what I was drunk, right? But you? Uh I what I was drunk, right? But I don't want to say that. So, I say, I don't want to say that. So, I say, I don't want to say that. So, I say, "Oh, you know, the car I had car "Oh, you know, the car I had car "Oh, you know, the car I had car trouble, you know, couldn't do it." Um trouble, you know, couldn't do it." Um trouble, you know, couldn't do it." Um or um you know, the boss, what happened or um you know, the boss, what happened or um you know, the boss, what happened to the you know, money for the Oh, yeah. to the you know, money for the Oh, yeah. to the you know, money for the Oh, yeah. It was unexpected tax bill because I'm It was unexpected tax bill because I'm It was unexpected tax bill because I'm not going to say I stole it. And so I not going to say I stole it. And so I not going to say I stole it. And so I think that is why. The other thing of think that is why. The other thing of think that is why. The other thing of course is sometimes we make uh addicted course is sometimes we make uh addicted course is sometimes we make uh addicted people lie. I always point this out to people lie. I always point this out to people lie. I always point this out to residents that um if you watch how residents that um if you watch how residents that um if you watch how doctors sometimes ask people about their doctors sometimes ask people about their doctors sometimes ask people about their substance use it's absolutely clear the substance use it's absolutely clear the substance use it's absolutely clear the correct answer. If I say you don't drink correct answer. If I say you don't drink correct answer. If I say you don't drink do you or you don't use drugs do you? or do you or you don't use drugs do you? or do you or you don't use drugs do you? or it's some look and so and when you're it's some look and so and when you're it's some look and so and when you're addicted you get very good at reading addicted you get very good at reading addicted you get very good at reading people like what is this person going to people like what is this person going to people like what is this person going to say if I tell them that I use say if I tell them that I use say if I tell them that I use methamphetamine and uh sometimes they lie not because and uh sometimes they lie not because and uh sometimes they lie not because they want to but because they know they want to but because they know they want to but because they know they'll get a negative reaction from the they'll get a negative reaction from the they'll get a negative reaction from the person asking them. person asking them. person asking them. &gt;&gt; The other question was about relapse. Um &gt;&gt; The other question was about relapse. Um &gt;&gt; The other question was about relapse. Um is it the case that relapse can occur is it the case that relapse can occur is it the case that relapse can occur just as easily when things are going just as easily when things are going just as easily when things are going well as opposed to when they're going well as opposed to when they're going well as opposed to when they're going poorly? What do you see in your clinic? poorly? What do you see in your clinic? poorly? What do you see in your clinic? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean pe people relapse uh in &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean pe people relapse uh in &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean pe people relapse uh in both ways. I mean, it's um I'm a both ways. I mean, it's um I'm a both ways. I mean, it's um I'm a friend of mine in college, I remember friend of mine in college, I remember friend of mine in college, I remember his dad after years and years of his dad after years and years of his dad after years and years of drinking um got sober and just drinking um got sober and just drinking um got sober and just miraculously got an extremely miraculously got an extremely miraculously got an extremely highpaying, respected job despite an highpaying, respected job despite an highpaying, respected job despite an incredibly erratic work history and uh incredibly erratic work history and uh incredibly erratic work history and uh immediately relapsed, went out and drove immediately relapsed, went out and drove immediately relapsed, went out and drove the wrong way on a highway and uh the wrong way on a highway and uh the wrong way on a highway and uh killed himself. and just think like how killed himself. and just think like how killed himself. and just think like how could you know everything was going could you know everything was going could you know everything was going right but you see that a lot it's sort right but you see that a lot it's sort right but you see that a lot it's sort of like you know I got money in my of like you know I got money in my of like you know I got money in my pocket I'm happy I know I'm okay now the pocket I'm happy I know I'm okay now the pocket I'm happy I know I'm okay now the problem's behind me and so I'm going to problem's behind me and so I'm going to problem's behind me and so I'm going to do what I always did and then be shocked do what I always did and then be shocked do what I always did and then be shocked that I got the same result I always did that I got the same result I always did that I got the same result I always did you see that broadly speaking though you see that broadly speaking though you see that broadly speaking though relapse is most likely in times of you relapse is most likely in times of you relapse is most likely in times of you know stress you know whether that's uh know stress you know whether that's uh know stress you know whether that's uh transitory stress like uh you know spat transitory stress like uh you know spat transitory stress like uh you know spat with the spouse or with the boss or I'm with the spouse or with the boss or I'm with the spouse or with the boss or I'm just really, you know, I was exhausted. just really, you know, I was exhausted. just really, you know, I was exhausted. Um, you know, didn't sleep well a Um, you know, didn't sleep well a Um, you know, didn't sleep well a couple nights in a row, that kind of couple nights in a row, that kind of couple nights in a row, that kind of thing. Or something bigger like, uh, thing. Or something bigger like, uh, thing. Or something bigger like, uh, you know, maybe my kids addicted you know, maybe my kids addicted you know, maybe my kids addicted also, and I'm dealing with that, and also, and I'm dealing with that, and also, and I'm dealing with that, and that makes me more likely to relapse. that makes me more likely to relapse. that makes me more likely to relapse. &gt;&gt; Last question is from me. I'm just &gt;&gt; Last question is from me. I'm just &gt;&gt; Last question is from me. I'm just curious. You're you're a dad of two curious. You're you're a dad of two curious. You're you're a dad of two college age boys. Um, college age boys. Um, college age boys. Um, what advice did you give them or do you what advice did you give them or do you what advice did you give them or do you give them about addiction? um not give them about addiction? um not give them about addiction? um not assuming that they're particularly assuming that they're particularly assuming that they're particularly prone, but just they're in life and to prone, but just they're in life and to prone, but just they're in life and to be in life now means that you're prone be in life now means that you're prone be in life now means that you're prone to addiction, period. to addiction, period. to addiction, period. I can hear them rolling their eyes even I can hear them rolling their eyes even I can hear them rolling their eyes even from Southern California um because they from Southern California um because they from Southern California um because they they've they said like oh another they've they said like oh another they've they said like oh another talk about addiction you know so another talk about addiction you know so another talk about addiction you know so I um talked to them a lot about fentanyl I um talked to them a lot about fentanyl I um talked to them a lot about fentanyl &gt;&gt; because I've known so many families &gt;&gt; because I've known so many families &gt;&gt; because I've known so many families where kids like them you say like you where kids like them you say like you where kids like them you say like you know nice family middle-ass kid know nice family middle-ass kid know nice family middle-ass kid have died from fentanyl that they took have died from fentanyl that they took have died from fentanyl that they took as in the form uh that looked like as in the form uh that looked like as in the form uh that looked like something else and you know this something else and you know this something else and you know this happened in college campuses happening happened in college campuses happening happened in college campuses happening in high schools you know these in high schools you know these in high schools you know these printed pills that look exactly like an printed pills that look exactly like an printed pills that look exactly like an Adavan or an Adel think I'm going to try Adavan or an Adel think I'm going to try Adavan or an Adel think I'm going to try that and you don't realize you're taking that and you don't realize you're taking that and you don't realize you're taking fenoline and you die so I always fenoline and you die so I always fenoline and you die so I always warned them about that like never to warned them about that like never to warned them about that like never to take anything you know you can't take anything you know you can't take anything you know you can't know what it is if you didn't personally know what it is if you didn't personally know what it is if you didn't personally acquire it you can't know what it is and acquire it you can't know what it is and acquire it you can't know what it is and then the other thing I told them is you then the other thing I told them is you then the other thing I told them is you know the point that you're going to know the point that you're going to know the point that you're going to have make these decisions yourself but have make these decisions yourself but have make these decisions yourself but the only thing I can tell you is you the only thing I can tell you is you the only thing I can tell you is you will never get addicted to something will never get addicted to something will never get addicted to something that you choose never to use. That is that you choose never to use. That is that you choose never to use. That is your maximal point of control. And what your maximal point of control. And what your maximal point of control. And what happens after that point, what you happens after that point, what you happens after that point, what you started using is something I can't know. started using is something I can't know. started using is something I can't know. More importantly, something you can't More importantly, something you can't More importantly, something you can't know. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Well, Dr. Keith Humphre, uh, &gt;&gt; Thank you. Well, Dr. Keith Humphre, uh, &gt;&gt; Thank you. Well, Dr. Keith Humphre, uh, thank you so much for coming here today. thank you so much for coming here today. thank you so much for coming here today. &gt;&gt; Thank you. I really enjoyed the &gt;&gt; Thank you. I really enjoyed the &gt;&gt; Thank you. I really enjoyed the discussion. I mean, it's obvious to discussion. I mean, it's obvious to discussion. I mean, it's obvious to everyone that you have immense knowledge everyone that you have immense knowledge everyone that you have immense knowledge about this area. And the fact that you about this area. And the fact that you about this area. And the fact that you have not just knowledge, but that you're have not just knowledge, but that you're have not just knowledge, but that you're a clinician and you help people get into a clinician and you help people get into a clinician and you help people get into and through recovery and stay sober in and through recovery and stay sober in and through recovery and stay sober in all these different dimensions is itself all these different dimensions is itself all these different dimensions is itself amazing. But I think um I'm certain I'm amazing. But I think um I'm certain I'm amazing. But I think um I'm certain I'm not alone in saying that what's so not alone in saying that what's so not alone in saying that what's so awesome about the work you do and you is awesome about the work you do and you is awesome about the work you do and you is that it and that became evident today is that it and that became evident today is that it and that became evident today is that you combine incredible expertise that you combine incredible expertise that you combine incredible expertise with in incredible compassion for with in incredible compassion for with in incredible compassion for people. That's uh you didn't have to say people. That's uh you didn't have to say people. That's uh you didn't have to say it. It's just in every aspect of what it. It's just in every aspect of what it. It's just in every aspect of what you shared. Um and you know it's an you shared. Um and you know it's an you shared. Um and you know it's an honor to have you here. It's an honor to honor to have you here. It's an honor to honor to have you here. It's an honor to be colleagues and to meet you finally. be colleagues and to meet you finally. be colleagues and to meet you finally. Um, but mostly I'm just grateful that we Um, but mostly I'm just grateful that we Um, but mostly I'm just grateful that we were able to create a environment where were able to create a environment where were able to create a environment where you could share your knowledge and your you could share your knowledge and your you could share your knowledge and your compassion and I'm certain that it's compassion and I'm certain that it's compassion and I'm certain that it's going to help a lot of people understand going to help a lot of people understand going to help a lot of people understand themselves, understand people around themselves, understand people around themselves, understand people around them, and hopefully take action if they them, and hopefully take action if they them, and hopefully take action if they need to. So, thank you so much. need to. So, thank you so much. need to. So, thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Thank you, Andrew. It was a real &gt;&gt; Thank you, Andrew. It was a real &gt;&gt; Thank you, Andrew. It was a real pleasure to be on your show. pleasure to be on your show. pleasure to be on your show. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me today for my &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me today for my &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Keith Humphre. To discussion with Dr. Keith Humphre. To discussion with Dr. Keith Humphre. To learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see the links in the show note caption. If the links in the show note caption. If the links in the show note caption. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years. And that's based on more than 5 years. And that's based on more than 5 years. And that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Keith today's discussion with Dr. Keith today's discussion with Dr. Keith Humphre. And last, but certainly not Humphre. And last, but certainly not Humphre. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]