Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. Today, we're going to explore hormones, Today, we're going to explore hormones, Today, we're going to explore hormones, what they are, how they work, what leads what they are, how they work, what leads what they are, how they work, what leads to masculinization or feminization of to masculinization or feminization of to masculinization or feminization of the brain and body. What we're trying to the brain and body. What we're trying to the brain and body. What we're trying to do today is really get to the biology, do today is really get to the biology, do today is really get to the biology, the physiology, the endocrinology, and the physiology, the endocrinology, and the physiology, the endocrinology, and the behavior. the behavior. the behavior. Hormones, by definition, are a Hormones, by definition, are a Hormones, by definition, are a substance, a chemical that's released in substance, a chemical that's released in substance, a chemical that's released in one area of the body, typically from one area of the body, typically from one area of the body, typically from something we call a gland, although they something we call a gland, although they something we call a gland, although they can also be released from neurons, but can also be released from neurons, but can also be released from neurons, but they're released often from glands that they're released often from glands that they're released often from glands that travel and have effects both on that travel and have effects both on that travel and have effects both on that gland, but also on other organs and gland, but also on other organs and gland, but also on other organs and tissues in the body. And that tissues in the body. And that tissues in the body. And that differentiates hormones from things like differentiates hormones from things like differentiates hormones from things like neurotransmitters, which tend to act neurotransmitters, which tend to act neurotransmitters, which tend to act more locally. more locally. more locally. Examples of tissues that produce Examples of tissues that produce Examples of tissues that produce hormones would be the thyroid, the hormones would be the thyroid, the hormones would be the thyroid, the testes, the ovaries, etc. And then, of testes, the ovaries, etc. And then, of testes, the ovaries, etc. And then, of course, there are areas of the brain course, there are areas of the brain course, there are areas of the brain like the hypothalamus and the pituitary, like the hypothalamus and the pituitary, like the hypothalamus and the pituitary, which are closely related to one another which are closely related to one another which are closely related to one another and release hormones that cause the and release hormones that cause the and release hormones that cause the release of yet other hormones out in the release of yet other hormones out in the release of yet other hormones out in the body. So, let's start with development. body. So, let's start with development. body. So, let's start with development. Sperm meets egg. Everything that happens Sperm meets egg. Everything that happens Sperm meets egg. Everything that happens before that is topic of the next before that is topic of the next before that is topic of the next episode, but sperm meets egg. This is episode, but sperm meets egg. This is episode, but sperm meets egg. This is mammalian reproduction, and that egg mammalian reproduction, and that egg mammalian reproduction, and that egg starts to duplicate. It starts to make starts to duplicate. It starts to make starts to duplicate. It starts to make more of itself. It makes more cells. And more of itself. It makes more cells. And more of itself. It makes more cells. And eventually, some of those cells become eventually, some of those cells become eventually, some of those cells become skin, some of those cells become brain, skin, some of those cells become brain, skin, some of those cells become brain, some of those cells become muscle, some of those cells become muscle, some of those cells become muscle, some of those cells become fingers, all the of those cells become fingers, all the of those cells become fingers, all the stuff that makes up the brain and body stuff that makes up the brain and body stuff that makes up the brain and body plan. In addition, there are hormones that In addition, there are hormones that In addition, there are hormones that come both from the mother come both from the mother come both from the mother and from the developing baby, developing and from the developing baby, developing and from the developing baby, developing fetus, that impact whether or not the fetus, that impact whether or not the fetus, that impact whether or not the brain will be what they call organized brain will be what they call organized brain will be what they call organized masculine or organized feminine. And as masculine or organized feminine. And as masculine or organized feminine. And as I say this, I say this, I say this, I want you to try and discard with the I want you to try and discard with the I want you to try and discard with the cultural connotations or your cultural connotations or your cultural connotations or your psychological connotations of what psychological connotations of what psychological connotations of what masculinization and feminization are masculinization and feminization are masculinization and feminization are because we're only centering on the because we're only centering on the because we're only centering on the biology. So, typically people have either two X chromosomes people have either two X chromosomes people have either two X chromosomes and the traditional language around that and the traditional language around that and the traditional language around that is that person is female, right? Or an X is that person is female, right? Or an X is that person is female, right? Or an X chromosome and a Y chromosome and that chromosome and a Y chromosome and that chromosome and a Y chromosome and that person will become male. Now, it's not person will become male. Now, it's not person will become male. Now, it's not always the case. There are cases where always the case. There are cases where always the case. There are cases where it's XXY where there are two X it's XXY where there are two X it's XXY where there are two X chromosomes plus a Y chromosome. There chromosomes plus a Y chromosome. There chromosomes plus a Y chromosome. There are also cases where it's XYY where are also cases where it's XYY where are also cases where it's XYY where there are two Y chromosomes. And these there are two Y chromosomes. And these there are two Y chromosomes. And these have important biological and have important biological and have important biological and psychological impacts. psychological impacts. psychological impacts. So, the first thing we need to establish So, the first thing we need to establish So, the first thing we need to establish is that there is something called is that there is something called is that there is something called chromosomal sex. Whether or not there chromosomal sex. Whether or not there chromosomal sex. Whether or not there are two X chromosomes or an X and Y are two X chromosomes or an X and Y are two X chromosomes or an X and Y chromosome is what we call chromosomal chromosome is what we call chromosomal chromosome is what we call chromosomal sex. But the next stage of separating out the But the next stage of separating out the But the next stage of separating out the sexes is what we call gonadal sex. sexes is what we call gonadal sex. sexes is what we call gonadal sex. Typically, not always, but typically if Typically, not always, but typically if Typically, not always, but typically if somebody has testes somebody has testes somebody has testes for their gonads, we think of them as for their gonads, we think of them as for their gonads, we think of them as male. And if somebody has ovaries, we think of And if somebody has ovaries, we think of And if somebody has ovaries, we think of them as female. them as female. them as female. Although that's not always the case Although that's not always the case Although that's not always the case either. But let's just explore the either. But let's just explore the either. But let's just explore the transition from chromosomal sex to transition from chromosomal sex to transition from chromosomal sex to gonadal sex because it's a fascinating gonadal sex because it's a fascinating gonadal sex because it's a fascinating one that we all went through in some one that we all went through in some one that we all went through in some form or another. form or another. form or another. So, this XY that we typically think of as this XY that we typically think of as this XY that we typically think of as promoting masculinization of the fetus, promoting masculinization of the fetus, promoting masculinization of the fetus, we say that because on the Y chromosome we say that because on the Y chromosome we say that because on the Y chromosome there are genes there are genes there are genes and those genes have particular and those genes have particular and those genes have particular functions that suppress female functions that suppress female functions that suppress female reproductive organs. So, on the Y reproductive organs. So, on the Y reproductive organs. So, on the Y chromosome, there's a gene chromosome, there's a gene chromosome, there's a gene which encodes for something called which encodes for something called which encodes for something called Mullerian inhibiting hormone. Mullerian inhibiting hormone. Mullerian inhibiting hormone. So, there's actually a hormone that's So, there's actually a hormone that's So, there's actually a hormone that's programmed by the Y chromosome that programmed by the Y chromosome that programmed by the Y chromosome that inhibits the formation of Mullerian inhibits the formation of Mullerian inhibits the formation of Mullerian ducts, which are an important part of ducts, which are an important part of ducts, which are an important part of the female reproductive apparatus. the female reproductive apparatus. the female reproductive apparatus. That's critical because already we're That's critical because already we're That's critical because already we're seeing the transition between chromosome seeing the transition between chromosome seeing the transition between chromosome Y chromosome and gonad. And other genes Y chromosome and gonad. And other genes Y chromosome and gonad. And other genes on the Y chromosome promote the on the Y chromosome promote the on the Y chromosome promote the formation of testes. So, there are genes formation of testes. So, there are genes formation of testes. So, there are genes like the SRY gene and other genes that like the SRY gene and other genes that like the SRY gene and other genes that promote the formation of testes, while promote the formation of testes, while promote the formation of testes, while they also inhibit the formation of the they also inhibit the formation of the they also inhibit the formation of the Mullerian ducts. So, the transition from Mullerian ducts. So, the transition from Mullerian ducts. So, the transition from chromosomal sex to gonadal sex is a very chromosomal sex to gonadal sex is a very chromosomal sex to gonadal sex is a very important distinction. It's kind of a important distinction. It's kind of a important distinction. It's kind of a fork in the road that happens very early fork in the road that happens very early fork in the road that happens very early in development while fetuses are still in development while fetuses are still in development while fetuses are still in the embryo. So, we have to in the embryo. So, we have to in the embryo. So, we have to distinguish between chromosomal sex, distinguish between chromosomal sex, distinguish between chromosomal sex, gonadal sex, and then there's what we gonadal sex, and then there's what we gonadal sex, and then there's what we call hormonal sex, which is the effects call hormonal sex, which is the effects call hormonal sex, which is the effects of the of the steroid hormones, estrogen of the of the steroid hormones, estrogen of the of the steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone and their and their and testosterone and their and their and testosterone and their and their derivatives, on what we call derivatives, on what we call derivatives, on what we call morphological sex or the shape of the morphological sex or the shape of the morphological sex or the shape of the baby and the human and the genitalia and baby and the human and the genitalia and baby and the human and the genitalia and the jaw and all these other things. And the jaw and all these other things. And the jaw and all these other things. And so, it actually is quite complicated. so, it actually is quite complicated. so, it actually is quite complicated. So, you know, it's a long distance from you know, it's a long distance from you know, it's a long distance from chromosomes to gender identity and chromosomes to gender identity and chromosomes to gender identity and gender identity has a lot of social gender identity has a lot of social gender identity has a lot of social influences and roles. This is an area influences and roles. This is an area influences and roles. This is an area that right now is very dynamic and in that right now is very dynamic and in that right now is very dynamic and in the discussion out there, as you know. the discussion out there, as you know. the discussion out there, as you know. But, just getting from chromosomal sex But, just getting from chromosomal sex But, just getting from chromosomal sex to what we would call gonadal sex or and to what we would call gonadal sex or and to what we would call gonadal sex or and hormonal sex and morphological sex hormonal sex and morphological sex hormonal sex and morphological sex involves a number of steps. So, today involves a number of steps. So, today involves a number of steps. So, today we're going to talk about those steps. we're going to talk about those steps. we're going to talk about those steps. And there's some fascinating things that And there's some fascinating things that And there's some fascinating things that do indeed relate to tools, do indeed do indeed relate to tools, do indeed do indeed relate to tools, do indeed relate to some important behavioral relate to some important behavioral relate to some important behavioral choices, important choices about things to avoid important choices about things to avoid important choices about things to avoid while pregnant, and for those of you while pregnant, and for those of you while pregnant, and for those of you that are not pregnant, things to avoid that are not pregnant, things to avoid that are not pregnant, things to avoid if you're thinking about eventually if you're thinking about eventually if you're thinking about eventually having children. having children. having children. And that is not to drive development in And that is not to drive development in And that is not to drive development in one direction or another, but there are one direction or another, but there are one direction or another, but there are examples where there are some examples where there are some examples where there are some deleterious things in our environment deleterious things in our environment deleterious things in our environment that can actually negatively impact what that can actually negatively impact what that can actually negatively impact what we call sexual development overall we call sexual development overall we call sexual development overall regardless of chromosomal background. regardless of chromosomal background. regardless of chromosomal background. So, let's get started with that. Let's So, let's get started with that. Let's So, let's get started with that. Let's talk a little bit more about what talk a little bit more about what talk a little bit more about what hormones do. hormones do. hormones do. Hormones generally have two categories Hormones generally have two categories Hormones generally have two categories of effects. They can either be very fast of effects. They can either be very fast of effects. They can either be very fast or they can be very slow. There are or they can be very slow. There are or they can be very slow. There are hormones like cortisol and adrenaline hormones like cortisol and adrenaline hormones like cortisol and adrenaline which act very fast, and then there are which act very fast, and then there are which act very fast, and then there are hormones like what we like testosterone hormones like what we like testosterone hormones like what we like testosterone and estrogen which we refer to as the and estrogen which we refer to as the and estrogen which we refer to as the sex steroid hormones. sex steroid hormones. sex steroid hormones. These molecules, for those of you that These molecules, for those of you that These molecules, for those of you that are interested, are what are called are interested, are what are called are interested, are what are called lipophilic which just means that they lipophilic which just means that they lipophilic which just means that they like fatty stuff. They can actually pass like fatty stuff. They can actually pass like fatty stuff. They can actually pass through fatty membranes and because the through fatty membranes and because the through fatty membranes and because the outside of cells as well as the what's outside of cells as well as the what's outside of cells as well as the what's called the nuclear envelope where all called the nuclear envelope where all called the nuclear envelope where all the DNA contents and stuff are the DNA contents and stuff are the DNA contents and stuff are stuffed inside stuffed inside stuffed inside are made of a of a of lipid of fat, are made of a of a of lipid of fat, are made of a of a of lipid of fat, these steroid hormones can actually these steroid hormones can actually these steroid hormones can actually travel into cells and then interact with travel into cells and then interact with travel into cells and then interact with the DNA of cells in order to control the DNA of cells in order to control the DNA of cells in order to control gene expression. So, they can change the gene expression. So, they can change the gene expression. So, they can change the sorts of things that cells will become, sorts of things that cells will become, sorts of things that cells will become, and they can change the way that cells and they can change the way that cells and they can change the way that cells function in a long-term way. And that's function in a long-term way. And that's function in a long-term way. And that's actually how the presence of these genes actually how the presence of these genes actually how the presence of these genes like SRY and Mullerian inhibiting like SRY and Mullerian inhibiting like SRY and Mullerian inhibiting hormone lead to hormone lead to hormone lead to reductions or elimination, I should say, reductions or elimination, I should say, reductions or elimination, I should say, of things like the Mullerian ducts and of things like the Mullerian ducts and of things like the Mullerian ducts and promote instead what's called in males promote instead what's called in males promote instead what's called in males the Wolffian ducts the Wolffian ducts the Wolffian ducts or promote the development of testes or promote the development of testes or promote the development of testes rather than ovaries. So, all you need to rather than ovaries. So, all you need to rather than ovaries. So, all you need to know is that hormones have short-term know is that hormones have short-term know is that hormones have short-term and long-term effects, and the long-term and long-term effects, and the long-term and long-term effects, and the long-term effects are actually effects are actually effects are actually related to their effects on genes and related to their effects on genes and related to their effects on genes and how those genes are expressed or how those genes are expressed or how those genes are expressed or repressed not in or to prevent them from repressed not in or to prevent them from repressed not in or to prevent them from having particular proteins made. So, having particular proteins made. So, having particular proteins made. So, these hormones, these steroid hormones, are hormones, these steroid hormones, are hormones, these steroid hormones, are exceedingly powerful. exceedingly powerful. exceedingly powerful. And if we're going to have a discussion And if we're going to have a discussion And if we're going to have a discussion about masculinization or feminization, about masculinization or feminization, about masculinization or feminization, etc., you also need to think about the etc., you also need to think about the etc., you also need to think about the counterpart. It's not just about counterpart. It's not just about counterpart. It's not just about masculinizing the body or feminizing the masculinizing the body or feminizing the masculinizing the body or feminizing the body and brain, it's also about body and brain, it's also about body and brain, it's also about demasculinizing the brain in many cases as a normal the brain in many cases as a normal the brain in many cases as a normal biological function of biological function of biological function of typically of XX females. And typically of XX females. And typically of XX females. And defeminization, the suppression of defeminization, the suppression of defeminization, the suppression of certain pathways that are related to certain pathways that are related to certain pathways that are related to feminization of the body and brain. feminization of the body and brain. feminization of the body and brain. So, I've just thrown a lot of biology at So, I've just thrown a lot of biology at So, I've just thrown a lot of biology at you, but this is where it all starts to you, but this is where it all starts to you, but this is where it all starts to get incredibly surprising. get incredibly surprising. get incredibly surprising. You would think that it's You would think that it's You would think that it's straightforward, right? You have a Y straightforward, right? You have a Y straightforward, right? You have a Y chromosome, you suppress the female chromosome, you suppress the female chromosome, you suppress the female reproductive pathway like the like the reproductive pathway like the like the reproductive pathway like the like the Mullerian ducts, you promote this the Mullerian ducts, you promote this the Mullerian ducts, you promote this the development of testes, and then testes development of testes, and then testes development of testes, and then testes make testosterone, and then it organizes make testosterone, and then it organizes make testosterone, and then it organizes the brain male, and it wants to do the brain male, and it wants to do the brain male, and it wants to do male-like things, and then male-like things, and then male-like things, and then in females, you get estrogen, and it in females, you get estrogen, and it in females, you get estrogen, and it wants to do female-like things, and air wants to do female-like things, and air wants to do female-like things, and air quotes here for all of this. And it quotes here for all of this. And it quotes here for all of this. And it turns out that isn't how it works at turns out that isn't how it works at turns out that isn't how it works at all. Here's where it's interesting. We have Here's where it's interesting. We have Here's where it's interesting. We have to understand that there are effects of to understand that there are effects of to understand that there are effects of these hormones, testosterone and these hormones, testosterone and these hormones, testosterone and estrogen, on what are called primary sexual on what are called primary sexual on what are called primary sexual characteristics, which are the ones that characteristics, which are the ones that characteristics, which are the ones that you're born with, you're born with, you're born with, secondary sexual characteristics, which secondary sexual characteristics, which secondary sexual characteristics, which are the ones that show up in puberty, are the ones that show up in puberty, are the ones that show up in puberty, and these are happening in the brain and these are happening in the brain and these are happening in the brain and body and spinal cord. And so, I'm going body and spinal cord. And so, I'm going body and spinal cord. And so, I'm going to disentangle all this for you by to disentangle all this for you by to disentangle all this for you by giving you some examples. First, let's giving you some examples. First, let's giving you some examples. First, let's talk about the development of primary talk about the development of primary talk about the development of primary sexual characteristics, the ones that sexual characteristics, the ones that sexual characteristics, the ones that show up at birth. And one of the more show up at birth. And one of the more show up at birth. And one of the more dramatic examples of this dramatic examples of this dramatic examples of this comes from the role of testosterone in comes from the role of testosterone in comes from the role of testosterone in creating the external genitalia. creating the external genitalia. creating the external genitalia. It turns out that it's not testosterone It turns out that it's not testosterone It turns out that it's not testosterone that's responsible for the development that's responsible for the development that's responsible for the development of the penis in a baby that has an X of the penis in a baby that has an X of the penis in a baby that has an X chromosome and a Y chromosome. chromosome and a Y chromosome. chromosome and a Y chromosome. It's a different androgen. Androgen is It's a different androgen. Androgen is It's a different androgen. Androgen is just a category of hormones that just a category of hormones that just a category of hormones that includes testosterone, but testosterone includes testosterone, but testosterone includes testosterone, but testosterone is converted is converted is converted in the fetus in the fetus in the fetus to something called dihydrotestosterone. to something called dihydrotestosterone. to something called dihydrotestosterone. And that's accomplished through an And that's accomplished through an And that's accomplished through an enzyme called 5-alpha reductase. enzyme called 5-alpha reductase. enzyme called 5-alpha reductase. Dihydrotestosterone is what we would call the dominant is what we would call the dominant is what we would call the dominant androgen in males. It's responsible for androgen in males. It's responsible for androgen in males. It's responsible for aggression, it's responsible for a lot aggression, it's responsible for a lot aggression, it's responsible for a lot of muscular strength, it's involved in of muscular strength, it's involved in of muscular strength, it's involved in beard growth and male pattern baldness. beard growth and male pattern baldness. beard growth and male pattern baldness. We're going to talk about all of that, We're going to talk about all of that, We're going to talk about all of that, but dihydrotestosterone but dihydrotestosterone but dihydrotestosterone has powerful effects in has powerful effects in has powerful effects in determining the genitalia while the baby determining the genitalia while the baby determining the genitalia while the baby is still in the embryo. So, this ends is still in the embryo. So, this ends is still in the embryo. So, this ends There's testosterone that's made There's testosterone that's made There's testosterone that's made and that testosterone gets converted by and that testosterone gets converted by and that testosterone gets converted by this enzyme 5-alpha reductase this enzyme 5-alpha reductase this enzyme 5-alpha reductase in a little structure called the in a little structure called the in a little structure called the tubercle. That tubercle will eventually tubercle. That tubercle will eventually tubercle. That tubercle will eventually become the penis. So, you say, "Okay, become the penis. So, you say, "Okay, become the penis. So, you say, "Okay, straightforward. This testosterone's straightforward. This testosterone's straightforward. This testosterone's converted to dihydrotestosterone and converted to dihydrotestosterone and converted to dihydrotestosterone and then if there's dihydrotestosterone it then if there's dihydrotestosterone it then if there's dihydrotestosterone it controls penis growth." controls penis growth." controls penis growth." And indeed that's the case. So, that's a And indeed that's the case. So, that's a And indeed that's the case. So, that's a primary sexual characteristic. That baby primary sexual characteristic. That baby primary sexual characteristic. That baby will then grow up and later during will then grow up and later during will then grow up and later during puberty there will be the release of a molecule there will be the release of a molecule there will be the release of a molecule I talked about this last episode called I talked about this last episode called I talked about this last episode called kisspeptin, k i s p e p t i n, kisspeptin, k i s p e p t i n, kisspeptin, k i s p e p t i n, kisspeptin, which will cause the release kisspeptin, which will cause the release kisspeptin, which will cause the release of some other hormones, gonadotropin of some other hormones, gonadotropin of some other hormones, gonadotropin releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, will stimulate the testes to make will stimulate the testes to make will stimulate the testes to make testosterone. So, in puberty testosterone. So, in puberty testosterone. So, in puberty testosterone leads to further growth and testosterone leads to further growth and testosterone leads to further growth and development of the penis as well as the development of the penis as well as the development of the penis as well as the accumulation of or growth of pubic hair, accumulation of or growth of pubic hair, accumulation of or growth of pubic hair, uh deepening of the voice, all the uh deepening of the voice, all the uh deepening of the voice, all the secondary sexual characteristics. secondary sexual characteristics. secondary sexual characteristics. There's a very interesting phenomenon There's a very interesting phenomenon There's a very interesting phenomenon that was published in the journal that was published in the journal that was published in the journal Science in the 1970s for which now Science in the 1970s for which now Science in the 1970s for which now there's a wealth of scientific data. there's a wealth of scientific data. there's a wealth of scientific data. And this relates to a genetic mutation And this relates to a genetic mutation And this relates to a genetic mutation where 5-alpha reductase, the enzyme that where 5-alpha reductase, the enzyme that where 5-alpha reductase, the enzyme that converts testosterone to converts testosterone to converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, doesn't exist. It's mutated. And this doesn't exist. It's mutated. And this doesn't exist. It's mutated. And this actually was first identified in the actually was first identified in the actually was first identified in the Dominican Republic. What happens is Dominican Republic. What happens is Dominican Republic. What happens is baby is born. If you were to look at baby is born. If you were to look at baby is born. If you were to look at that baby, it would look that baby, it would look that baby, it would look female. There would be very little or no female. There would be very little or no female. There would be very little or no external penis. external penis. external penis. And what was observed is that what was observed is that what was observed is that from time to time, that baby, after from time to time, that baby, after from time to time, that baby, after being raised as a girl, would around the being raised as a girl, would around the being raised as a girl, would around the age of 11 or 12 or 13 age of 11 or 12 or 13 age of 11 or 12 or 13 would start to sprout a penis. There's would start to sprout a penis. There's would start to sprout a penis. There's actually a name for this. It's called actually a name for this. It's called actually a name for this. It's called huevedoces, which the translation is huevedoces, which the translation is huevedoces, which the translation is more or less more or less more or less penis at 12. penis at 12. penis at 12. And as strange as this might sound, it And as strange as this might sound, it And as strange as this might sound, it makes sense if you understand the makes sense if you understand the makes sense if you understand the underlying mutation. What happens in underlying mutation. What happens in underlying mutation. What happens in these children, these huevedoces, is that the children, these huevedoces, is that the children, these huevedoces, is that the child is born, it has testes, which are child is born, it has testes, which are child is born, it has testes, which are not descended, so up in the body. not descended, so up in the body. not descended, so up in the body. They weren't able to convert They weren't able to convert They weren't able to convert testosterone to dihydrotestosterone testosterone to dihydrotestosterone testosterone to dihydrotestosterone because they lack this enzyme, 5-alpha because they lack this enzyme, 5-alpha because they lack this enzyme, 5-alpha reductase. As a consequence, the primary sexual As a consequence, the primary sexual As a consequence, the primary sexual characteristic of external male characteristic of external male characteristic of external male genitalia, penis, doesn't develop. genitalia, penis, doesn't develop. genitalia, penis, doesn't develop. And then what happens is the baby grows And then what happens is the baby grows And then what happens is the baby grows up, and then up, and then up, and then testosterone starts getting secreted testosterone starts getting secreted testosterone starts getting secreted from the testes cuz kisspeptin in the from the testes cuz kisspeptin in the from the testes cuz kisspeptin in the brain signals through gonadotropin and brain signals through gonadotropin and brain signals through gonadotropin and luteinizing hormone travels down to the luteinizing hormone travels down to the luteinizing hormone travels down to the testes. The testes start churning out testes. The testes start churning out testes. The testes start churning out testosterone, and there's a secondary testosterone, and there's a secondary testosterone, and there's a secondary growth of the penis, and all of a sudden growth of the penis, and all of a sudden growth of the penis, and all of a sudden there's a penis. And the point here there's a penis. And the point here there's a penis. And the point here is that dihydrotestosterone, that dihydrotestosterone, that dihydrotestosterone, not testosterone, is responsible for not testosterone, is responsible for not testosterone, is responsible for this primary growth of the penis, and this primary growth of the penis, and this primary growth of the penis, and that testosterone later is involved in that testosterone later is involved in that testosterone later is involved in the secondary sexual characteristics, the secondary sexual characteristics, the secondary sexual characteristics, deepening of the voice, etc. Now, this deepening of the voice, etc. Now, this deepening of the voice, etc. Now, this is where the information gets even more is where the information gets even more is where the information gets even more interesting and applies to essentially everybody. and applies to essentially everybody. and applies to essentially everybody. You might think that testosterone, You might think that testosterone, You might think that testosterone, because it masculinizes because it masculinizes because it masculinizes the body in these in the secondary the body in these in the secondary the body in these in the secondary sexual characteristic way, sexual characteristic way, sexual characteristic way, and because dihydrotestosterone, and because dihydrotestosterone, and because dihydrotestosterone, another androgen, masculinizes another androgen, masculinizes another androgen, masculinizes the primary sexual characteristics, the primary sexual characteristics, the primary sexual characteristics, the growth of the penis early on, that growth of the penis early on, that growth of the penis early on, that testosterone must masculinize the brain. testosterone must masculinize the brain. testosterone must masculinize the brain. But the masculinization of the brain is But the masculinization of the brain is But the masculinization of the brain is not accomplished by testosterone. It is not accomplished by testosterone. It is not accomplished by testosterone. It is accomplished by accomplished by accomplished by estrogen. Testosterone can be converted into Testosterone can be converted into Testosterone can be converted into estrogen by an enzyme called aromatase. estrogen by an enzyme called aromatase. estrogen by an enzyme called aromatase. There are neurons in the brain that make There are neurons in the brain that make There are neurons in the brain that make aromatase and convert testosterone into aromatase and convert testosterone into aromatase and convert testosterone into estrogen. In other words, it's estrogen estrogen. In other words, it's estrogen estrogen. In other words, it's estrogen that masculinizes the XY that masculinizes the XY that masculinizes the XY individual, that masculinizes the brain. individual, that masculinizes the brain. individual, that masculinizes the brain. And this has profound effects on all And this has profound effects on all And this has profound effects on all sorts of things, on behavior, sorts of things, on behavior, sorts of things, on behavior, on outlook in the world, et cetera. But on outlook in the world, et cetera. But on outlook in the world, et cetera. But I think most people don't realize that I think most people don't realize that I think most people don't realize that it's estrogen that comes from it's estrogen that comes from it's estrogen that comes from testosterone that masculinizes the male testosterone that masculinizes the male testosterone that masculinizes the male brain, the XY brain, not testosterone, brain, the XY brain, not testosterone, brain, the XY brain, not testosterone, nor dihydrotestosterone. nor dihydrotestosterone. nor dihydrotestosterone. So I just want to mention some tools. So I just want to mention some tools. So I just want to mention some tools. You might be asking yourself, how could You might be asking yourself, how could You might be asking yourself, how could tools possibly come up at this stage of tools possibly come up at this stage of tools possibly come up at this stage of the conversation where we're talking the conversation where we're talking the conversation where we're talking about sexual development and we're about sexual development and we're about sexual development and we're talking about the differentiation of talking about the differentiation of talking about the differentiation of tissues in the body. Well, this is true tissues in the body. Well, this is true tissues in the body. Well, this is true both for children and parents and both for children and parents and both for children and parents and adults. I want to emphasize that there adults. I want to emphasize that there adults. I want to emphasize that there are things that are environmental, are things that are environmental, are things that are environmental, and there are things that people use and there are things that people use and there are things that people use that actually can impact hormone levels that actually can impact hormone levels that actually can impact hormone levels and can impact sexual development in and can impact sexual development in and can impact sexual development in fairly profound ways. And I want to be fairly profound ways. And I want to be fairly profound ways. And I want to be very clear, this is not very clear, this is not very clear, this is not uh me pulling from some rare journal uh me pulling from some rare journal uh me pulling from some rare journal I've never heard of it. This is pulling I've never heard of it. This is pulling I've never heard of it. This is pulling from textbooks, in particular today I'm from textbooks, in particular today I'm from textbooks, in particular today I'm guiding a lot of the conversation on guiding a lot of the conversation on guiding a lot of the conversation on work that on behavioral endocrinology. work that on behavioral endocrinology. work that on behavioral endocrinology. This is a book by Randy Nelson and This is a book by Randy Nelson and This is a book by Randy Nelson and Lance Kriegfield, ex- true experts in Lance Kriegfield, ex- true experts in Lance Kriegfield, ex- true experts in the field. I'm going to talk about some the field. I'm going to talk about some the field. I'm going to talk about some of the work from Tyrone Hayes from UC of the work from Tyrone Hayes from UC of the work from Tyrone Hayes from UC Berkeley about environmental toxins and their about environmental toxins and their about environmental toxins and their impacts on some of these things like impacts on some of these things like impacts on some of these things like testosterone and estrogen. testosterone and estrogen. testosterone and estrogen. I'm going to touch into them their I'm going to touch into them their I'm going to touch into them their I'm going to give some anecdotal evidence going to give some anecdotal evidence going to give some anecdotal evidence that's grounded in studies which we will that's grounded in studies which we will that's grounded in studies which we will provide in the caption or that I'll provide in the caption or that I'll provide in the caption or that I'll reference here. You know, I again I'm reference here. You know, I again I'm reference here. You know, I again I'm just going to highlight when one starts just going to highlight when one starts just going to highlight when one starts talking about environmental factors and talking about environmental factors and talking about environmental factors and how they're poisoning us or disrupting how they're poisoning us or disrupting how they're poisoning us or disrupting growth or fertility rates, it can start growth or fertility rates, it can start growth or fertility rates, it can start to sound a little bit crazy except when to sound a little bit crazy except when to sound a little bit crazy except when you start to actually look at some of you start to actually look at some of you start to actually look at some of the real data. Data from quality the real data. Data from quality the real data. Data from quality research labs funded by federal research labs funded by federal research labs funded by federal government funded not from companies or government funded not from companies or government funded not from companies or other sources that are really aimed at other sources that are really aimed at other sources that are really aimed at understanding what the underlying understanding what the underlying understanding what the underlying biology is. And for that I really we biology is. And for that I really we biology is. And for that I really we should all be grateful to Tyrone we should all be grateful to Tyrone we should all be grateful to Tyrone Hayes at UC Berkeley. I remember way back when at UC Berkeley. I remember way back when at UC Berkeley. I remember way back when I was a graduate student in the late I was a graduate student in the late I was a graduate student in the late 90s, goodness, 90s, goodness, 90s, goodness, at UC Berkeley and I remember him he was at UC Berkeley and I remember him he was at UC Berkeley and I remember him he was studying frogs. He was talking about studying frogs. He was talking about studying frogs. He was talking about developmental defects in these frogs that live in defects in these frogs that live in defects in these frogs that live in different waters around it was different waters around it was different waters around it was California but also elsewhere. California but also elsewhere. California but also elsewhere. And he identified a substance which is And he identified a substance which is And he identified a substance which is present in a lot of waterways throughout present in a lot of waterways throughout present in a lot of waterways throughout this country and other countries. So US this country and other countries. So US this country and other countries. So US and beyond. Certainly not just and beyond. Certainly not just and beyond. Certainly not just restricted California. Which is restricted California. Which is restricted California. Which is atrazine. This is a t r a z i n e. atrazine. This is a t r a z i n e. atrazine. This is a t r a z i n e. Again, this is the stuff of textbooks Again, this is the stuff of textbooks Again, this is the stuff of textbooks and it causes severe testicular and it causes severe testicular and it causes severe testicular malformations. So again, atrazine malformations. So again, atrazine malformations. So again, atrazine exposure is serious and what's exposure is serious and what's exposure is serious and what's interesting is if you look at the data interesting is if you look at the data interesting is if you look at the data what you find is that at sites in what you find is that at sites in what you find is that at sites in western and midwestern sections of the western and midwestern sections of the western and midwestern sections of the United States, 10 to 92% of male frogs, United States, 10 to 92% of male frogs, United States, 10 to 92% of male frogs, these were frogs mind you, had these were frogs mind you, had these were frogs mind you, had testicular abnormalities. and the most testicular abnormalities. and the most testicular abnormalities. and the most severe testicular malformations severe testicular malformations severe testicular malformations were in the testes rather than in the were in the testes rather than in the were in the testes rather than in the sperm. So, it's actually the organ sperm. So, it's actually the organ sperm. So, it's actually the organ itself, the gonad itself. Now, itself, the gonad itself. Now, itself, the gonad itself. Now, it's very well known now that atrazine it's very well known now that atrazine it's very well known now that atrazine is in many herbicides. And so, you know, is in many herbicides. And so, you know, is in many herbicides. And so, you know, whereas I would say in the '80s and '90s whereas I would say in the '80s and '90s whereas I would say in the '80s and '90s the discussion around, you know, the discussion around, you know, the discussion around, you know, herbicides and their negative effects herbicides and their negative effects herbicides and their negative effects was considered kind of like hippy dippy was considered kind of like hippy dippy was considered kind of like hippy dippy stuff or the stuff you hear about at um stuff or the stuff you hear about at um stuff or the stuff you hear about at um you know, the your local community you know, the your local community you know, the your local community markets and the these kind of new age markets and the these kind of new age markets and the these kind of new age communities. Now, there's communities. Now, there's communities. Now, there's very solid data from federally funded very solid data from federally funded very solid data from federally funded labs at major universities that have labs at major universities that have labs at major universities that have been peer-reviewed and published in been peer-reviewed and published in been peer-reviewed and published in excellent journals excellent journals excellent journals showing that indeed many of these showing that indeed many of these showing that indeed many of these herbicides can have ne- negative effects herbicides can have ne- negative effects herbicides can have ne- negative effects primarily by impacting the ratios of primarily by impacting the ratios of primarily by impacting the ratios of these hormones in either the mothers or these hormones in either the mothers or these hormones in either the mothers or in the in the in the testes, altering the testes of the testes, altering the testes of the testes, altering the testes of the fathers, or direct effects on developing fathers, or direct effects on developing fathers, or direct effects on developing young animals and potentially humans. young animals and potentially humans. young animals and potentially humans. And so, you ask, "Well, what about And so, you ask, "Well, what about And so, you ask, "Well, what about humans? You know, frogs are humans? You know, frogs are humans? You know, frogs are wonderful, but what about uh what about wonderful, but what about uh what about wonderful, but what about uh what about humans?" So, here are the data on what's humans?" So, here are the data on what's humans?" So, here are the data on what's happening. Um and I this isn't all going to be Um and I this isn't all going to be Um and I this isn't all going to be scary stuff. We're also going to talk scary stuff. We're also going to talk scary stuff. We're also going to talk about uh tools to ameliorate and offset about uh tools to ameliorate and offset about uh tools to ameliorate and offset some of these effects depending on your some of these effects depending on your some of these effects depending on your needs. But, across human populations, needs. But, across human populations, needs. But, across human populations, sperm counts are indeed declining, okay? sperm counts are indeed declining, okay? sperm counts are indeed declining, okay? So, in 1940, the average So, in 1940, the average So, in 1940, the average um the average density of human sperm was the average density of human sperm was the average density of human sperm was 113 million per milliliter of semen. 113 million per milliliter of semen. 113 million per milliliter of semen. That's how it's measured. How many sperm That's how it's measured. How many sperm That's how it's measured. How many sperm per milliliter of semen. In 1990, this per milliliter of semen. In 1990, this per milliliter of semen. In 1990, this figure has dropped to 66. It went from figure has dropped to 66. It went from figure has dropped to 66. It went from million per milliliter to 66 million per million per milliliter to 66 million per million per milliliter to 66 million per milliliter in the United States and milliliter in the United States and milliliter in the United States and Western Europe. So, it's not just a US Western Europe. So, it's not just a US Western Europe. So, it's not just a US thing. Researchers al- also estimated thing. Researchers al- also estimated thing. Researchers al- also estimated that the volume of semen produced by men that the volume of semen produced by men that the volume of semen produced by men has dropped 20% in that time, reduced has dropped 20% in that time, reduced has dropped 20% in that time, reduced sperm count per ejaculation even sperm count per ejaculation even sperm count per ejaculation even further. So, between 1981 and 1991, the further. So, between 1981 and 1991, the further. So, between 1981 and 1991, the ratio of normal spermatogenesis has ratio of normal spermatogenesis has ratio of normal spermatogenesis has decreased from 56.4% decreased from 56.4% decreased from 56.4% to 26.9%. to 26.9%. to 26.9%. So, there's a lot that's happening primarily there's a lot that's happening primarily there's a lot that's happening primarily because of these herbicides that are in because of these herbicides that are in because of these herbicides that are in widespread use to reduce sperm counts. widespread use to reduce sperm counts. widespread use to reduce sperm counts. And these are going to have profound And these are going to have profound And these are going to have profound effects not just on sperm counts, but on effects not just on sperm counts, but on effects not just on sperm counts, but on development, sexual development at the development, sexual development at the development, sexual development at the level of the gonads and the brain level of the gonads and the brain level of the gonads and the brain because you need testosterone to get because you need testosterone to get because you need testosterone to get dihydrotestosterone for primary sexual dihydrotestosterone for primary sexual dihydrotestosterone for primary sexual characteristics, you need characteristics, you need characteristics, you need estrogen that's come from testosterone estrogen that's come from testosterone estrogen that's come from testosterone to masculinize the brain. And of course, to masculinize the brain. And of course, to masculinize the brain. And of course, we're not just focusing on sperm and we're not just focusing on sperm and we're not just focusing on sperm and testosterone, you of course testosterone, you of course testosterone, you of course also know that many of these herbicides also know that many of these herbicides also know that many of these herbicides are disrupting estrogens in the similar are disrupting estrogens in the similar are disrupting estrogens in the similar way, which might explain why way, which might explain why way, which might explain why puberty is happening so much earlier in puberty is happening so much earlier in puberty is happening so much earlier in young girls these days. So, there are a young girls these days. So, there are a young girls these days. So, there are a lot of things that are happening. Now, lot of things that are happening. Now, lot of things that are happening. Now, does this mean that you have to run does this mean that you have to run does this mean that you have to run around and neurotically around and neurotically around and neurotically avoid anything that includes things like avoid anything that includes things like avoid anything that includes things like atrazine and atrazine and atrazine and should you be avoiding all kinds of should you be avoiding all kinds of should you be avoiding all kinds of herbicides? I don't know, that's up to herbicides? I don't know, that's up to herbicides? I don't know, that's up to you, but it does seem that these have you, but it does seem that these have you, but it does seem that these have market effects in both the animal market effects in both the animal market effects in both the animal studies and in the in the human studies. studies and in the in the human studies. studies and in the in the human studies. So, let's talk about female sexual So, let's talk about female sexual So, let's talk about female sexual development. And as always, what we'll do is we'll And as always, what we'll do is we'll And as always, what we'll do is we'll talk about the normal biology, then talk about the normal biology, then talk about the normal biology, then we'll talk a little bit about a kind of we'll talk a little bit about a kind of we'll talk a little bit about a kind of extraordinary or unusual set of cases, extraordinary or unusual set of cases, extraordinary or unusual set of cases, but we'll talk about them because they but we'll talk about them because they but we'll talk about them because they illustrate an important principle about illustrate an important principle about illustrate an important principle about how things work under typical how things work under typical how things work under typical circumstances. So, there is a So, there is a So, there is a mutation called androgen insensitivity syndrome. called androgen insensitivity syndrome. called androgen insensitivity syndrome. And understanding how androgen And understanding how androgen And understanding how androgen insensitivity syndrome works can help insensitivity syndrome works can help insensitivity syndrome works can help you really understand how hormones you really understand how hormones you really understand how hormones impact sexual development. So, here's impact sexual development. So, here's impact sexual development. So, here's how it works. how it works. how it works. There are individuals who are XY, so There are individuals who are XY, so There are individuals who are XY, so they have a Y chromosome, that are born they have a Y chromosome, that are born they have a Y chromosome, that are born that make that make that make testosterone, they have testes, they have testes, they have testes, and they don't have Mullerian ducts and they don't have Mullerian ducts and they don't have Mullerian ducts because they because on the Y chromosome because they because on the Y chromosome because they because on the Y chromosome is this Mullerian inhibiting hormone. is this Mullerian inhibiting hormone. is this Mullerian inhibiting hormone. However, these individuals look However, these individuals look However, these individuals look completely female. completely female. completely female. And in general, they report feeling like And in general, they report feeling like And in general, they report feeling like girls when they're young, women when girls when they're young, women when girls when they're young, women when they're older. they're older. they're older. But there's something unusual that's But there's something unusual that's But there's something unusual that's happening in these individuals because happening in these individuals because happening in these individuals because they have an XY chromosomal they have an XY chromosomal they have an XY chromosomal type and not XX. So, what's happening? type and not XX. So, what's happening? type and not XX. So, what's happening? Well, what's happening is Well, what's happening is Well, what's happening is the testes are making testosterone, but the testes are making testosterone, but the testes are making testosterone, but the receptor for testosterone is the receptor for testosterone is the receptor for testosterone is mutated. And therefore, the testes never mutated. And therefore, the testes never mutated. And therefore, the testes never descend. They don't have ovaries, they have They don't have ovaries, they have They don't have ovaries, they have testes, but the testes are internal. testes, but the testes are internal. testes, but the testes are internal. And so, typically, these individuals And so, typically, these individuals And so, typically, these individuals find out that they are actually XY find out that they are actually XY find out that they are actually XY chromosome, so that, you know, their chromosome, so that, you know, their chromosome, so that, you know, their chromosomal sex is male, if you will, chromosomal sex is male, if you will, chromosomal sex is male, if you will, and their gonadal sex is male, but the and their gonadal sex is male, but the and their gonadal sex is male, but the gonads, the testes, are inside the body. gonads, the testes, are inside the body. gonads, the testes, are inside the body. They don't actually develop a scrotum. They don't actually develop a scrotum. They don't actually develop a scrotum. They don't make ovaries. And when they They don't make ovaries. And when they They don't make ovaries. And when they don't menstruate around the time of don't menstruate around the time of don't menstruate around the time of puberty, that's a sign that something is that's a sign that something is that's a sign that something is different. And so, they never menstruate different. And so, they never menstruate different. And so, they never menstruate around puberty. And if they look into around puberty. And if they look into around puberty. And if they look into this deeply enough, what you find is this deeply enough, what you find is this deeply enough, what you find is that they are actually XY, they make that they are actually XY, they make that they are actually XY, they make testosterone, but their body can't make testosterone, but their body can't make testosterone, but their body can't make use of the testosterone because they use of the testosterone because they use of the testosterone because they don't have the receptors. don't have the receptors. don't have the receptors. And the receptors are vitally important And the receptors are vitally important And the receptors are vitally important for some for most all of the secondary for some for most all of the secondary for some for most all of the secondary sexual characteristics that we talked sexual characteristics that we talked sexual characteristics that we talked about, body hair, penis growth at during about, body hair, penis growth at during about, body hair, penis growth at during puberty, etc. So, again, we're talking puberty, etc. So, again, we're talking puberty, etc. So, again, we're talking about this in order to illustrate the about this in order to illustrate the about this in order to illustrate the principle that in order to have its principle that in order to have its principle that in order to have its effects, a hormone doesn't just have to be a hormone doesn't just have to be a hormone doesn't just have to be present. That hormone actually has to be present. That hormone actually has to be present. That hormone actually has to be able to bind its receptor and take able to bind its receptor and take able to bind its receptor and take action on the target cells. Perhaps the action on the target cells. Perhaps the action on the target cells. Perhaps the simplest way to understand simplest way to understand simplest way to understand how estrogen and testosterone impact how estrogen and testosterone impact how estrogen and testosterone impact masculinization or feminization of the masculinization or feminization of the masculinization or feminization of the brain and behavior is from a brain and behavior is from a brain and behavior is from a statement. It's actually the closing statement. It's actually the closing statement. It's actually the closing sentence of an abstract that my sentence of an abstract that my sentence of an abstract that my colleague Nirao Shah at Stanford School colleague Nirao Shah at Stanford School colleague Nirao Shah at Stanford School of Medicine of Medicine of Medicine uh published, which is that estrogen uh published, which is that estrogen uh published, which is that estrogen again, it's estrogen that is aromatized again, it's estrogen that is aromatized again, it's estrogen that is aromatized from testosterone by aromatase from testosterone by aromatase from testosterone by aromatase sets up the masculine repertoire of sets up the masculine repertoire of sets up the masculine repertoire of sexual and in animals and in humans sexual and in animals and in humans sexual and in animals and in humans territorial behaviors. So, it sets up territorial behaviors. So, it sets up territorial behaviors. So, it sets up the circuitry in the brain. Estrogen the circuitry in the brain. Estrogen the circuitry in the brain. Estrogen does that. Estrogen sets up the does that. Estrogen sets up the does that. Estrogen sets up the masculine circuitry in the brain. masculine circuitry in the brain. masculine circuitry in the brain. And testosterone And testosterone And testosterone is then what controls the display of is then what controls the display of is then what controls the display of those behaviors later in life. And I those behaviors later in life. And I those behaviors later in life. And I find that incredibly interesting. You find that incredibly interesting. You find that incredibly interesting. You would think it was just testosterone did would think it was just testosterone did would think it was just testosterone did one thing and estrogen did another, but one thing and estrogen did another, but one thing and estrogen did another, but it turns out that nature is far more it turns out that nature is far more it turns out that nature is far more interesting than that. Okay, so what are interesting than that. Okay, so what are interesting than that. Okay, so what are some things that impact sexual some things that impact sexual some things that impact sexual development early in life and later in development early in life and later in development early in life and later in life? Let's talk about Let's talk about Let's talk about cannabis. Let's talk about alcohol. Let's talk about alcohol. Let's talk about alcohol. First of all, First of all, First of all, cannabis, marijuana, THC. There are many studies marijuana, THC. There are many studies marijuana, THC. There are many studies that point to the fact that THC and that point to the fact that THC and that point to the fact that THC and other things in cannabis other things in cannabis other things in cannabis promote significant increases in aromatase significant increases in aromatase significant increases in aromatase activity. Now, pot smokers aren't going to like Now, pot smokers aren't going to like Now, pot smokers aren't going to like this, especially male pot smokers aren't this, especially male pot smokers aren't this, especially male pot smokers aren't going to like this, but it's the going to like this, but it's the going to like this, but it's the reality. Here's the deal. reality. Here's the deal. reality. Here's the deal. That cannabis, and it's not clear if That cannabis, and it's not clear if That cannabis, and it's not clear if it's THC itself or other elements in the it's THC itself or other elements in the it's THC itself or other elements in the marijuana plant, promote aromatase marijuana plant, promote aromatase marijuana plant, promote aromatase activity. Now, this has been observed anecdotally Now, this has been observed anecdotally Now, this has been observed anecdotally where pot smokers have a higher where pot smokers have a higher where pot smokers have a higher incidence of developing something I incidence of developing something I incidence of developing something I mentioned before, gynecomastia, breast mentioned before, gynecomastia, breast mentioned before, gynecomastia, breast bud development, or full-blown breast bud development, or full-blown breast bud development, or full-blown breast development in males. Now, earlier I development in males. Now, earlier I development in males. Now, earlier I said that estrogen is what masculinizes said that estrogen is what masculinizes said that estrogen is what masculinizes the male brain. In utero, that's true, the male brain. In utero, that's true, the male brain. In utero, that's true, but the way that cannabis seems to work, but the way that cannabis seems to work, but the way that cannabis seems to work, at least from the studies I was able to at least from the studies I was able to at least from the studies I was able to identify, is that it promotes identify, is that it promotes identify, is that it promotes circulating estrogen in the body, and therefore can estrogen in the body, and therefore can estrogen in the body, and therefore can counteract some of the masculinizing counteract some of the masculinizing counteract some of the masculinizing effects of effects of effects of uh things like testosterone and uh things like testosterone and uh things like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone on primary and dihydrotestosterone on primary and dihydrotestosterone on primary and secondary sexual characteristics. So, I secondary sexual characteristics. So, I secondary sexual characteristics. So, I mention this because um mention this because um mention this because um you know, I think nowadays uh marijuana you know, I think nowadays uh marijuana you know, I think nowadays uh marijuana use is far more widespread, and use is far more widespread, and use is far more widespread, and certainly during puberty, it can have certainly during puberty, it can have certainly during puberty, it can have profound effects on these hormonal profound effects on these hormonal profound effects on these hormonal systems. And so, we'll do another systems. And so, we'll do another systems. And so, we'll do another episode that goes really deep into this, episode that goes really deep into this, episode that goes really deep into this, but yes, cannabis promotes estrogenic but yes, cannabis promotes estrogenic but yes, cannabis promotes estrogenic activity by increasing aromatase. activity by increasing aromatase. activity by increasing aromatase. Most everyone can appreciate that Most everyone can appreciate that Most everyone can appreciate that drinking during pregnancy is not good drinking during pregnancy is not good drinking during pregnancy is not good for the developing fetus. Fetal alcohol for the developing fetus. Fetal alcohol for the developing fetus. Fetal alcohol syndrome is a well-established syndrome is a well-established syndrome is a well-established uh negative outcome of pregnancy, uh negative outcome of pregnancy, uh negative outcome of pregnancy, and it's something that there are and it's something that there are and it's something that there are cognitive effects that are that are cognitive effects that are that are cognitive effects that are that are really bad. There There's actually really bad. There There's actually really bad. There There's actually physical malformation, physical malformation, physical malformation, um etc. So, drinking during pregnancy, um etc. So, drinking during pregnancy, um etc. So, drinking during pregnancy, not good. Probably drinking during not good. Probably drinking during not good. Probably drinking during puberty, not good either, because puberty, not good either, because puberty, not good either, because alcohol, in particular, certain things alcohol, in particular, certain things alcohol, in particular, certain things like beer, but other grain alcohols, like beer, but other grain alcohols, like beer, but other grain alcohols, can increase estrogenic activity. Now, increase estrogenic activity. Now, increase estrogenic activity. Now, this isn't just about protecting this isn't just about protecting this isn't just about protecting young boys from estrogenic activity. young boys from estrogenic activity. young boys from estrogenic activity. It's also protecting girls from It's also protecting girls from It's also protecting girls from excessive or even hypoestrogenic effects excessive or even hypoestrogenic effects excessive or even hypoestrogenic effects of alcohol of alcohol of alcohol in puberty. in puberty. in puberty. Now, many teenagers drink, college Now, many teenagers drink, college Now, many teenagers drink, college students drink, and it's important to students drink, and it's important to students drink, and it's important to point out that puberty doesn't start on point out that puberty doesn't start on point out that puberty doesn't start on one day and end on another day. Puberty one day and end on another day. Puberty one day and end on another day. Puberty has a beginning, a middle, and an end, has a beginning, a middle, and an end, has a beginning, a middle, and an end, but development is really our entire but development is really our entire but development is really our entire lifespan. Okay, so we talked about lifespan. Okay, so we talked about lifespan. Okay, so we talked about cannabis, we talked about alcohol. Let's cannabis, we talked about alcohol. Let's cannabis, we talked about alcohol. Let's talk about cell phones. talk about cell phones. talk about cell phones. First of all, I use a cell phone, I use First of all, I use a cell phone, I use First of all, I use a cell phone, I use it very often, and I do not think they it very often, and I do not think they it very often, and I do not think they are evil devices. I think that they are evil devices. I think that they are evil devices. I think that they require some discipline in order to make require some discipline in order to make require some discipline in order to make sure that it does not become a negative sure that it does not become a negative sure that it does not become a negative force in one's life. So, I personally force in one's life. So, I personally force in one's life. So, I personally restrict the number of hours that I'm on restrict the number of hours that I'm on restrict the number of hours that I'm on the phone and in particular on social the phone and in particular on social the phone and in particular on social media. But, what about the cell phone media. But, what about the cell phone media. But, what about the cell phone itself? You know, when I was a junior itself? You know, when I was a junior itself? You know, when I was a junior professor, that is our pre-tenure early professor, that is our pre-tenure early professor, that is our pre-tenure early professor, I taught this class on neural professor, I taught this class on neural professor, I taught this class on neural circuits in health and disease. And one circuits in health and disease. And one circuits in health and disease. And one of the students asked me, you know, are of the students asked me, you know, are of the students asked me, you know, are cell phones safe for the brain? And it, cell phones safe for the brain? And it, cell phones safe for the brain? And it, you know, the all the data point to the you know, the all the data point to the you know, the all the data point to the fact that fact that fact that they were, or at least there were no they were, or at least there were no they were, or at least there were no data showing that it wasn't. I still data showing that it wasn't. I still data showing that it wasn't. I still don't have the answer on that, frankly. don't have the answer on that, frankly. don't have the answer on that, frankly. I'm not personally aware of any evidence I'm not personally aware of any evidence I'm not personally aware of any evidence in quality peer-reviewed studies showing in quality peer-reviewed studies showing in quality peer-reviewed studies showing that cell phones are bad for the brain that cell phones are bad for the brain that cell phones are bad for the brain or that holding the phone to the ear is or that holding the phone to the ear is or that holding the phone to the ear is bad or that Bluetooth is bad or any of bad or that Bluetooth is bad or any of bad or that Bluetooth is bad or any of that. I'm just not aware of any quality that. I'm just not aware of any quality that. I'm just not aware of any quality studies. However, studies. However, studies. However, I was very interested in a particular was very interested in a particular was very interested in a particular study that was stud- that was published study that was stud- that was published study that was stud- that was published back in 2013 on back in 2013 on back in 2013 on rats. It was basically took a cell phone rats. It was basically took a cell phone rats. It was basically took a cell phone and put it under cage of rats and looked and put it under cage of rats and looked and put it under cage of rats and looked at basically testicular and ovarian at basically testicular and ovarian at basically testicular and ovarian development in rats and saw development in rats and saw development in rats and saw minor but still statistically minor but still statistically minor but still statistically significant defects in ovarian and significant defects in ovarian and significant defects in ovarian and testicular development. testicular development. testicular development. Since then, and now returning to the Since then, and now returning to the Since then, and now returning to the literature, I've seen a absolute explosion of I've seen a absolute explosion of I've seen a absolute explosion of studies, some of which are in quality studies, some of which are in quality studies, some of which are in quality journals, some of which are in what I journals, some of which are in what I journals, some of which are in what I would call not blue ribbon journals, would call not blue ribbon journals, would call not blue ribbon journals, identifying defects in testicular and/or ovarian defects in testicular and/or ovarian defects in testicular and/or ovarian development by mere exposure to cell development by mere exposure to cell development by mere exposure to cell phone emitted waves. Let's just call that. We emitted waves. Let's just call that. We emitted waves. Let's just call that. We don't know what they are. And this don't know what they are. And this don't know what they are. And this sounds almost crazy, right? Anytime sounds almost crazy, right? Anytime sounds almost crazy, right? Anytime somebody starts talking about EMFs and somebody starts talking about EMFs and somebody starts talking about EMFs and things like that, you kind of worry like things like that, you kind of worry like things like that, you kind of worry like is this person okay? But is this person okay? But is this person okay? But look, the literature pointing in a look, the literature pointing in a look, the literature pointing in a direction where chronic exposure of the direction where chronic exposure of the direction where chronic exposure of the of the gonads to cell phones could be of the gonads to cell phones could be of the gonads to cell phones could be creating serious issues in terms of the creating serious issues in terms of the creating serious issues in terms of the health at the cellular level and in health at the cellular level and in health at the cellular level and in terms of the output. So, the output in terms of the output. So, the output in terms of the output. So, the output in for the testes would be sperm for the testes would be sperm for the testes would be sperm production, swimming speed in sperm is an important swimming speed in sperm is an important swimming speed in sperm is an important feature of sperm health. In the ovaries, feature of sperm health. In the ovaries, feature of sperm health. In the ovaries, it would be estrogenic output, it would be estrogenic output, it would be estrogenic output, how regular the cycles are. I think that how regular the cycles are. I think that how regular the cycles are. I think that it's fair to say based on the literature it's fair to say based on the literature it's fair to say based on the literature that there are effects of cell phone emitted there are effects of cell phone emitted there are effects of cell phone emitted waves on gonadal development. The waves on gonadal development. The waves on gonadal development. The question is question is question is what is the proximity of the cell phone what is the proximity of the cell phone what is the proximity of the cell phone to the gonads? So, you have to take to the gonads? So, you have to take to the gonads? So, you have to take these sorts of studies with a grain of these sorts of studies with a grain of these sorts of studies with a grain of salt. There's some interesting effects salt. There's some interesting effects salt. There's some interesting effects of hormones that actually you can of hormones that actually you can of hormones that actually you can observe on the outside of people observe on the outside of people observe on the outside of people that tell you something about not just that tell you something about not just that tell you something about not just their level of hormones, but also about their level of hormones, but also about their level of hormones, but also about their underlying genetics. And these their underlying genetics. And these their underlying genetics. And these relate to beard growth and baldness. And relate to beard growth and baldness. And relate to beard growth and baldness. And it's fascinating. The molecule, the it's fascinating. The molecule, the it's fascinating. The molecule, the hormone dihydrotestosterone hormone dihydrotestosterone hormone dihydrotestosterone made from testosterone made from testosterone made from testosterone is the hormone primarily responsible for is the hormone primarily responsible for is the hormone primarily responsible for facial hair, for beard growth. facial hair, for beard growth. facial hair, for beard growth. As well, it's the molecule, the hormone As well, it's the molecule, the hormone As well, it's the molecule, the hormone primarily responsible for lack of hair primarily responsible for lack of hair primarily responsible for lack of hair on the head on the head on the head for hair loss. for hair loss. for hair loss. Not incidentally Not incidentally Not incidentally the drugs that are designed to prevent the drugs that are designed to prevent the drugs that are designed to prevent hair loss hair loss hair loss are five alpha reductase inhibitors. are five alpha reductase inhibitors. are five alpha reductase inhibitors. So, remember five alpha reductase from So, remember five alpha reductase from So, remember five alpha reductase from the huevos dosis? Well, the people that the huevos dosis? Well, the people that the huevos dosis? Well, the people that discovered the huevos dosis went on to discovered the huevos dosis went on to discovered the huevos dosis went on to do a lot of research on the underlying do a lot of research on the underlying do a lot of research on the underlying biochemistry of this really interesting biochemistry of this really interesting biochemistry of this really interesting molecule dihydrotestosterone, molecule dihydrotestosterone, molecule dihydrotestosterone, they identified 5-alpha-reductase they identified 5-alpha-reductase they identified 5-alpha-reductase and 5-alpha- and 5-alpha- and 5-alpha- reductase inhibitors are the basis of reductase inhibitors are the basis of reductase inhibitors are the basis of most of the anti-hair loss treatments most of the anti-hair loss treatments most of the anti-hair loss treatments that are out there. that are out there. that are out there. And so there's some interesting things And so there's some interesting things And so there's some interesting things here. First of all, the side effect here. First of all, the side effect here. First of all, the side effect profiles of those profiles of those profiles of those treatments for hair loss are quite treatments for hair loss are quite treatments for hair loss are quite severe in many individuals. Remember, severe in many individuals. Remember, severe in many individuals. Remember, DHT is the primary androgen for libido, DHT is the primary androgen for libido, DHT is the primary androgen for libido, for strength and connective tissue um for strength and connective tissue um for strength and connective tissue um repair, for uh aggression, even if that repair, for uh aggression, even if that repair, for uh aggression, even if that aggression of course is held in check, aggression of course is held in check, aggression of course is held in check, but just sort of ambition and aggression but just sort of ambition and aggression but just sort of ambition and aggression is related dopamine, but within the is related dopamine, but within the is related dopamine, but within the testosterone pathway less so pure testosterone pathway less so pure testosterone pathway less so pure testosterone, although it pure testosterone, although it pure testosterone, although it pure testosterone has its effects, but DHT is testosterone has its effects, but DHT is testosterone has its effects, but DHT is at least in primate species including at least in primate species including at least in primate species including humans is the dominant androgen for most humans is the dominant androgen for most humans is the dominant androgen for most of those sorts of effects. of those sorts of effects. of those sorts of effects. And if you look at somebody, And if you look at somebody, And if you look at somebody, everyone can predict whether or not they're going can predict whether or not they're going can predict whether or not they're going to go bald based on looking at their to go bald based on looking at their to go bald based on looking at their We're always taught our mother's father. We're always taught our mother's father. We're always taught our mother's father. So if your mother's father was bald, So if your mother's father was bald, So if your mother's father was bald, there's a higher probability that you're there's a higher probability that you're there's a higher probability that you're going to go bald. going to go bald. going to go bald. The pattern of DHT receptors on the The pattern of DHT receptors on the The pattern of DHT receptors on the scalp will dictate whether or not you're scalp will dictate whether or not you're scalp will dictate whether or not you're going to go bald everywhere or just in going to go bald everywhere or just in going to go bald everywhere or just in the front or so or crown type baldness. the front or so or crown type baldness. the front or so or crown type baldness. And the density of the beard tells you And the density of the beard tells you And the density of the beard tells you about the density of DHT receptors. Now about the density of DHT receptors. Now about the density of DHT receptors. Now this varies by this varies by this varies by background, by genetic background. by background, by genetic background. by background, by genetic background. There are areas of the world where There are areas of the world where There are areas of the world where all the men seem to be have the same all the men seem to be have the same all the men seem to be have the same pattern of baldness like a strip of pattern of baldness like a strip of pattern of baldness like a strip of baldness down the center with hair still baldness down the center with hair still baldness down the center with hair still on the sides and full beards. That's on the sides and full beards. That's on the sides and full beards. That's because these patterns of DHT receptors because these patterns of DHT receptors because these patterns of DHT receptors are genetically determined. are genetically determined. are genetically determined. Elsewhere, testosterone levels can still Elsewhere, testosterone levels can still Elsewhere, testosterone levels can still be very high, DHT levels in the blood be very high, DHT levels in the blood be very high, DHT levels in the blood can be very high, and yet people will can be very high, and yet people will can be very high, and yet people will have very light beards or no beards, and have very light beards or no beards, and have very light beards or no beards, and that's because they don't have a lot of that's because they don't have a lot of that's because they don't have a lot of DHT receptors in the face. There are a DHT receptors in the face. There are a DHT receptors in the face. There are a lot of effects of DHT that you can just lot of effects of DHT that you can just lot of effects of DHT that you can just see in male phenotypes. And it's see in male phenotypes. And it's see in male phenotypes. And it's interesting that these hair loss drugs interesting that these hair loss drugs interesting that these hair loss drugs that are that are that are or to prevent hair loss drugs are or to prevent hair loss drugs are or to prevent hair loss drugs are directly aimed at preventing the directly aimed at preventing the directly aimed at preventing the conversion of testosterone into conversion of testosterone into conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone, and that's why they to some extent and that's why they to some extent and that's why they to some extent prevent hair loss, but also to some prevent hair loss, but also to some prevent hair loss, but also to some extent have extent have extent have a bunch of side effects that are a bunch of side effects that are a bunch of side effects that are associated with low DHT. I want to tell associated with low DHT. I want to tell associated with low DHT. I want to tell you a story you a story you a story about hyenas and clitorises the size of penises. and clitorises the size of penises. and clitorises the size of penises. So, when I was a graduate student at UC So, when I was a graduate student at UC So, when I was a graduate student at UC Berkeley, we had a professor in our department, we had a professor in our department, we had a professor in our department, phenomenal scientist, named Steve phenomenal scientist, named Steve phenomenal scientist, named Steve Glickman. Steve Glickman Steve Glickman Steve Glickman had a colony of hyenas, spotted hyenas, had a colony of hyenas, spotted hyenas, had a colony of hyenas, spotted hyenas, that lived that lived that lived within caged enclosures, of course, in within caged enclosures, of course, in within caged enclosures, of course, in Tilden Park behind the UC Berkeley Tilden Park behind the UC Berkeley Tilden Park behind the UC Berkeley campus. The hyenas are no longer there. campus. The hyenas are no longer there. campus. The hyenas are no longer there. Hyenas exhibit an incredible feature to Hyenas exhibit an incredible feature to Hyenas exhibit an incredible feature to their body, their body, their body, their hormones, and their social their hormones, and their social their hormones, and their social structure. Hyenas, unlike many species, Hyenas, unlike many species, Hyenas, unlike many species, have a situation with their genitalia have a situation with their genitalia have a situation with their genitalia where the male penis is actually where the male penis is actually where the male penis is actually smaller than the female clitoris. than the female clitoris. than the female clitoris. And I should say that the male penis And I should say that the male penis And I should say that the male penis itself, having seen a fair number of itself, having seen a fair number of itself, having seen a fair number of hyena penises, is not particularly hyena penises, is not particularly hyena penises, is not particularly small, which means that the small, which means that the small, which means that the hyena clitorises are extremely large. hyena clitorises are extremely large. hyena clitorises are extremely large. This was well known for some time. This was well known for some time. This was well known for some time. It turns out that in the spotted hyenas, It turns out that in the spotted hyenas, It turns out that in the spotted hyenas, the females are dominant. So, after a the females are dominant. So, after a the females are dominant. So, after a kill, the females will eat, then their kill, the females will eat, then their kill, the females will eat, then their young will eat, and then the male hyenas young will eat, and then the male hyenas young will eat, and then the male hyenas will eat. will eat. will eat. As well, when the female hyena gives As well, when the female hyena gives As well, when the female hyena gives birth, she gives birth not through the vaginal she gives birth not through the vaginal she gives birth not through the vaginal canal that we're accustomed to seeing, canal that we're accustomed to seeing, canal that we're accustomed to seeing, but through a very enlarged clitoris like through a very enlarged clitoris like through a very enlarged clitoris like phallus, although it's not a phallus, although it's not a phallus, although it's not a phallus, it's a clitoris, it's a clitoris, it's a clitoris, and it literally splits open. So, the and it literally splits open. So, the and it literally splits open. So, the many fetuses died during the course of many fetuses died during the course of many fetuses died during the course of hyena development and birth. The baby hyena development and birth. The baby hyena development and birth. The baby hyena actually comes through actually comes through actually comes through the tissue, and it's a very the tissue, and it's a very the tissue, and it's a very traumatic birth. traumatic birth. traumatic birth. It was a mystery as to how the It was a mystery as to how the It was a mystery as to how the female hyenas have this we'll call it female hyenas have this we'll call it female hyenas have this we'll call it masculinization, but it's really a masculinization, but it's really a masculinization, but it's really a androgenization of the periphery of the genitalia. of the periphery of the genitalia. of the periphery of the genitalia. And it turns out through a lot of And it turns out through a lot of And it turns out through a lot of careful research done by Steve Glickman, careful research done by Steve Glickman, careful research done by Steve Glickman, Christine Drea, Christine Drea, Christine Drea, uh and others, that it's uh and others, that it's uh and others, that it's androstenedione. What is essentially a prohormone to What is essentially a prohormone to What is essentially a prohormone to testosterone? It's androstenedione at very high levels It's androstenedione at very high levels It's androstenedione at very high levels that's produced in female hyenas that that's produced in female hyenas that that's produced in female hyenas that creates this enlargement of their creates this enlargement of their creates this enlargement of their genitalia. So, if you want to read up on genitalia. So, if you want to read up on genitalia. So, if you want to read up on androstenedione, androstenedione is made into androstenedione is made into androstenedione is made into testosterone through this enzyme 17 beta testosterone through this enzyme 17 beta testosterone through this enzyme 17 beta hydro- hydroxysteroid hydro- hydroxysteroid hydro- hydroxysteroid dehydro- drogenase. dehydro- drogenase. dehydro- drogenase. It's a complicated pathway to It's a complicated pathway to It's a complicated pathway to pronounce. It's a fairly straightforward pronounce. It's a fairly straightforward pronounce. It's a fairly straightforward pathway biochemically. pathway biochemically. pathway biochemically. You may recall during the '90s and You may recall during the '90s and You may recall during the '90s and 2000s, there were a lot of uh 2000s, there were a lot of uh 2000s, there were a lot of uh performance-enhancing drug scandals, in performance-enhancing drug scandals, in performance-enhancing drug scandals, in particular in Major League Baseball, particular in Major League Baseball, particular in Major League Baseball, and it was and it was and it was purported, although I don't know that it purported, although I don't know that it purported, although I don't know that it was ever verified, but it was purported was ever verified, but it was purported was ever verified, but it was purported that the major um performance-enhancing that the major um performance-enhancing that the major um performance-enhancing drug of abuse at that time, drug of abuse at that time, drug of abuse at that time, in particular players whose names we in particular players whose names we in particular players whose names we won't mention, but you can Google it if won't mention, but you can Google it if won't mention, but you can Google it if you if you want to find out, you if you want to find out, you if you want to find out, was androstenedione. And the last little was androstenedione. And the last little was androstenedione. And the last little anecdote about this, which is anecdote about this, which is anecdote about this, which is also published in the scientific also published in the scientific also published in the scientific literature, which is weird, but I do literature, which is weird, but I do literature, which is weird, but I do find interesting. Hormones are so find interesting. Hormones are so find interesting. Hormones are so fascinating, they're just incredible to fascinating, they're just incredible to fascinating, they're just incredible to me. Is me. Is me. Is going back to the marijuana plant. going back to the marijuana plant. going back to the marijuana plant. You know, the marijuana plant has these You know, the marijuana plant has these You know, the marijuana plant has these estrogenic properties. estrogenic properties. estrogenic properties. And I asked a plant biologist whether or And I asked a plant biologist whether or And I asked a plant biologist whether or not this was unusual. not this was unusual. not this was unusual. But this plant biologist told me, "Oh, But this plant biologist told me, "Oh, But this plant biologist told me, "Oh, yeah, there are plants that make what is yeah, there are plants that make what is yeah, there are plants that make what is essentially the equivalent of essentially the equivalent of essentially the equivalent of testosterone, like pine pollen is looks testosterone, like pine pollen is looks testosterone, like pine pollen is looks a lot like testosterone." And there are a lot like testosterone." And there are a lot like testosterone." And there are other plants that make what is other plants that make what is other plants that make what is essentially estrogen. And I said, "Well, essentially estrogen. And I said, "Well, essentially estrogen. And I said, "Well, why would they do that?" He said that why would they do that?" He said that why would they do that?" He said that one of the reasons why some plants have one of the reasons why some plants have one of the reasons why some plants have evolved this capacity to increase evolved this capacity to increase evolved this capacity to increase estrogen levels estrogen levels estrogen levels in animals that smoke not smoke it, but in animals that smoke not smoke it, but in animals that smoke not smoke it, but then animals that consume them. I'm then animals that consume them. I'm then animals that consume them. I'm guessing that animals aren't smoking guessing that animals aren't smoking guessing that animals aren't smoking marijuana, although I don't know, send marijuana, although I don't know, send marijuana, although I don't know, send me the paper if you've heard of this. me the paper if you've heard of this. me the paper if you've heard of this. Is that plants have figured out ways Is that plants have figured out ways Is that plants have figured out ways they've adapted ways to push back on they've adapted ways to push back on they've adapted ways to push back on populations of rodents and other species populations of rodents and other species populations of rodents and other species of animals that eat them. So, plants are of animals that eat them. So, plants are of animals that eat them. So, plants are engaged in a kind of plant-to-animal engaged in a kind of plant-to-animal engaged in a kind of plant-to-animal warfare, where they increase the warfare, where they increase the warfare, where they increase the estrogen of the males in that population estrogen of the males in that population estrogen of the males in that population to lower the sperm counts to keep those to lower the sperm counts to keep those to lower the sperm counts to keep those populations clamped at certain levels, populations clamped at certain levels, populations clamped at certain levels, so that those plants can continue to so that those plants can continue to so that those plants can continue to flourish. And I find this just fascinating. And I find this just fascinating. And I find this just fascinating. And hormones, therefore, aren't just hormones, therefore, aren't just hormones, therefore, aren't just impacting tissue growth and development within the tissue growth and development within the tissue growth and development within the individual and between the mother, individual and between the mother, individual and between the mother, remember the placenta is an endocrine remember the placenta is an endocrine remember the placenta is an endocrine organ, and the offspring, but plants and organ, and the offspring, but plants and organ, and the offspring, but plants and animals are in this communication. So, animals are in this communication. So, animals are in this communication. So, it's a fascinating area of biology. And it's a fascinating area of biology. And it's a fascinating area of biology. And as you've noticed today, none of this as you've noticed today, none of this as you've noticed today, none of this deals with the current controversies deals with the current controversies deals with the current controversies around gender and how many genders and around gender and how many genders and around gender and how many genders and sex, etc. That's a separate conversation sex, etc. That's a separate conversation sex, etc. That's a separate conversation that is that is that is by definition grounded in the kind of by definition grounded in the kind of by definition grounded in the kind of concepts we've been talking about today, concepts we've been talking about today, concepts we've been talking about today, and needs to take place taking into and needs to take place taking into and needs to take place taking into consideration all of the aspects of sex consideration all of the aspects of sex consideration all of the aspects of sex and the effects of hormones both on the and the effects of hormones both on the and the effects of hormones both on the body, on the brain. We didn't talk a lot body, on the brain. We didn't talk a lot body, on the brain. We didn't talk a lot about spinal cord, but we will in the about spinal cord, but we will in the about spinal cord, but we will in the next episode on but we can just say on next episode on but we can just say on next episode on but we can just say on the brain and the periphery, early the brain and the periphery, early the brain and the periphery, early effects, late effects, late effects, late effects, acute effects, meaning effects that are acute effects, meaning effects that are acute effects, meaning effects that are very fast of levels of hormones going up very fast of levels of hormones going up very fast of levels of hormones going up or down, something that absolutely or down, something that absolutely or down, something that absolutely happens during the and across the happens during the and across the happens during the and across the menstrual cycle, menstrual cycle, menstrual cycle, as well as long-term effects like the as well as long-term effects like the as well as long-term effects like the effects of these hormones on gene effects of these hormones on gene effects of these hormones on gene expression. So, today, as always, we weren't able to So, today, as always, we weren't able to So, today, as always, we weren't able to cover all things related to sex and cover all things related to sex and cover all things related to sex and hormones and sexual differentiation or hormones and sexual differentiation or hormones and sexual differentiation or development. There's no way we could, but we have There's no way we could, but we have There's no way we could, but we have covered a lot of material. So, once covered a lot of material. So, once covered a lot of material. So, once again, I want to thank you for embarking again, I want to thank you for embarking again, I want to thank you for embarking on this journey through neuroscience and on this journey through neuroscience and on this journey through neuroscience and today neuroendocrinology with me, and as today neuroendocrinology with me, and as today neuroendocrinology with me, and as always, thank you for your interest in always, thank you for your interest in always, thank you for your interest in science.