Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. Today we Stamford School of Medicine. Today we Stamford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing cortisol. In particular, are discussing cortisol. In particular, are discussing cortisol. In particular, how to control your cortisol in order to how to control your cortisol in order to how to control your cortisol in order to avoid burnout or should you already be avoid burnout or should you already be avoid burnout or should you already be feeling burnt out, how to overcome feeling burnt out, how to overcome feeling burnt out, how to overcome burnout. Now, it's hard for me to burnout. Now, it's hard for me to burnout. Now, it's hard for me to overemphasize just how important overemphasize just how important overemphasize just how important cortisol is. In fact, in the late stages cortisol is. In fact, in the late stages cortisol is. In fact, in the late stages of preparing for this episode, it dawned of preparing for this episode, it dawned of preparing for this episode, it dawned on me that if ever there were an episode on me that if ever there were an episode on me that if ever there were an episode of the Huberman Lab podcast that people of the Huberman Lab podcast that people of the Huberman Lab podcast that people could benefit from in terms of their could benefit from in terms of their could benefit from in terms of their health and well-being, this would be health and well-being, this would be health and well-being, this would be that episode. And I say that because, as that episode. And I say that because, as that episode. And I say that because, as you'll soon learn, cortisol, the biology you'll soon learn, cortisol, the biology you'll soon learn, cortisol, the biology of it, how it impacts your mood, your of it, how it impacts your mood, your of it, how it impacts your mood, your sleep, your immune system, your overall sleep, your immune system, your overall sleep, your immune system, your overall feelings of well-being, not just in the feelings of well-being, not just in the feelings of well-being, not just in the moment, but over the long term, and your moment, but over the long term, and your moment, but over the long term, and your ability to control cortisol at different ability to control cortisol at different ability to control cortisol at different portions of the day and night, makes it portions of the day and night, makes it portions of the day and night, makes it one of the most, if not the most one of the most, if not the most one of the most, if not the most powerful levers for your health and powerful levers for your health and powerful levers for your health and well-being. So, I'm very excited to get well-being. So, I'm very excited to get well-being. So, I'm very excited to get into the material for today's discussion into the material for today's discussion into the material for today's discussion about cortisol, how to control it, and about cortisol, how to control it, and about cortisol, how to control it, and how to avoid and overcome burnout. how to avoid and overcome burnout. how to avoid and overcome burnout. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. Okay, let's does include sponsors. Okay, let's does include sponsors. Okay, let's discuss cortisol. Now, I believe that discuss cortisol. Now, I believe that discuss cortisol. Now, I believe that most people have heard of cortisol and most people have heard of cortisol and most people have heard of cortisol and most everyone that hears the word most everyone that hears the word most everyone that hears the word cortisol hears it somewhere nearby the cortisol hears it somewhere nearby the cortisol hears it somewhere nearby the word stress and it makes sense why you word stress and it makes sense why you word stress and it makes sense why you would hear about cortisol in that would hear about cortisol in that would hear about cortisol in that context because indeed cortisol is a context because indeed cortisol is a context because indeed cortisol is a hormone that's made and released in hormone that's made and released in hormone that's made and released in response to stress. Now, the problem response to stress. Now, the problem response to stress. Now, the problem with thinking about cortisol simply as a with thinking about cortisol simply as a with thinking about cortisol simply as a stress hormone is that it's doing a lot stress hormone is that it's doing a lot stress hormone is that it's doing a lot of other things unrelated to stress that of other things unrelated to stress that of other things unrelated to stress that are super important and positive for are super important and positive for are super important and positive for you. However, it all depends on how high you. However, it all depends on how high you. However, it all depends on how high your cortisol levels are and when. So, your cortisol levels are and when. So, your cortisol levels are and when. So, during today's discussion, there's going during today's discussion, there's going during today's discussion, there's going to be a very prominent theme, which is to be a very prominent theme, which is to be a very prominent theme, which is your cortisol rhythm, or more your cortisol rhythm, or more your cortisol rhythm, or more particularly your 24-hour so-called particularly your 24-hour so-called particularly your 24-hour so-called circadian rhythm in cortisol. And here's circadian rhythm in cortisol. And here's circadian rhythm in cortisol. And here's the important first thing to remember. the important first thing to remember. the important first thing to remember. You want your cortisol high early in the You want your cortisol high early in the You want your cortisol high early in the day, shortly after waking, and you want day, shortly after waking, and you want day, shortly after waking, and you want your cortisol low in the hours right your cortisol low in the hours right your cortisol low in the hours right before sleep and in the first hours of before sleep and in the first hours of before sleep and in the first hours of sleep. If you remember nothing else from sleep. If you remember nothing else from sleep. If you remember nothing else from this episode, please remember that this episode, please remember that this episode, please remember that because if you get those two things because if you get those two things because if you get those two things correct, everything else in terms of correct, everything else in terms of correct, everything else in terms of health and wellness and performance, all health and wellness and performance, all health and wellness and performance, all of that will be reinforced by getting of that will be reinforced by getting of that will be reinforced by getting your cortisol rhythm correct. So today, your cortisol rhythm correct. So today, your cortisol rhythm correct. So today, I will explain how to get your cortisol I will explain how to get your cortisol I will explain how to get your cortisol rhythm correct. I will also explain what rhythm correct. I will also explain what rhythm correct. I will also explain what stress does to cortisol in the short stress does to cortisol in the short stress does to cortisol in the short term, which turns out to be good for term, which turns out to be good for term, which turns out to be good for you, and in the long term if you're you, and in the long term if you're you, and in the long term if you're dealing with long bouts of stress dealing with long bouts of stress dealing with long bouts of stress associated with what eventually becomes associated with what eventually becomes associated with what eventually becomes burnout. So, it's also important for me burnout. So, it's also important for me burnout. So, it's also important for me to point out that if you're already to point out that if you're already to point out that if you're already feeling wired and tired and burnt out, feeling wired and tired and burnt out, feeling wired and tired and burnt out, if you don't have energy in the morning, if you don't have energy in the morning, if you don't have energy in the morning, or if you somehow have low energy all or if you somehow have low energy all or if you somehow have low energy all day, but then at night you can't sleep. day, but then at night you can't sleep. day, but then at night you can't sleep. This is very typical of burnout. Or if This is very typical of burnout. Or if This is very typical of burnout. Or if you have morning anxiety, literally all you have morning anxiety, literally all you have morning anxiety, literally all of that can be resolved. Perhaps not of that can be resolved. Perhaps not of that can be resolved. Perhaps not entirely, but mostly, and in some cases entirely, but mostly, and in some cases entirely, but mostly, and in some cases entirely, by fixing your cortisol entirely, by fixing your cortisol entirely, by fixing your cortisol rhythm. Okay. So to understand and rhythm. Okay. So to understand and rhythm. Okay. So to understand and control your cortisol, the first thing control your cortisol, the first thing control your cortisol, the first thing you really need to know is that cortisol you really need to know is that cortisol you really need to know is that cortisol again is not a stress hormone per se. again is not a stress hormone per se. again is not a stress hormone per se. Rather, cortisol is involved in Rather, cortisol is involved in Rather, cortisol is involved in deploying and directing energy to deploying and directing energy to deploying and directing energy to tissues that need it most. Okay, I'll tissues that need it most. Okay, I'll tissues that need it most. Okay, I'll say that again. Cortisol is not a stress say that again. Cortisol is not a stress say that again. Cortisol is not a stress hormone per se. Cortisol should be hormone per se. Cortisol should be hormone per se. Cortisol should be thought of as a hormone that causes the thought of as a hormone that causes the thought of as a hormone that causes the deployment of energy into the body and deployment of energy into the body and deployment of energy into the body and helps direct that energy to particular helps direct that energy to particular helps direct that energy to particular tissues, especially your brain, in order tissues, especially your brain, in order tissues, especially your brain, in order to deal with, yes, stressors, but all to deal with, yes, stressors, but all to deal with, yes, stressors, but all sorts of other things that demand your sorts of other things that demand your sorts of other things that demand your energy. So, the way to think about energy. So, the way to think about energy. So, the way to think about cortisol is that it causes the release cortisol is that it causes the release cortisol is that it causes the release of glucose, blood sugar, into the of glucose, blood sugar, into the of glucose, blood sugar, into the bloodstream. And it does that by bloodstream. And it does that by bloodstream. And it does that by controlling energy released from the controlling energy released from the controlling energy released from the liver and from the muscles. But cortisol liver and from the muscles. But cortisol liver and from the muscles. But cortisol is not made in the brain. Cortisol is not made in the brain. Cortisol is not made in the brain. Cortisol is made in your adrenal glands. And of made in your adrenal glands. And of made in your adrenal glands. And of course, the adrenals are associated with course, the adrenals are associated with course, the adrenals are associated with adrenaline, also called epinephrine. adrenaline, also called epinephrine. adrenaline, also called epinephrine. Those are the same thing, by the way, Those are the same thing, by the way, Those are the same thing, by the way, epinephrine and adrenaline. And your epinephrine and adrenaline. And your epinephrine and adrenaline. And your adrenals will release epinephrine, aka adrenals will release epinephrine, aka adrenals will release epinephrine, aka adrenaline, in response to a stressor adrenaline, in response to a stressor adrenaline, in response to a stressor very quickly. very quickly. very quickly. Your adrenals can also release cortisol Your adrenals can also release cortisol Your adrenals can also release cortisol in response to a stressor, but it needs in response to a stressor, but it needs in response to a stressor, but it needs to make that cortisol first and then to make that cortisol first and then to make that cortisol first and then release it. So cortisol acts on a release it. So cortisol acts on a release it. So cortisol acts on a slightly slower time scale to deal with slightly slower time scale to deal with slightly slower time scale to deal with stress. And as I mentioned before, stress. And as I mentioned before, stress. And as I mentioned before, cortisol isn't just about stress. cortisol isn't just about stress. cortisol isn't just about stress. Cortisol is also about generating energy Cortisol is also about generating energy Cortisol is also about generating energy to deal with pretty much anything that to deal with pretty much anything that to deal with pretty much anything that requires energy. So when you need energy requires energy. So when you need energy requires energy. So when you need energy to deal with stress, to deal with to deal with stress, to deal with to deal with stress, to deal with getting out of bed in the morning, to getting out of bed in the morning, to getting out of bed in the morning, to deal with a hard school task, work task, deal with a hard school task, work task, deal with a hard school task, work task, relationship task, drive your kids to relationship task, drive your kids to relationship task, drive your kids to school, whatever, cortisol needs to be school, whatever, cortisol needs to be school, whatever, cortisol needs to be released. Okay, this is a very different released. Okay, this is a very different released. Okay, this is a very different mental framework around cortisol than mental framework around cortisol than mental framework around cortisol than we're used to hearing. We normally hear we're used to hearing. We normally hear we're used to hearing. We normally hear elevated cortisol. I'm releasing elevated cortisol. I'm releasing elevated cortisol. I'm releasing cortisol. My cortisol is too high. You cortisol. My cortisol is too high. You cortisol. My cortisol is too high. You need cortisol released in order to get need cortisol released in order to get need cortisol released in order to get glucose, blood sugar into the glucose, blood sugar into the glucose, blood sugar into the bloodstream. Now, cortisol is unique bloodstream. Now, cortisol is unique bloodstream. Now, cortisol is unique compared to say adrenaline or compared to say adrenaline or compared to say adrenaline or norepinephrine because cortisol is norepinephrine because cortisol is norepinephrine because cortisol is what's called lipohilic. Meaning, what's called lipohilic. Meaning, what's called lipohilic. Meaning, because cell membranes are lipid, fat, because cell membranes are lipid, fat, because cell membranes are lipid, fat, and cortisol is lipohilic, and cortisol is lipohilic, and cortisol is lipohilic, it can move through cell membranes. And it can move through cell membranes. And it can move through cell membranes. And what that means in the functional what that means in the functional what that means in the functional context, what it means for you is that context, what it means for you is that context, what it means for you is that cortisol is released from the adrenals, cortisol is released from the adrenals, cortisol is released from the adrenals, circulates in the blood just like circulates in the blood just like circulates in the blood just like adrenaline would. But unlike adrenaline, adrenaline would. But unlike adrenaline, adrenaline would. But unlike adrenaline, it can cross the bloodb brain barrier it can cross the bloodb brain barrier it can cross the bloodb brain barrier and it really likes to do that because and it really likes to do that because and it really likes to do that because there are a lot of receptors for there are a lot of receptors for there are a lot of receptors for cortisol in the brain. In particular, in cortisol in the brain. In particular, in cortisol in the brain. In particular, in a region of the brain called the a region of the brain called the a region of the brain called the hippocampus, which is involved in hippocampus, which is involved in hippocampus, which is involved in memory. Now, we'll come back to the memory. Now, we'll come back to the memory. Now, we'll come back to the hippocampus later because the hippocampus later because the hippocampus later because the hippocampus is vital for understanding hippocampus is vital for understanding hippocampus is vital for understanding what happens during situations of what happens during situations of what happens during situations of chronic stress and why cortisol can be chronic stress and why cortisol can be chronic stress and why cortisol can be disregulated under conditions of chronic disregulated under conditions of chronic disregulated under conditions of chronic stress. But for the time being, let's go stress. But for the time being, let's go stress. But for the time being, let's go back to thinking about cortisol simply back to thinking about cortisol simply back to thinking about cortisol simply as a mode of releasing glucose into the as a mode of releasing glucose into the as a mode of releasing glucose into the bloodstream. Cortisol releases glucose bloodstream. Cortisol releases glucose bloodstream. Cortisol releases glucose into the bloodstream. much of that into the bloodstream. much of that into the bloodstream. much of that glucose is going to be directed towards glucose is going to be directed towards glucose is going to be directed towards brain energy so that neurons, nerve brain energy so that neurons, nerve brain energy so that neurons, nerve cells can use it to think and to deal cells can use it to think and to deal cells can use it to think and to deal with whatever happens to be confronting with whatever happens to be confronting with whatever happens to be confronting you during your day, good or bad, you during your day, good or bad, you during your day, good or bad, stressful or nonstressful. So, one of my stressful or nonstressful. So, one of my stressful or nonstressful. So, one of my biggest wishes for today is that you and biggest wishes for today is that you and biggest wishes for today is that you and hopefully the rest of the world will hopefully the rest of the world will hopefully the rest of the world will eventually come to adopt the eventually come to adopt the eventually come to adopt the understanding that cortisol is not a understanding that cortisol is not a understanding that cortisol is not a stress hormone. Yes, cortisol is stress hormone. Yes, cortisol is stress hormone. Yes, cortisol is involved in stress, but cortisol's main involved in stress, but cortisol's main involved in stress, but cortisol's main job is to deploy energy. It's an energy job is to deploy energy. It's an energy job is to deploy energy. It's an energy producing hormone. in particular, a producing hormone. in particular, a producing hormone. in particular, a brain energy producing hormone. I'd like brain energy producing hormone. I'd like brain energy producing hormone. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge to take a quick break and acknowledge to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Carbon. Carbon is a one of our sponsors, Carbon. Carbon is a one of our sponsors, Carbon. Carbon is a diet coaching app built by nutrition diet coaching app built by nutrition diet coaching app built by nutrition expert Dr. Lane Norton. I've used Carbon expert Dr. Lane Norton. I've used Carbon expert Dr. Lane Norton. I've used Carbon for more than three years now. And I for more than three years now. And I for more than three years now. And I have to say, having been interested in have to say, having been interested in have to say, having been interested in fitness and in my nutrition for more fitness and in my nutrition for more fitness and in my nutrition for more than three decades, it's among the most than three decades, it's among the most than three decades, it's among the most powerful tools for nutrition coaching powerful tools for nutrition coaching powerful tools for nutrition coaching and effective weight management that and effective weight management that and effective weight management that I've ever encountered. especially if I've ever encountered. especially if I've ever encountered. especially if your goal is like mine, which is to your goal is like mine, which is to your goal is like mine, which is to maintain or build muscle while also maintain or build muscle while also maintain or build muscle while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning 50 years losing fat. Now, I'm turning 50 years losing fat. Now, I'm turning 50 years old this September, and even though I old this September, and even though I old this September, and even though I consider myself in pretty good shape, consider myself in pretty good shape, consider myself in pretty good shape, and I've been training for a long time and I've been training for a long time and I've been training for a long time and trying to eat right, one of my goals and trying to eat right, one of my goals and trying to eat right, one of my goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best shape is to hit 50 in the absolute best shape is to hit 50 in the absolute best shape of my life. To do that, I'm dialing in of my life. To do that, I'm dialing in of my life. To do that, I'm dialing in my nutrition using carbon with the goals my nutrition using carbon with the goals my nutrition using carbon with the goals of increasing my muscle mass, increasing of increasing my muscle mass, increasing of increasing my muscle mass, increasing my strength, while also decreasing my strength, while also decreasing my strength, while also decreasing my body fat. I've been raving about the body fat. I've been raving about the body fat. I've been raving about the Carbon app to friends and to family and Carbon app to friends and to family and Carbon app to friends and to family and to members of my Hubberman Lab team over to members of my Hubberman Lab team over to members of my Hubberman Lab team over the last few years and everyone who's the last few years and everyone who's the last few years and everyone who's joined me in using it has found it to be joined me in using it has found it to be joined me in using it has found it to be tremendously useful. In fact, some of tremendously useful. In fact, some of tremendously useful. In fact, some of those people are going to join me in my those people are going to join me in my those people are going to join me in my approaching 50 fitness goals and body approaching 50 fitness goals and body approaching 50 fitness goals and body composition goals. My birthday is composition goals. My birthday is composition goals. My birthday is September 26th and so I'd like to invite September 26th and so I'd like to invite September 26th and so I'd like to invite you to join if you would like to improve you to join if you would like to improve you to join if you would like to improve your body composition and fitness to your body composition and fitness to your body composition and fitness to also use the Carbon app. Now, there are also use the Carbon app. Now, there are also use the Carbon app. Now, there are a lot of apps out there that are focused a lot of apps out there that are focused a lot of apps out there that are focused on fitness and nutrition. But what makes on fitness and nutrition. But what makes on fitness and nutrition. But what makes Carbon different is that it doesn't just Carbon different is that it doesn't just Carbon different is that it doesn't just hand you a one-sizefits-all plan. It hand you a one-sizefits-all plan. It hand you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually learns your metabolism over actually learns your metabolism over actually learns your metabolism over time and it adapts your program based on time and it adapts your program based on time and it adapts your program based on your results. It also allows you total your results. It also allows you total your results. It also allows you total flexibility in how you eat. If you're flexibility in how you eat. If you're flexibility in how you eat. If you're plant-based or you're keto, high carb, plant-based or you're keto, high carb, plant-based or you're keto, high carb, low carb, anything in between, or even low carb, anything in between, or even low carb, anything in between, or even if you switch back and forth between if you switch back and forth between if you switch back and forth between different diets, carbon works around different diets, carbon works around different diets, carbon works around your preferences. The other thing I love your preferences. The other thing I love your preferences. The other thing I love about carbon is that it easily adapts to about carbon is that it easily adapts to about carbon is that it easily adapts to whether you're the type of person who whether you're the type of person who whether you're the type of person who likes to put in the specific brand and likes to put in the specific brand and likes to put in the specific brand and the exact number of ounces or grams of the exact number of ounces or grams of the exact number of ounces or grams of food that you ate or if you tend to be a food that you ate or if you tend to be a food that you ate or if you tend to be a little bit looser about that, like you little bit looser about that, like you little bit looser about that, like you ate half a handful of almonds or ate half a handful of almonds or ate half a handful of almonds or something like that, it can learn and something like that, it can learn and something like that, it can learn and adapt to that and still give you adapt to that and still give you adapt to that and still give you accurate recommendations. So, if you're accurate recommendations. So, if you're accurate recommendations. So, if you're looking to take a smarter, more looking to take a smarter, more looking to take a smarter, more personalized approach to your nutrition, personalized approach to your nutrition, personalized approach to your nutrition, I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. To try Carbon, you can go to To try Carbon, you can go to To try Carbon, you can go to joincarbon.com/huberman. While Carbon does not typically offer While Carbon does not typically offer While Carbon does not typically offer trials or promotions, they've agreed to trials or promotions, they've agreed to trials or promotions, they've agreed to give a free 7-day trial to all Hubberman give a free 7-day trial to all Hubberman give a free 7-day trial to all Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's joincarbon.com/huberman to get a 7-day free trial. Today's to get a 7-day free trial. Today's to get a 7-day free trial. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I therapist carried out entirely online. I therapist carried out entirely online. I personally have been doing therapy for personally have been doing therapy for personally have been doing therapy for well over 35 years. I find it to be an well over 35 years. I find it to be an well over 35 years. I find it to be an extremely important component to overall extremely important component to overall extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I consider doing health. In fact, I consider doing health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as important as regular therapy just as important as regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise, including getting regular exercise, including getting regular exercise, including cardiovascular exercise and resistance cardiovascular exercise and resistance cardiovascular exercise and resistance training, which of course I also do training, which of course I also do training, which of course I also do every week. There are essentially three every week. There are essentially three every week. There are essentially three things that make up great therapy. First things that make up great therapy. First things that make up great therapy. First of all, it provides the opportunity to of all, it provides the opportunity to of all, it provides the opportunity to have a really good rapport with somebody have a really good rapport with somebody have a really good rapport with somebody that you can really trust and talk to that you can really trust and talk to that you can really trust and talk to about essentially any issue that you about essentially any issue that you about essentially any issue that you want. Second of all, it can provide want. Second of all, it can provide want. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support or directed guidance or of course both. or directed guidance or of course both. or directed guidance or of course both. And third, expert therapy should provide And third, expert therapy should provide And third, expert therapy should provide you useful insights. Insights that can you useful insights. Insights that can you useful insights. Insights that can help you improve in your work life, your help you improve in your work life, your help you improve in your work life, your relationships, and in your relationship relationships, and in your relationship relationships, and in your relationship with yourself. With BetterHel, they make with yourself. With BetterHel, they make with yourself. With BetterHel, they make it very easy for you to find an expert it very easy for you to find an expert it very easy for you to find an expert therapist who you resonate with and that therapist who you resonate with and that therapist who you resonate with and that can provide those three benefits that can provide those three benefits that can provide those three benefits that come from expert therapy. Also, because come from expert therapy. Also, because come from expert therapy. Also, because BetterHel therapy is done entirely BetterHel therapy is done entirely BetterHel therapy is done entirely online, it's very timeefficient and easy online, it's very timeefficient and easy online, it's very timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. There's no to fit into a busy schedule. There's no to fit into a busy schedule. There's no commuting to a therapist's office or commuting to a therapist's office or commuting to a therapist's office or sitting in a waiting room looking for sitting in a waiting room looking for sitting in a waiting room looking for parking, any of that. You just hop parking, any of that. You just hop parking, any of that. You just hop online and you do your session. If you'd online and you do your session. If you'd online and you do your session. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to like to try BetterHelp, you can go to like to try BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Okay, so just a couple of minutes ago, Okay, so just a couple of minutes ago, Okay, so just a couple of minutes ago, we were talking about how cortisol needs we were talking about how cortisol needs we were talking about how cortisol needs to be high in the morning, shortly after to be high in the morning, shortly after to be high in the morning, shortly after waking and low in the nighttime, and waking and low in the nighttime, and waking and low in the nighttime, and certainly while you're asleep, except certainly while you're asleep, except certainly while you're asleep, except for, as it turns out, in the final hours for, as it turns out, in the final hours for, as it turns out, in the final hours of sleep, you actually want your of sleep, you actually want your of sleep, you actually want your cortisol rising. So, we need to take a cortisol rising. So, we need to take a cortisol rising. So, we need to take a step back and ask, why is cortisol step back and ask, why is cortisol step back and ask, why is cortisol released? when is it released? How is it released? when is it released? How is it released? when is it released? How is it released? Because understanding that released? Because understanding that released? Because understanding that gives us control over cortisol at any gives us control over cortisol at any gives us control over cortisol at any time of day or night. So rather than time of day or night. So rather than time of day or night. So rather than just list off a bunch of things that you just list off a bunch of things that you just list off a bunch of things that you can do to increase your cortisol or can do to increase your cortisol or can do to increase your cortisol or decrease your cortisol, which I'd love decrease your cortisol, which I'd love decrease your cortisol, which I'd love to do, frankly, but the problem with to do, frankly, but the problem with to do, frankly, but the problem with that is if I do that, it doesn't take that is if I do that, it doesn't take that is if I do that, it doesn't take into account that your levels of into account that your levels of into account that your levels of cortisol are constantly changing across cortisol are constantly changing across cortisol are constantly changing across the 24-hour cycle. So, if you don't the 24-hour cycle. So, if you don't the 24-hour cycle. So, if you don't understand that endogenous 24-hour understand that endogenous 24-hour understand that endogenous 24-hour rhythm in cortisol, not just knowing rhythm in cortisol, not just knowing rhythm in cortisol, not just knowing that it's high in the morning and lower that it's high in the morning and lower that it's high in the morning and lower at night, if you don't understand how at night, if you don't understand how at night, if you don't understand how that's regulated, you won't know which that's regulated, you won't know which that's regulated, you won't know which protocols, which tools to apply when, protocols, which tools to apply when, protocols, which tools to apply when, but if you can understand how that but if you can understand how that but if you can understand how that rhythm is generated and how cortisol is rhythm is generated and how cortisol is rhythm is generated and how cortisol is released in response to short-term released in response to short-term released in response to short-term events like stress, but also the desire events like stress, but also the desire events like stress, but also the desire or need to exercise, the desire or need or need to exercise, the desire or need or need to exercise, the desire or need to focus. If you can understand those to focus. If you can understand those to focus. If you can understand those things, how cortisol is released in the things, how cortisol is released in the things, how cortisol is released in the short term and across the 24-hour cycle, short term and across the 24-hour cycle, short term and across the 24-hour cycle, how it literally regulates itself, then how it literally regulates itself, then how it literally regulates itself, then you will have immense control over you will have immense control over you will have immense control over cortisol across the 24-hour cycle from cortisol across the 24-hour cycle from cortisol across the 24-hour cycle from day to day and from moment to moment. day to day and from moment to moment. day to day and from moment to moment. Okay? Cortisol is a corticosteroid Okay? Cortisol is a corticosteroid Okay? Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone. Yes, it's a steroid hormone. Yes, it's a steroid hormone. Yes, it's a steroid hormone. Just like testosterone is a steroid Just like testosterone is a steroid Just like testosterone is a steroid hormone, just like estrogen is a steroid hormone, just like estrogen is a steroid hormone, just like estrogen is a steroid hormone. Steroid hormones are derived hormone. Steroid hormones are derived hormone. Steroid hormones are derived from the molecule cholesterol. And there from the molecule cholesterol. And there from the molecule cholesterol. And there are a bunch of biochemical steps that are a bunch of biochemical steps that are a bunch of biochemical steps that take you from cholesterol to cortisol or take you from cholesterol to cortisol or take you from cholesterol to cortisol or from cholesterol to testosterone or from cholesterol to testosterone or from cholesterol to testosterone or from cholesterol to estrogen. Scientists have cholesterol to estrogen. Scientists have cholesterol to estrogen. Scientists have long known that cortisol is not at the long known that cortisol is not at the long known that cortisol is not at the same level throughout the 24-hour day. same level throughout the 24-hour day. same level throughout the 24-hour day. In fact, there's a quite classic study In fact, there's a quite classic study In fact, there's a quite classic study now that examined the 24-hour pattern of now that examined the 24-hour pattern of now that examined the 24-hour pattern of the episodic secretion of cortisol in the episodic secretion of cortisol in the episodic secretion of cortisol in normal subjects. And what they found is normal subjects. And what they found is normal subjects. And what they found is that there are essentially four phases that there are essentially four phases that there are essentially four phases of cortisol levels. I'll just read off of cortisol levels. I'll just read off of cortisol levels. I'll just read off what these different phases are. Phase what these different phases are. Phase what these different phases are. Phase one is a six-hour period of what they one is a six-hour period of what they one is a six-hour period of what they called the minimal secrettoryy activity, called the minimal secrettoryy activity, called the minimal secrettoryy activity, meaning when cortisol is not released meaning when cortisol is not released meaning when cortisol is not released very much that starts 4 hours before and very much that starts 4 hours before and very much that starts 4 hours before and continues until 2 hours after lights out continues until 2 hours after lights out continues until 2 hours after lights out for sleep. Okay, four starts four hours for sleep. Okay, four starts four hours for sleep. Okay, four starts four hours before and continues until 2 hours after before and continues until 2 hours after before and continues until 2 hours after you turn your lights out to go to sleep. you turn your lights out to go to sleep. you turn your lights out to go to sleep. The second phase of cortisol in which The second phase of cortisol in which The second phase of cortisol in which the levels are quite different than in the levels are quite different than in the levels are quite different than in the first phase is a three-hour period the first phase is a three-hour period the first phase is a three-hour period which they call the preliminary which they call the preliminary which they call the preliminary nocturnal secretratory episode but we nocturnal secretratory episode but we nocturnal secretratory episode but we can simply call the third to fifth hour can simply call the third to fifth hour can simply call the third to fifth hour of sleep. So in your third to fifth hour of sleep. So in your third to fifth hour of sleep. So in your third to fifth hour of sleep you have a second phase and of sleep you have a second phase and of sleep you have a second phase and this phase they call the preliminary this phase they call the preliminary this phase they call the preliminary nocturnal secrettoryy episode and this nocturnal secrettoryy episode and this nocturnal secrettoryy episode and this is when cortisol is slightly starting to is when cortisol is slightly starting to is when cortisol is slightly starting to rise just a little bit. In the first rise just a little bit. In the first rise just a little bit. In the first phase cortisol is very low or phase cortisol is very low or phase cortisol is very low or ideally you want cortisol very low. So ideally you want cortisol very low. So ideally you want cortisol very low. So this is under normal healthy conditions this is under normal healthy conditions this is under normal healthy conditions in that first phase the 4 hours before in that first phase the 4 hours before in that first phase the 4 hours before until the 2 hours after lights out until the 2 hours after lights out until the 2 hours after lights out cortisol is going to be very low and cortisol is going to be very low and cortisol is going to be very low and it's going to stay low. And then in the it's going to stay low. And then in the it's going to stay low. And then in the second phase, it's going to slightly second phase, it's going to slightly second phase, it's going to slightly rise into the third and fifth hour of rise into the third and fifth hour of rise into the third and fifth hour of sleep. Then in phase three, which here sleep. Then in phase three, which here sleep. Then in phase three, which here is listed as a 4-hour period, but the is listed as a 4-hour period, but the is listed as a 4-hour period, but the exact duration is going to vary. You exact duration is going to vary. You exact duration is going to vary. You have what's called the main secrettory have what's called the main secrettory have what's called the main secrettory phase of cortisol. This is when cortisol phase of cortisol. This is when cortisol phase of cortisol. This is when cortisol is increasing very, very fast. is increasing very, very fast. is increasing very, very fast. And this occurs, believe it or not, And this occurs, believe it or not, And this occurs, believe it or not, during the sixth, seventh, and eighth during the sixth, seventh, and eighth during the sixth, seventh, and eighth hour of sleep. Now, you might say, I hour of sleep. Now, you might say, I hour of sleep. Now, you might say, I only sleep 6 hours, so do I get that only sleep 6 hours, so do I get that only sleep 6 hours, so do I get that fast rise in cortisol? Guess what? You fast rise in cortisol? Guess what? You fast rise in cortisol? Guess what? You don't. If you sleep seven hours, you don't. If you sleep seven hours, you don't. If you sleep seven hours, you only get a portion of that fast rising only get a portion of that fast rising only get a portion of that fast rising cortisol. If you sleep eight hours, you cortisol. If you sleep eight hours, you cortisol. If you sleep eight hours, you get the full duration. And if you sleep get the full duration. And if you sleep get the full duration. And if you sleep 9 hours, yes, your cortisol will 9 hours, yes, your cortisol will 9 hours, yes, your cortisol will continue to rise. So the idea here is continue to rise. So the idea here is continue to rise. So the idea here is that in the very final hours of sleep, that in the very final hours of sleep, that in the very final hours of sleep, your cortisol is starting to rise your cortisol is starting to rise your cortisol is starting to rise quickly. This is the time of sleep that quickly. This is the time of sleep that quickly. This is the time of sleep that correlates with when REM sleep, rapid correlates with when REM sleep, rapid correlates with when REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep is most abundant. eye movement sleep is most abundant. eye movement sleep is most abundant. Okay? So in the early part of your sleep Okay? So in the early part of your sleep Okay? So in the early part of your sleep night, slowwave deep sleep is most night, slowwave deep sleep is most night, slowwave deep sleep is most abundant. This is when growth hormone is abundant. This is when growth hormone is abundant. This is when growth hormone is released. This is when your metabolism released. This is when your metabolism released. This is when your metabolism tends to be very low. Think about it. tends to be very low. Think about it. tends to be very low. Think about it. Metabolism low means low requirement for Metabolism low means low requirement for Metabolism low means low requirement for blood glucose. And it's associated with blood glucose. And it's associated with blood glucose. And it's associated with low cortisol levels. Starting to make low cortisol levels. Starting to make low cortisol levels. Starting to make sense. In the last portion of sleep, the sense. In the last portion of sleep, the sense. In the last portion of sleep, the final say two to three or if you sleep 9 final say two to three or if you sleep 9 final say two to three or if you sleep 9 hours, four hours of sleep, you have hours, four hours of sleep, you have hours, four hours of sleep, you have rising levels in cortisol. We know rising levels in cortisol. We know rising levels in cortisol. We know that's associated with REM sleep, rapid that's associated with REM sleep, rapid that's associated with REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep. And we know that REM eye movement sleep. And we know that REM eye movement sleep. And we know that REM sleep is a time of robust brain activity sleep is a time of robust brain activity sleep is a time of robust brain activity that even is greater than what occurs that even is greater than what occurs that even is greater than what occurs during wakeful states. What do you need during wakeful states. What do you need during wakeful states. What do you need for robust brain activity? You need for robust brain activity? You need for robust brain activity? You need energy. Where's that energy coming from? energy. Where's that energy coming from? energy. Where's that energy coming from? Blood glucose. How is that blood glucose Blood glucose. How is that blood glucose Blood glucose. How is that blood glucose deployed? Because cortisol causes its deployed? Because cortisol causes its deployed? Because cortisol causes its deployment. Okay, starting to make sense deployment. Okay, starting to make sense deployment. Okay, starting to make sense now. And then there's a fourth phase of now. And then there's a fourth phase of now. And then there's a fourth phase of secret, what they called secrettory secret, what they called secrettory secret, what they called secrettory activity of cortisol, which is after you activity of cortisol, which is after you activity of cortisol, which is after you wake up. Starts right after you wake up. wake up. Starts right after you wake up. wake up. Starts right after you wake up. And I'm going to add another little And I'm going to add another little And I'm going to add another little subphase to this, not to complicate it, subphase to this, not to complicate it, subphase to this, not to complicate it, but because it's a very powerful time but because it's a very powerful time but because it's a very powerful time each day, which is the first hour after each day, which is the first hour after each day, which is the first hour after waking from the moment you open your waking from the moment you open your waking from the moment you open your eyes and you decide to get out of bed. eyes and you decide to get out of bed. eyes and you decide to get out of bed. Doesn't matter if it's because of an Doesn't matter if it's because of an Doesn't matter if it's because of an alarm clock or it's because you just alarm clock or it's because you just alarm clock or it's because you just naturally woke up. That first hour is a naturally woke up. That first hour is a naturally woke up. That first hour is a very special hour because it's a time in very special hour because it's a time in very special hour because it's a time in which you can further amplify the which you can further amplify the which you can further amplify the increase in cortisol. After that first increase in cortisol. After that first increase in cortisol. After that first hour or certainly after about 90 hour or certainly after about 90 hour or certainly after about 90 minutes, you don't have that opportunity minutes, you don't have that opportunity minutes, you don't have that opportunity again until the next morning. There are again until the next morning. There are again until the next morning. There are things you can do to reduce your things you can do to reduce your things you can do to reduce your cortisol or to slow its decline into the cortisol or to slow its decline into the cortisol or to slow its decline into the afternoon and evening. But that first afternoon and evening. But that first afternoon and evening. But that first hour after waking is critical. Okay. So hour after waking is critical. Okay. So hour after waking is critical. Okay. So to step back now, what do we have? Let's to step back now, what do we have? Let's to step back now, what do we have? Let's talk about this in real world terms. In talk about this in real world terms. In talk about this in real world terms. In the hours right before falling asleep the hours right before falling asleep the hours right before falling asleep and in the first hours of sleep, your and in the first hours of sleep, your and in the first hours of sleep, your cortisol is very low. Ideally, this is cortisol is very low. Ideally, this is cortisol is very low. Ideally, this is the ideal case scenario for health, for the ideal case scenario for health, for the ideal case scenario for health, for your mental health, for your physical your mental health, for your physical your mental health, for your physical health, for performance. Then cortisol health, for performance. Then cortisol health, for performance. Then cortisol starts to rise on its own. You're not starts to rise on its own. You're not starts to rise on its own. You're not doing anything to make it rise. It doing anything to make it rise. It doing anything to make it rise. It starts to rise in particular as you starts to rise in particular as you starts to rise in particular as you transition from the middle of the night transition from the middle of the night transition from the middle of the night toward the end of your sleep night. And toward the end of your sleep night. And toward the end of your sleep night. And then just before waking, your cortisol then just before waking, your cortisol then just before waking, your cortisol is sharply rising. Steep, steep slope of is sharply rising. Steep, steep slope of is sharply rising. Steep, steep slope of increase. And then as you wake up, boom, increase. And then as you wake up, boom, increase. And then as you wake up, boom, you have this hour-long or so you have this hour-long or so you have this hour-long or so opportunity to further increase your opportunity to further increase your opportunity to further increase your cortisol. And you definitely want to cortisol. And you definitely want to cortisol. And you definitely want to increase your cortisol further during increase your cortisol further during increase your cortisol further during that first hour. And then about 3 4 that first hour. And then about 3 4 that first hour. And then about 3 4 hours later, so for most people that hours later, so for most people that hours later, so for most people that would be late morning or around noon would be late morning or around noon would be late morning or around noon time, your cortisol levels are slowly time, your cortisol levels are slowly time, your cortisol levels are slowly going to start to decline. However, if going to start to decline. However, if going to start to decline. However, if they decline too slowly, that's bad. If they decline too slowly, that's bad. If they decline too slowly, that's bad. If they decline too sharply, that's also they decline too sharply, that's also they decline too sharply, that's also bad. So the picture I'm trying to draw bad. So the picture I'm trying to draw bad. So the picture I'm trying to draw for you here is you want a really sharp for you here is you want a really sharp for you here is you want a really sharp spike in cortisol as you arise in the spike in cortisol as you arise in the spike in cortisol as you arise in the morning and then you want that to taper morning and then you want that to taper morning and then you want that to taper off somewhat gradually. So not too off somewhat gradually. So not too off somewhat gradually. So not too steeply, not too gradually into the steeply, not too gradually into the steeply, not too gradually into the afternoon such that by 3 4 hours or so afternoon such that by 3 4 hours or so afternoon such that by 3 4 hours or so before sleep, your cortisol levels are before sleep, your cortisol levels are before sleep, your cortisol levels are low, low and continuing to low, low and continuing to low, low and continuing to fall lower before they start up again fall lower before they start up again fall lower before they start up again the next morning in anticipation of you the next morning in anticipation of you the next morning in anticipation of you waking up. And if you haven't already waking up. And if you haven't already waking up. And if you haven't already caught on to this yet, you literally caught on to this yet, you literally caught on to this yet, you literally wake up because of a rise in cortisol. wake up because of a rise in cortisol. wake up because of a rise in cortisol. It's called the cortisol awakening It's called the cortisol awakening It's called the cortisol awakening response or CAR C A R C cortisol response or CAR C A R C cortisol response or CAR C A R C cortisol awakening response. The importance of awakening response. The importance of awakening response. The importance of cortisol for waking up and for feeling cortisol for waking up and for feeling cortisol for waking up and for feeling alert early in the day cannot be alert early in the day cannot be alert early in the day cannot be overstated. This is the anchor point at overstated. This is the anchor point at overstated. This is the anchor point at which you have control over your which you have control over your which you have control over your cortisol levels. And if you do things cortisol levels. And if you do things cortisol levels. And if you do things right in that first hour or 90 minutes right in that first hour or 90 minutes right in that first hour or 90 minutes of the day, you're going to set yourself of the day, you're going to set yourself of the day, you're going to set yourself up for an overall healthy pattern of up for an overall healthy pattern of up for an overall healthy pattern of cortisol release at night as well. Okay, cortisol release at night as well. Okay, cortisol release at night as well. Okay, so stay with me here as we get into a so stay with me here as we get into a so stay with me here as we get into a bit of mechanism as to how this cortisol bit of mechanism as to how this cortisol bit of mechanism as to how this cortisol rhythm is generated because if you can rhythm is generated because if you can rhythm is generated because if you can understand that it gives you immense understand that it gives you immense understand that it gives you immense control. Okay, so let's talk about how control. Okay, so let's talk about how control. Okay, so let's talk about how cortisol is generated and how it cortisol is generated and how it cortisol is generated and how it self-regulates itself. So cortisol again self-regulates itself. So cortisol again self-regulates itself. So cortisol again is made and released from the adrenals is made and released from the adrenals is made and released from the adrenals to be specific from a particular middle to be specific from a particular middle to be specific from a particular middle layer of your adrenals where a layer of your adrenals where a layer of your adrenals where a particular category of cells that make particular category of cells that make particular category of cells that make cortisol reside. Those cells need the cortisol reside. Those cells need the cortisol reside. Those cells need the instruction to make and release instruction to make and release instruction to make and release cortisol. And that instruction comes in cortisol. And that instruction comes in cortisol. And that instruction comes in the form of a hormone. So the whole the form of a hormone. So the whole the form of a hormone. So the whole story starts up in the brain in an area story starts up in the brain in an area story starts up in the brain in an area of the so-called hypothalamus. of the so-called hypothalamus. of the so-called hypothalamus. Hypothalamus is a little structure. Hypothalamus is a little structure. Hypothalamus is a little structure. It's actually quite small, the size of It's actually quite small, the size of It's actually quite small, the size of about two small marbles sitting above about two small marbles sitting above about two small marbles sitting above the roof of your mouth. And it they sit the roof of your mouth. And it they sit the roof of your mouth. And it they sit next to this thing that we call a next to this thing that we call a next to this thing that we call a ventricle, which is where the cerebral ventricle, which is where the cerebral ventricle, which is where the cerebral spinal fluid circulates. Now this turns spinal fluid circulates. Now this turns spinal fluid circulates. Now this turns out to be important because the cerebral out to be important because the cerebral out to be important because the cerebral spinal fluid gives the brain or the spinal fluid gives the brain or the spinal fluid gives the brain or the neurons there information about the neurons there information about the neurons there information about the chemistry of the body. It gives the chemistry of the body. It gives the chemistry of the body. It gives the neurons there information about what's neurons there information about what's neurons there information about what's in the bloodstream too because the in the bloodstream too because the in the bloodstream too because the area there allows blood vessels to get area there allows blood vessels to get area there allows blood vessels to get closer to the neurons and expose the closer to the neurons and expose the closer to the neurons and expose the neurons to more of what's going on in neurons to more of what's going on in neurons to more of what's going on in terms of the body chemistry than neurons terms of the body chemistry than neurons terms of the body chemistry than neurons located more deeply in the brain. So located more deeply in the brain. So located more deeply in the brain. So it's nice that the neurons that we're it's nice that the neurons that we're it's nice that the neurons that we're going to talk about now reside in an going to talk about now reside in an going to talk about now reside in an area of the hypothalamus called the area of the hypothalamus called the area of the hypothalamus called the paravventricular nucleus. Paramah means paravventricular nucleus. Paramah means paravventricular nucleus. Paramah means near. Ventricular means ventricle. So near. Ventricular means ventricle. So near. Ventricular means ventricle. So parvententricular near the ventricle parvententricular near the ventricle parvententricular near the ventricle where they can access information about where they can access information about where they can access information about the body's chemistry. the body's chemistry. the body's chemistry. So there are neurons that reside in the So there are neurons that reside in the So there are neurons that reside in the so-called PVN parventricular nucleus and so-called PVN parventricular nucleus and so-called PVN parventricular nucleus and they extend processes into the pituitary they extend processes into the pituitary they extend processes into the pituitary gland. The pituitary gland is a little gland. The pituitary gland is a little gland. The pituitary gland is a little stock that has a couple of different stock that has a couple of different stock that has a couple of different loes. Okay? They literally look like loes. Okay? They literally look like loes. Okay? They literally look like little loaves. It looks like if you uh little loaves. It looks like if you uh little loaves. It looks like if you uh took a couple uh cloves of garlic and took a couple uh cloves of garlic and took a couple uh cloves of garlic and you held on to their stocks next to one you held on to their stocks next to one you held on to their stocks next to one another. Those two cloves of garlic, a another. Those two cloves of garlic, a another. Those two cloves of garlic, a big stock and a slightly smaller stock. big stock and a slightly smaller stock. big stock and a slightly smaller stock. It's kind of what the pituitary looks It's kind of what the pituitary looks It's kind of what the pituitary looks like. And the pituitary actually extends like. And the pituitary actually extends like. And the pituitary actually extends out of the brain. And the neurons in the out of the brain. And the neurons in the out of the brain. And the neurons in the parventricular nucleus release a hormone parventricular nucleus release a hormone parventricular nucleus release a hormone called corticotropen releasing hormone called corticotropen releasing hormone called corticotropen releasing hormone or CR. or CR. or CR. Corticotropen releasing hormone acts on Corticotropen releasing hormone acts on Corticotropen releasing hormone acts on neurons in the anterior pituitary in neurons in the anterior pituitary in neurons in the anterior pituitary in that front piece of garlic and causes that front piece of garlic and causes that front piece of garlic and causes the cells there to release a hormone the cells there to release a hormone the cells there to release a hormone called act adreninocorticotropen called act adreninocorticotropen called act adreninocorticotropen hormone. Okay, I know there's a lot of hormone. Okay, I know there's a lot of hormone. Okay, I know there's a lot of nomenclature here but you should know nomenclature here but you should know nomenclature here but you should know the facts. ACT is then released into the facts. ACT is then released into the facts. ACT is then released into the bloodstream and it travels down to the bloodstream and it travels down to the bloodstream and it travels down to the adrenals and it stimulates the release adrenals and it stimulates the release adrenals and it stimulates the release of cortisol. In fact, by binding to of cortisol. In fact, by binding to of cortisol. In fact, by binding to something called the melanoorton something called the melanoorton something called the melanoorton receptor, which doesn't seem important receptor, which doesn't seem important receptor, which doesn't seem important for the moment, but later when I tell for the moment, but later when I tell for the moment, but later when I tell you why people who have chronically you why people who have chronically you why people who have chronically elevated cortisol get what's called elevated cortisol get what's called elevated cortisol get what's called hyperpigmentation, they get some hyperpigmentation, they get some hyperpigmentation, they get some pigmentation on their face that's kind pigmentation on their face that's kind pigmentation on their face that's kind of blotchy, right? This is a symptom of blotchy, right? This is a symptom of blotchy, right? This is a symptom of something called Cushing syndrome, which something called Cushing syndrome, which something called Cushing syndrome, which is elevated cortisol. It will make sense is elevated cortisol. It will make sense is elevated cortisol. It will make sense melanocortin. Okay, it's involved in melanocortin. Okay, it's involved in melanocortin. Okay, it's involved in pigmentation. The melanoortin receptor pigmentation. The melanoortin receptor pigmentation. The melanoortin receptor sits in that middle layer of the sits in that middle layer of the sits in that middle layer of the adrenals and act binds to it causing the adrenals and act binds to it causing the adrenals and act binds to it causing the synthesis and release of cortisol. Okay. synthesis and release of cortisol. Okay. synthesis and release of cortisol. Okay. Then cortisol in response to stress. Then cortisol in response to stress. Then cortisol in response to stress. Yes. But also in response to anytime we Yes. But also in response to anytime we Yes. But also in response to anytime we need to get our energy going, our brain need to get our energy going, our brain need to get our energy going, our brain energy, our focus, or as you learned a energy, our focus, or as you learned a energy, our focus, or as you learned a few moments ago, anytime we need to wake few moments ago, anytime we need to wake few moments ago, anytime we need to wake up in the morning, right? Anytime we up in the morning, right? Anytime we up in the morning, right? Anytime we need to get out of bed, that requires need to get out of bed, that requires need to get out of bed, that requires energy, right? In fact, the transition energy, right? In fact, the transition energy, right? In fact, the transition from sleep to wakefulness is one of the from sleep to wakefulness is one of the from sleep to wakefulness is one of the biggest requirements for an energy biggest requirements for an energy biggest requirements for an energy surge, which is why you have the surge, which is why you have the surge, which is why you have the cortisol awakening response. So, cortisol awakening response. So, cortisol awakening response. So, cortisol is going to be released into cortisol is going to be released into cortisol is going to be released into the bloodstream. It's going to cause the bloodstream. It's going to cause the bloodstream. It's going to cause the deployment of blood glucose, the deployment of blood glucose, the deployment of blood glucose, the breakdown of amino acids and other fuels breakdown of amino acids and other fuels breakdown of amino acids and other fuels in muscle, in liver, in particular, in muscle, in liver, in particular, in muscle, in liver, in particular, glycogen in the liver. That's going to glycogen in the liver. That's going to glycogen in the liver. That's going to be released into the bloodstream. be released into the bloodstream. be released into the bloodstream. And here's the thing. As cortisol is And here's the thing. As cortisol is And here's the thing. As cortisol is released into the bloodstream, the released into the bloodstream, the released into the bloodstream, the neurons in the brain that cause the neurons in the brain that cause the neurons in the brain that cause the release of CR, corticotropen releasing release of CR, corticotropen releasing release of CR, corticotropen releasing hormone, have access to how much hormone, have access to how much hormone, have access to how much cortisol is in the bloodstream. How? cortisol is in the bloodstream. How? cortisol is in the bloodstream. How? Well, they are parvententricular. Well, they are parvententricular. Well, they are parvententricular. Blood vessels and capillaries are also Blood vessels and capillaries are also Blood vessels and capillaries are also lining the ventricles. So, those cells lining the ventricles. So, those cells lining the ventricles. So, those cells in the parventricular nucleus have a in the parventricular nucleus have a in the parventricular nucleus have a sort of thermometer, if you will. sort of thermometer, if you will. sort of thermometer, if you will. They're kind of like a thermostat paying They're kind of like a thermostat paying They're kind of like a thermostat paying attention to just how high levels of attention to just how high levels of attention to just how high levels of cortisol are in the bloodstream. So when cortisol are in the bloodstream. So when cortisol are in the bloodstream. So when levels of cortisol in the bloodstream levels of cortisol in the bloodstream levels of cortisol in the bloodstream are very low, those cells in the are very low, those cells in the are very low, those cells in the parventricular nucleus release more CR parventricular nucleus release more CR parventricular nucleus release more CR to stimulate the release of act to go to stimulate the release of act to go to stimulate the release of act to go to the adrenals to cause the stimulation the adrenals to cause the stimulation the adrenals to cause the stimulation and release of more cortisol, driving and release of more cortisol, driving and release of more cortisol, driving levels of cortisol up. And by the way, levels of cortisol up. And by the way, levels of cortisol up. And by the way, cortisol has a relatively long halflife. cortisol has a relatively long halflife. cortisol has a relatively long halflife. So it tends to accumulate in the So it tends to accumulate in the So it tends to accumulate in the bloodstream. So as levels of cortisol bloodstream. So as levels of cortisol bloodstream. So as levels of cortisol tend to go up, let's think about that tend to go up, let's think about that tend to go up, let's think about that last phase of sleep, maybe, you know, 2 last phase of sleep, maybe, you know, 2 last phase of sleep, maybe, you know, 2 or 3 hours before you wake up, cortisol or 3 hours before you wake up, cortisol or 3 hours before you wake up, cortisol is going up up. is going up up. is going up up. What ends up happening eventually is What ends up happening eventually is What ends up happening eventually is that the cells in the parventricular that the cells in the parventricular that the cells in the parventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus that release nucleus of the hypothalamus that release nucleus of the hypothalamus that release CR hit a point where they realize at a CR hit a point where they realize at a CR hit a point where they realize at a biochemical level that is they realize biochemical level that is they realize biochemical level that is they realize based on receptor saturation and some based on receptor saturation and some based on receptor saturation and some other mechanisms internal to the cells, other mechanisms internal to the cells, other mechanisms internal to the cells, ah cortisol levels are really ah cortisol levels are really ah cortisol levels are really high right now. Let's shut down the high right now. Let's shut down the high right now. Let's shut down the release of corticotropen releasing release of corticotropen releasing release of corticotropen releasing hormone which causes a shutdown of the hormone which causes a shutdown of the hormone which causes a shutdown of the release of act which causes a shutdown release of act which causes a shutdown release of act which causes a shutdown of the synthesis and release of cortisol of the synthesis and release of cortisol of the synthesis and release of cortisol from the adrenals. So this is what we from the adrenals. So this is what we from the adrenals. So this is what we call a negative feedback loop. And by call a negative feedback loop. And by call a negative feedback loop. And by the way, this is the same way that the way, this is the same way that the way, this is the same way that testosterone works. In many ways, it's testosterone works. In many ways, it's testosterone works. In many ways, it's the same way that estrogen works, the same way that estrogen works, the same way that estrogen works, although estrogen is subject to a bit although estrogen is subject to a bit although estrogen is subject to a bit more regulation as well. When levels of more regulation as well. When levels of more regulation as well. When levels of the hormone cortisol reach a certain the hormone cortisol reach a certain the hormone cortisol reach a certain point, a certain threshold, it shuts point, a certain threshold, it shuts point, a certain threshold, it shuts down its own production by turning off down its own production by turning off down its own production by turning off the signals that would cause more of it the signals that would cause more of it the signals that would cause more of it to be produced. Okay? So, there's a to be produced. Okay? So, there's a to be produced. Okay? So, there's a negative feedback loop. Now, that means negative feedback loop. Now, that means negative feedback loop. Now, that means that cortisol after reaching a certain that cortisol after reaching a certain that cortisol after reaching a certain high level in the morning will high level in the morning will high level in the morning will eventually start to drop off and those eventually start to drop off and those eventually start to drop off and those levels will continue to drop off and levels will continue to drop off and levels will continue to drop off and should we encounter a need for a lot of should we encounter a need for a lot of should we encounter a need for a lot of brain energy. So, it could be a really brain energy. So, it could be a really brain energy. So, it could be a really focused conversation. It could be an focused conversation. It could be an focused conversation. It could be an exam. It could be you're playing a bout exam. It could be you're playing a bout exam. It could be you're playing a bout of soccer or you're going to the gym and of soccer or you're going to the gym and of soccer or you're going to the gym and you need a bunch of energy. You have to you need a bunch of energy. You have to you need a bunch of energy. You have to rally your mind and your motivation rally your mind and your motivation rally your mind and your motivation to do that. Yeah, you'll get an increase to do that. Yeah, you'll get an increase to do that. Yeah, you'll get an increase in cortisol, but that little increase in cortisol, but that little increase in cortisol, but that little increase in cortisol is like a bump of cortisol that cortisol is like a bump of cortisol that cortisol is like a bump of cortisol that rides on that already dropping rides on that already dropping rides on that already dropping indogenous rhythm in cortisol. So by now indogenous rhythm in cortisol. So by now indogenous rhythm in cortisol. So by now it's probably dawning on you that as it's probably dawning on you that as it's probably dawning on you that as those levels of cortisol get lower and those levels of cortisol get lower and those levels of cortisol get lower and lower into the late afternoon and lower into the late afternoon and lower into the late afternoon and evening etc. Those cells in the brain evening etc. Those cells in the brain evening etc. Those cells in the brain that release CR are now registering at a that release CR are now registering at a that release CR are now registering at a biochemical level at a cellular level biochemical level at a cellular level biochemical level at a cellular level that the levels of cortisol are very that the levels of cortisol are very that the levels of cortisol are very low. And so eventually those levels get low. And so eventually those levels get low. And so eventually those levels get low enough that those cells in the low enough that those cells in the low enough that those cells in the parventricular nucleus go oh cortisol parventricular nucleus go oh cortisol parventricular nucleus go oh cortisol levels are really low. They're levels are really low. They're levels are really low. They're not zero but they're really low. Let's not zero but they're really low. Let's not zero but they're really low. Let's start releasing corticotropen releasing start releasing corticotropen releasing start releasing corticotropen releasing hormone which stimulates act which hormone which stimulates act which hormone which stimulates act which stimulates the adrenals and that's why stimulates the adrenals and that's why stimulates the adrenals and that's why cortisol starts to rise again late in cortisol starts to rise again late in cortisol starts to rise again late in sleep and into the next morning. Does it sleep and into the next morning. Does it sleep and into the next morning. Does it make sense? Hopefully that makes sense. make sense? Hopefully that makes sense. make sense? Hopefully that makes sense. Cortisol is regulating its own Cortisol is regulating its own Cortisol is regulating its own production so that it doesn't get too production so that it doesn't get too production so that it doesn't get too high or too low. And it does that high or too low. And it does that high or too low. And it does that through a negative feedback loop through a negative feedback loop through a negative feedback loop involving these cells in the involving these cells in the involving these cells in the hypothalamus. So what I just described hypothalamus. So what I just described hypothalamus. So what I just described was something called the HPA axis. was something called the HPA axis. was something called the HPA axis. hypothalamic H pituitary P adrenal axis. hypothalamic H pituitary P adrenal axis. hypothalamic H pituitary P adrenal axis. Okay, so the HPA axis is important for Okay, so the HPA axis is important for Okay, so the HPA axis is important for synthesis of cortisol to generate this synthesis of cortisol to generate this synthesis of cortisol to generate this 24-hour so-called circadian rhythm. It's 24-hour so-called circadian rhythm. It's 24-hour so-called circadian rhythm. It's also important for the synthesis of also important for the synthesis of also important for the synthesis of cortisol in response to stress, both cortisol in response to stress, both cortisol in response to stress, both short-term and long-term. And I'm going short-term and long-term. And I'm going short-term and long-term. And I'm going to get back to stress a little bit more to get back to stress a little bit more to get back to stress a little bit more later, but let's just for a moment think later, but let's just for a moment think later, but let's just for a moment think about that HPA axis. And two things about that HPA axis. And two things about that HPA axis. And two things about stress that you can kind of put up about stress that you can kind of put up about stress that you can kind of put up on the shelf that will be helpful later on the shelf that will be helpful later on the shelf that will be helpful later as we get into our discussion about as we get into our discussion about as we get into our discussion about short-term and chronic stress. Stress short-term and chronic stress. Stress short-term and chronic stress. Stress activates the HPA axis. But as you know, activates the HPA axis. But as you know, activates the HPA axis. But as you know, stress is a very fast response. Meaning stress is a very fast response. Meaning stress is a very fast response. Meaning when you encounter a stressor, your when you encounter a stressor, your when you encounter a stressor, your heart rate goes up, your blood pressure heart rate goes up, your blood pressure heart rate goes up, your blood pressure goes up, your eyes widen. Literally, goes up, your eyes widen. Literally, goes up, your eyes widen. Literally, your pupils widen and your eyes widen. your pupils widen and your eyes widen. your pupils widen and your eyes widen. and all sorts of things happen in terms and all sorts of things happen in terms and all sorts of things happen in terms of your levels of alertness and of your levels of alertness and of your levels of alertness and attention. That very rapid response attention. That very rapid response attention. That very rapid response occurs also because of the HPA axis, but occurs also because of the HPA axis, but occurs also because of the HPA axis, but because of the release of adrenaline, because of the release of adrenaline, because of the release of adrenaline, epinephrine and norepinephrine from your epinephrine and norepinephrine from your epinephrine and norepinephrine from your adrenals and also from areas in your adrenals and also from areas in your adrenals and also from areas in your brain. That's a very fasting. It happens brain. That's a very fasting. It happens brain. That's a very fasting. It happens within milliseconds. If not within milliseconds. If not within milliseconds. If not milliseconds, certainly within seconds. milliseconds, certainly within seconds. milliseconds, certainly within seconds. Just think about if you're walking down Just think about if you're walking down Just think about if you're walking down the street in a city and a, you know, a the street in a city and a, you know, a the street in a city and a, you know, a car kind of veers onto the sidewalk and car kind of veers onto the sidewalk and car kind of veers onto the sidewalk and you have to jump out of the way. You you have to jump out of the way. You you have to jump out of the way. You made the reaction without even basically made the reaction without even basically made the reaction without even basically having to think about it. You get out of having to think about it. You get out of having to think about it. You get out of the way and your heart rate's up. the way and your heart rate's up. the way and your heart rate's up. Everything's happening all at once. Everything's happening all at once. Everything's happening all at once. You're completely different state than You're completely different state than You're completely different state than you were just a few seconds prior. Even you were just a few seconds prior. Even you were just a few seconds prior. Even that's all happening fast because of that's all happening fast because of that's all happening fast because of adrenaline and norepinephrine. adrenaline and norepinephrine. adrenaline and norepinephrine. Cortisol, yes, will be deployed in Cortisol, yes, will be deployed in Cortisol, yes, will be deployed in response to that sort of stressor. But response to that sort of stressor. But response to that sort of stressor. But cortisol needs to be synthesized and cortisol needs to be synthesized and cortisol needs to be synthesized and then released and then it causes the then released and then it causes the then released and then it causes the release of glucose. And that's going to release of glucose. And that's going to release of glucose. And that's going to take some time. In fact, it takes about take some time. In fact, it takes about take some time. In fact, it takes about 10 minutes. So, it turns out that can 10 minutes. So, it turns out that can 10 minutes. So, it turns out that can explain a lot of why stress tends to explain a lot of why stress tends to explain a lot of why stress tends to come on very quickly and last rather come on very quickly and last rather come on very quickly and last rather long relative to the stressor, to the long relative to the stressor, to the long relative to the stressor, to the thing like the car that veered up onto thing like the car that veered up onto thing like the car that veered up onto the sidewalk. You probably had that the sidewalk. You probably had that the sidewalk. You probably had that experience where something happens experience where something happens experience where something happens that's very stressful, then the stressor that's very stressful, then the stressor that's very stressful, then the stressor is resolved, right? The car didn't hit is resolved, right? The car didn't hit is resolved, right? The car didn't hit you. It didn't kill you, thank goodness. you. It didn't kill you, thank goodness. you. It didn't kill you, thank goodness. Didn't run over your leg. Didn't break Didn't run over your leg. Didn't break Didn't run over your leg. Didn't break your leg, thank goodness. your leg, thank goodness. your leg, thank goodness. But you turn to your friend, you're But you turn to your friend, you're But you turn to your friend, you're like, "Oh my goodness. Oh yeah, that was like, "Oh my goodness. Oh yeah, that was like, "Oh my goodness. Oh yeah, that was a close call." And guess what? About a close call." And guess what? About a close call." And guess what? About five, 10 minutes later, you're still five, 10 minutes later, you're still five, 10 minutes later, you're still kind of stressed about it. Something kind of stressed about it. Something kind of stressed about it. Something stressful happened. Something real, as stressful happened. Something real, as stressful happened. Something real, as we say, happened. And it's hard to as we say, happened. And it's hard to as we say, happened. And it's hard to just kind of get back to baseline again. just kind of get back to baseline again. just kind of get back to baseline again. And that's because that wave of cortisol And that's because that wave of cortisol And that's because that wave of cortisol comes on a little bit later and it lasts comes on a little bit later and it lasts comes on a little bit later and it lasts longer. It has a much longer halflife longer. It has a much longer halflife longer. It has a much longer halflife than does adrenaline or norepinephrine. than does adrenaline or norepinephrine. than does adrenaline or norepinephrine. So the stress response has this fast So the stress response has this fast So the stress response has this fast aspect to it that's generated through aspect to it that's generated through aspect to it that's generated through the HPA axis and through again release the HPA axis and through again release the HPA axis and through again release of hormones such as norepinephrine in of hormones such as norepinephrine in of hormones such as norepinephrine in the brain. Those two things happen in the brain. Those two things happen in the brain. Those two things happen in parallel. By the way, that happens parallel. By the way, that happens parallel. By the way, that happens because adrenaline is released from the because adrenaline is released from the because adrenaline is released from the adrenals very quickly to cause changes adrenals very quickly to cause changes adrenals very quickly to cause changes in the body. But adrenaline can't cross in the body. But adrenaline can't cross in the body. But adrenaline can't cross the bloodb brain barrier. And when you the bloodb brain barrier. And when you the bloodb brain barrier. And when you need a very fast reaction in order to need a very fast reaction in order to need a very fast reaction in order to deal with a stressor, you can't really deal with a stressor, you can't really deal with a stressor, you can't really wait for that hormone to cross from the wait for that hormone to cross from the wait for that hormone to cross from the bloodstream into the brain. So you bloodstream into the brain. So you bloodstream into the brain. So you release norepinephrine from a site in release norepinephrine from a site in release norepinephrine from a site in the brain very quickly as well in the brain very quickly as well in the brain very quickly as well in parallel with that release of parallel with that release of parallel with that release of adrenaline. So those two things happen adrenaline. So those two things happen adrenaline. So those two things happen in parallel. Boom, you deal with the in parallel. Boom, you deal with the in parallel. Boom, you deal with the stressor. Hopefully that stressor is stressor. Hopefully that stressor is stressor. Hopefully that stressor is resolved, didn't injure you or worse, resolved, didn't injure you or worse, resolved, didn't injure you or worse, but then that wave of synthesis and but then that wave of synthesis and but then that wave of synthesis and release of cortisol occurs, blood release of cortisol occurs, blood release of cortisol occurs, blood glucose is elevated, and so it takes a glucose is elevated, and so it takes a glucose is elevated, and so it takes a while for stress to come down again. All while for stress to come down again. All while for stress to come down again. All of that is mediated through the HPA, of that is mediated through the HPA, of that is mediated through the HPA, hypothalamic pituitary, adrenal axis, as hypothalamic pituitary, adrenal axis, as hypothalamic pituitary, adrenal axis, as is the generation of that 24-hour rhythm is the generation of that 24-hour rhythm is the generation of that 24-hour rhythm in cortisol, where cortisol slowly rises in cortisol, where cortisol slowly rises in cortisol, where cortisol slowly rises and then goes back down into the evening and then goes back down into the evening and then goes back down into the evening and nighttime and so on. Okay, now and nighttime and so on. Okay, now and nighttime and so on. Okay, now that's the first way that cortisol is that's the first way that cortisol is that's the first way that cortisol is synthesized and released. But there's a synthesized and released. But there's a synthesized and released. But there's a second way that turns out to be very second way that turns out to be very second way that turns out to be very important and it involves a structure important and it involves a structure important and it involves a structure called the supraismatic nucleus or SCN. called the supraismatic nucleus or SCN. called the supraismatic nucleus or SCN. The super kaismatic nucleus is your The super kaismatic nucleus is your The super kaismatic nucleus is your brain's central circadian pacemaker. brain's central circadian pacemaker. brain's central circadian pacemaker. It's the set of neurons also above the It's the set of neurons also above the It's the set of neurons also above the roof of your mouth, also in the roof of your mouth, also in the roof of your mouth, also in the hypothalamus that basically orchestrates hypothalamus that basically orchestrates hypothalamus that basically orchestrates all the activities of all the organs and all the activities of all the organs and all the activities of all the organs and cells in your body like an orchestra cells in your body like an orchestra cells in your body like an orchestra conductor. Makes sure that your gut conductor. Makes sure that your gut conductor. Makes sure that your gut cells are active at a certain time, that cells are active at a certain time, that cells are active at a certain time, that you're hungry at certain times, you're hungry at certain times, you're hungry at certain times, you're not hungry at others. Regulates pretty not hungry at others. Regulates pretty not hungry at others. Regulates pretty much everything, including cortisol. And much everything, including cortisol. And much everything, including cortisol. And the SCN can control the HPA axis when the SCN can control the HPA axis when the SCN can control the HPA axis when it's active, when it's less active by it's active, when it's less active by it's active, when it's less active by virtue of connections that run through, virtue of connections that run through, virtue of connections that run through, if you really want to know the names for if you really want to know the names for if you really want to know the names for you, aficionadoos, through the dorsome you, aficionadoos, through the dorsome you, aficionadoos, through the dorsome medial hypothalamus and then to the medial hypothalamus and then to the medial hypothalamus and then to the parventricular nucleus. Okay, that's all parventricular nucleus. Okay, that's all parventricular nucleus. Okay, that's all fine and good. It just means that the fine and good. It just means that the fine and good. It just means that the HPA axis is subject to immediate control HPA axis is subject to immediate control HPA axis is subject to immediate control over stressors or other things that over stressors or other things that over stressors or other things that require our attention. Again, doesn't require our attention. Again, doesn't require our attention. Again, doesn't have to be stress, could be positive have to be stress, could be positive have to be stress, could be positive things. as well. The HPA axis is under things. as well. The HPA axis is under things. as well. The HPA axis is under the control of the SCN, circadian the control of the SCN, circadian the control of the SCN, circadian timing, which is what generates that timing, which is what generates that timing, which is what generates that high in the morning, low in the high in the morning, low in the high in the morning, low in the afternoon and evening rhythm. All of afternoon and evening rhythm. All of afternoon and evening rhythm. All of that subject to negative feedback that subject to negative feedback that subject to negative feedback controls itself, making sure levels controls itself, making sure levels controls itself, making sure levels don't get too high or too low for too don't get too high or too low for too don't get too high or too low for too long. But there's a second pathway, a long. But there's a second pathway, a long. But there's a second pathway, a parallel pathway as we call it, that is parallel pathway as we call it, that is parallel pathway as we call it, that is separate from the HPA control over the separate from the HPA control over the separate from the HPA control over the synthesis and release of cortisol. And synthesis and release of cortisol. And synthesis and release of cortisol. And this one originates also in the SCN, the this one originates also in the SCN, the this one originates also in the SCN, the supercaismatic nucleus, and is relayed supercaismatic nucleus, and is relayed supercaismatic nucleus, and is relayed through a couple of different synapses, through a couple of different synapses, through a couple of different synapses, a couple of different junctions, and a couple of different junctions, and a couple of different junctions, and eventually runs through a nerve pathway eventually runs through a nerve pathway eventually runs through a nerve pathway that foricians is called the splanchnic that foricians is called the splanchnic that foricians is called the splanchnic nerve, right? Kind of cool name, nerve, right? Kind of cool name, nerve, right? Kind of cool name, splanchnic nerve that can cause the splanchnic nerve that can cause the splanchnic nerve that can cause the release of cortisol, or I should say the release of cortisol, or I should say the release of cortisol, or I should say the synthesis and release of cortisol in synthesis and release of cortisol in synthesis and release of cortisol in response to times when you want cortisol response to times when you want cortisol response to times when you want cortisol to be especially high for a while. Okay, to be especially high for a while. Okay, to be especially high for a while. Okay, so this is different than the so this is different than the so this is different than the requirement for stress. You might think, requirement for stress. You might think, requirement for stress. You might think, you know, we want cortisol to be high in you know, we want cortisol to be high in you know, we want cortisol to be high in response to stressors. No, your brain response to stressors. No, your brain response to stressors. No, your brain and body are really smart. They're and body are really smart. They're and body are really smart. They're really, really smart. When you encounter really, really smart. When you encounter really, really smart. When you encounter a stressor, you deploy just as much a stressor, you deploy just as much a stressor, you deploy just as much cortisol as your body thinks you might cortisol as your body thinks you might cortisol as your body thinks you might need in order to resolve that stressor need in order to resolve that stressor need in order to resolve that stressor and probably not a whole lot more. And and probably not a whole lot more. And and probably not a whole lot more. And because cortisol lasts a while, as we because cortisol lasts a while, as we because cortisol lasts a while, as we just discussed, it gives you an just discussed, it gives you an just discussed, it gives you an opportunity to have more brain energy, opportunity to have more brain energy, opportunity to have more brain energy, bodily energy to resolve that stressor. bodily energy to resolve that stressor. bodily energy to resolve that stressor. But your brain and body sort of know at But your brain and body sort of know at But your brain and body sort of know at a biological level that you don't want a biological level that you don't want a biological level that you don't want cortisol too high for too long. That's cortisol too high for too long. That's cortisol too high for too long. That's why you have the negative feedback loop. why you have the negative feedback loop. why you have the negative feedback loop. However, there's a beautiful mechanism However, there's a beautiful mechanism However, there's a beautiful mechanism which is this second parallel pathway which is this second parallel pathway which is this second parallel pathway from the SCN that allows you to control from the SCN that allows you to control from the SCN that allows you to control the amount of cortisol that you release the amount of cortisol that you release the amount of cortisol that you release and boost it even further for a long and boost it even further for a long and boost it even further for a long period of time. Now, when would you want period of time. Now, when would you want period of time. Now, when would you want that to occur? You think like, why would that to occur? You think like, why would that to occur? You think like, why would I want that to occur? Maybe in response I want that to occur? Maybe in response I want that to occur? Maybe in response to a chronic stressor, a very long to a chronic stressor, a very long to a chronic stressor, a very long stressor. Well, actually, you wouldn't stressor. Well, actually, you wouldn't stressor. Well, actually, you wouldn't want that to happen because if cortisol want that to happen because if cortisol want that to happen because if cortisol is elevated for too long at the wrong is elevated for too long at the wrong is elevated for too long at the wrong times of day or night, you run into all times of day or night, you run into all times of day or night, you run into all sorts of issues related to immune system sorts of issues related to immune system sorts of issues related to immune system suppression to dysregulation of suppression to dysregulation of suppression to dysregulation of metabolic function. And this is where we metabolic function. And this is where we metabolic function. And this is where we start to hear about some of the more start to hear about some of the more start to hear about some of the more common negative aspects of chronically common negative aspects of chronically common negative aspects of chronically elevated cortisol, like accumulation of elevated cortisol, like accumulation of elevated cortisol, like accumulation of body fat around the midsection, the body fat around the midsection, the body fat around the midsection, the so-called moon face, you know, the uh so-called moon face, you know, the uh so-called moon face, you know, the uh literally the rounding of the face and literally the rounding of the face and literally the rounding of the face and the accumulation of fat in the face. uh the accumulation of fat in the face. uh the accumulation of fat in the face. uh there's usually an accompanying loss of there's usually an accompanying loss of there's usually an accompanying loss of fat in the neck and accumulation of fat in the neck and accumulation of fat in the neck and accumulation of fat around the belly. Nobody wants this, around the belly. Nobody wants this, around the belly. Nobody wants this, right? Some things like right? Some things like right? Some things like hyperpigmentation and things like that. hyperpigmentation and things like that. hyperpigmentation and things like that. All right, but there is a time of day All right, but there is a time of day All right, but there is a time of day when everyone would benefit from having when everyone would benefit from having when everyone would benefit from having higher levels of cortisol, not just for higher levels of cortisol, not just for higher levels of cortisol, not just for a few moments or minutes, but for a few moments or minutes, but for a few moments or minutes, but for several hours. And that's the first hour several hours. And that's the first hour several hours. And that's the first hour or two or two and a half or three after or two or two and a half or three after or two or two and a half or three after waking. So, while there's this 24-hour waking. So, while there's this 24-hour waking. So, while there's this 24-hour rhythm in cortisol, where cortisol is rhythm in cortisol, where cortisol is rhythm in cortisol, where cortisol is elevated in the morning, there's this elevated in the morning, there's this elevated in the morning, there's this unique opportunity of about an hour to unique opportunity of about an hour to unique opportunity of about an hour to two hours, maybe three, immediately two hours, maybe three, immediately two hours, maybe three, immediately after waking when your SCN can activate after waking when your SCN can activate after waking when your SCN can activate this parallel pathway down to your this parallel pathway down to your this parallel pathway down to your adrenals to cause the release of more adrenals to cause the release of more adrenals to cause the release of more cortisol and elevate your morning cortisol and elevate your morning cortisol and elevate your morning energy, alertness, mood, and so on. Now, energy, alertness, mood, and so on. Now, energy, alertness, mood, and so on. Now, you might be saying, "Wait, this is kind you might be saying, "Wait, this is kind you might be saying, "Wait, this is kind of confusing. The SCEN controls the of confusing. The SCEN controls the of confusing. The SCEN controls the 24-hour rhythm, but it's also 24-hour rhythm, but it's also 24-hour rhythm, but it's also controlling the faster release of controlling the faster release of controlling the faster release of cortisol during this, you know, kind of cortisol during this, you know, kind of cortisol during this, you know, kind of one unique window immediately after one unique window immediately after one unique window immediately after waking. It's kind of confusing, right? waking. It's kind of confusing, right? waking. It's kind of confusing, right? The SCEN's involved in both things. Ah, The SCEN's involved in both things. Ah, The SCEN's involved in both things. Ah, well, the SCN has access to one well, the SCN has access to one well, the SCN has access to one particular feature of your external particular feature of your external particular feature of your external world of your environment that no other world of your environment that no other world of your environment that no other structure in the hypothalamus has access structure in the hypothalamus has access structure in the hypothalamus has access to, and that's the presence or absence to, and that's the presence or absence to, and that's the presence or absence of light. The retina, the light sensing of light. The retina, the light sensing of light. The retina, the light sensing tissue at the back of your eye, contains tissue at the back of your eye, contains tissue at the back of your eye, contains a bunch of different neurons that sense a bunch of different neurons that sense a bunch of different neurons that sense light, convert it into electrical light, convert it into electrical light, convert it into electrical signals, and hand those electrical signals, and hand those electrical signals, and hand those electrical signals off to a certain class of cells signals off to a certain class of cells signals off to a certain class of cells called the retinal ganglion cells. called the retinal ganglion cells. called the retinal ganglion cells. Retinal gang cells project into the Retinal gang cells project into the Retinal gang cells project into the brain to allow you to see things, color, brain to allow you to see things, color, brain to allow you to see things, color, shapes, motion, etc. However, there's a shapes, motion, etc. However, there's a shapes, motion, etc. However, there's a specialized subset of those retinal specialized subset of those retinal specialized subset of those retinal ganglen cells called the intrinsically ganglen cells called the intrinsically ganglen cells called the intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin retinal photosensitive melanopsin retinal photosensitive melanopsin retinal ganglion cells that respond in ganglion cells that respond in ganglion cells that respond in particular to very bright light or more particular to very bright light or more particular to very bright light or more accurately to transitions between dimmer accurately to transitions between dimmer accurately to transitions between dimmer environments and brighter environments and brighter environments and brighter environments that last a long period of time. Like that last a long period of time. Like that last a long period of time. Like for instance, when you go from your eyes for instance, when you go from your eyes for instance, when you go from your eyes closed in sleep to your eyes opening closed in sleep to your eyes opening closed in sleep to your eyes opening when awake. when awake. when awake. Those neurons project directly to the Those neurons project directly to the Those neurons project directly to the super kaismatic nucleus. In other words, super kaismatic nucleus. In other words, super kaismatic nucleus. In other words, your SCN has unique access to your SCN has unique access to your SCN has unique access to information about when the levels of information about when the levels of information about when the levels of overall luminance in your environment overall luminance in your environment overall luminance in your environment change dramatically, change dramatically, change dramatically, such as upon waking. So, here's where such as upon waking. So, here's where such as upon waking. So, here's where I'm going to suggest a protocol. And I'm going to suggest a protocol. And I'm going to suggest a protocol. And you've heard this protocol before. I you've heard this protocol before. I you've heard this protocol before. I know. The protocol is to get bright know. The protocol is to get bright know. The protocol is to get bright light, ideally from sunlight, into your light, ideally from sunlight, into your light, ideally from sunlight, into your eyes within the first hour of waking. eyes within the first hour of waking. eyes within the first hour of waking. Ideally, within the first 30 minutes. Ideally, within the first 30 minutes. Ideally, within the first 30 minutes. Ideally, it's from sunlight. So, you Ideally, it's from sunlight. So, you Ideally, it's from sunlight. So, you would go outside, take your sunglasses would go outside, take your sunglasses would go outside, take your sunglasses off. Eyeglasses and contacts are fine, off. Eyeglasses and contacts are fine, off. Eyeglasses and contacts are fine, even if they have UV protection in them. even if they have UV protection in them. even if they have UV protection in them. Look in the direction of the sun. Blink Look in the direction of the sun. Blink Look in the direction of the sun. Blink as needed to protect your eyes. Yes, you as needed to protect your eyes. Yes, you as needed to protect your eyes. Yes, you can do this on cloudy days. In fact, can do this on cloudy days. In fact, can do this on cloudy days. In fact, it's more important to do on cloudy days it's more important to do on cloudy days it's more important to do on cloudy days because cloudy days tend to be dimmer because cloudy days tend to be dimmer because cloudy days tend to be dimmer overall. And this is a unique overall. And this is a unique overall. And this is a unique opportunity to boost your cortisol opportunity to boost your cortisol opportunity to boost your cortisol levels in that first hour of the day. If levels in that first hour of the day. If levels in that first hour of the day. If you don't have access to sunlight for you don't have access to sunlight for you don't have access to sunlight for whatever reason, travel, you live in a whatever reason, travel, you live in a whatever reason, travel, you live in a cave, time of year, weather, whatever, cave, time of year, weather, whatever, cave, time of year, weather, whatever, you could use a 10,000 lux artificial you could use a 10,000 lux artificial you could use a 10,000 lux artificial light. These are available online for light. These are available online for light. These are available online for usually about $100 or so. These are very usually about $100 or so. These are very usually about $100 or so. These are very useful tools. Some of them are portable. useful tools. Some of them are portable. useful tools. Some of them are portable. If you're going to do that, I still If you're going to do that, I still If you're going to do that, I still highly recommend that you get outside highly recommend that you get outside highly recommend that you get outside and get some sunlight in your eyes as and get some sunlight in your eyes as and get some sunlight in your eyes as soon as you can once the sun is out. But soon as you can once the sun is out. But soon as you can once the sun is out. But for you very early risers that wake up for you very early risers that wake up for you very early risers that wake up before the sun is out, this is so before the sun is out, this is so before the sun is out, this is so key. And I know I've been talking about key. And I know I've been talking about key. And I know I've been talking about this for years on this podcast and this for years on this podcast and this for years on this podcast and elsewhere and I know I've just been, you elsewhere and I know I've just been, you elsewhere and I know I've just been, you know, hitting this like a, you know, hitting this like a, you know, hitting this like a, you know, banging on the same drum over and know, banging on the same drum over and know, banging on the same drum over and over again, but that additional surge in over again, but that additional surge in over again, but that additional surge in cortisol that can occur only in that cortisol that can occur only in that cortisol that can occur only in that first one to say two or three hours of first one to say two or three hours of first one to say two or three hours of the day, that's a very special time the day, that's a very special time the day, that's a very special time because it's not just about the elevated because it's not just about the elevated because it's not just about the elevated mood, focus, and alertness that you're mood, focus, and alertness that you're mood, focus, and alertness that you're going to achieve during that time by going to achieve during that time by going to achieve during that time by virtue of getting bright light in your virtue of getting bright light in your virtue of getting bright light in your eyes. It's also the case and please hear eyes. It's also the case and please hear eyes. It's also the case and please hear this. I want to highlight bold underline this. I want to highlight bold underline this. I want to highlight bold underline this for you. It's also the case that this for you. It's also the case that this for you. It's also the case that the higher that first peak in cortisol the higher that first peak in cortisol the higher that first peak in cortisol is early in the day, the better you're is early in the day, the better you're is early in the day, the better you're setting yourself up for low levels of setting yourself up for low levels of setting yourself up for low levels of cortisol later in the evening and at cortisol later in the evening and at cortisol later in the evening and at night, which will allow you to fall night, which will allow you to fall night, which will allow you to fall asleep easily, to stay asleep easily. asleep easily, to stay asleep easily. asleep easily, to stay asleep easily. And now you know why. The reason why is And now you know why. The reason why is And now you know why. The reason why is that negative feedback regulation of that negative feedback regulation of that negative feedback regulation of cortisol. Think about it. If cortisol cortisol. Think about it. If cortisol cortisol. Think about it. If cortisol gets too high, the system shuts down the gets too high, the system shuts down the gets too high, the system shuts down the release of more cortisol. And what release of more cortisol. And what release of more cortisol. And what you've done by viewing bright light as you've done by viewing bright light as you've done by viewing bright light as soon as possible after waking is to soon as possible after waking is to soon as possible after waking is to amplify your levels of cortisol which amplify your levels of cortisol which amplify your levels of cortisol which then are going to trigger that negative then are going to trigger that negative then are going to trigger that negative feedback loop and going to cause feedback loop and going to cause feedback loop and going to cause cortisol to gradually decline from the cortisol to gradually decline from the cortisol to gradually decline from the late morning perhaps starting around late morning perhaps starting around late morning perhaps starting around 10:00 a.m. 11 noon depending on when you 10:00 a.m. 11 noon depending on when you 10:00 a.m. 11 noon depending on when you woke up of course dropping woke up of course dropping woke up of course dropping into the afternoon. So you have dropping into the afternoon. So you have dropping into the afternoon. So you have plenty of energy into your early plenty of energy into your early plenty of energy into your early afternoon, late afternoon, but by afternoon, late afternoon, but by afternoon, late afternoon, but by evening and nighttime, your cortisol evening and nighttime, your cortisol evening and nighttime, your cortisol levels are low. I'd like to take a quick levels are low. I'd like to take a quick levels are low. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and that also includes prebiotics and that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As somebody who's been adaptogens. As somebody who's been adaptogens. As somebody who's been involved in research science for almost involved in research science for almost involved in research science for almost three decades and in health and fitness three decades and in health and fitness three decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly for equally as long, I'm constantly for equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my looking for the best tools to improve my looking for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in performance. I discovered AG1 back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it everyday since. and I've been taking it everyday since. and I've been taking it everyday since. I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my I find it improves all aspects of my health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I health, my energy, my focus, and I simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. simply feel much better when I take it. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're in the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, without increasing the cost. In fact, AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula AG1 just launched their latest formula upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based upgrade. This nextgen formula is based on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically it now includes several clinically studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to studied probiotic strains shown to support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune support both digestive health and immune system health as well as to improve system health as well as to improve system health as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just Whenever I'm asked if I could take just one supplement what that supplement one supplement what that supplement one supplement what that supplement would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd would be, I always say AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this K2. As I've highlighted before on this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to everything from mood and brain health to heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status heart health to healthy hormone status and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink ag.com/huberman to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 to get a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by David. episode is also brought to us by David. episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 gram of protein, only other. It has 28 gram of protein, only other. It has 28 gram of protein, only 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from protein. This of its calories come from protein. This of its calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest is 50% higher than the next closest is 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also protein bar. David protein bars also protein bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is taste amazing. Even the texture is taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the amazing. My favorite bar is the amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough, but then chocolate chip cookie dough, but then chocolate chip cookie dough, but then again, I also like the new chocolate again, I also like the new chocolate again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all brownie flavored. Basically, I like all brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all the flavors a lot. They're all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times to eat on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, per day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it the calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of one gram easy to hit my protein goals of one gram easy to hit my protein goals of one gram of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per of protein per pound of body weight per day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack and I always keep one with me when snack and I always keep one with me when snack and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. I'm out of the house or traveling. I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Now, we're going to talk about some Now, we're going to talk about some Now, we're going to talk about some other things that you can do to boost other things that you can do to boost other things that you can do to boost your morning cortisol in a meaningful your morning cortisol in a meaningful your morning cortisol in a meaningful way. However, before I do that, I have way. However, before I do that, I have way. However, before I do that, I have to say that this viewing morning to say that this viewing morning to say that this viewing morning sunlight thing or bright light from a sunlight thing or bright light from a sunlight thing or bright light from a 10,000 lux artificial source, the 10,000 lux artificial source, the 10,000 lux artificial source, the increase in cortisol that it provides increase in cortisol that it provides increase in cortisol that it provides and therefore the increase in energy and therefore the increase in energy and therefore the increase in energy and mood and focus, etc. is very mood and focus, etc. is very mood and focus, etc. is very significant. It's been shown to quickly significant. It's been shown to quickly significant. It's been shown to quickly increase cortisol levels by up to 50%, increase cortisol levels by up to 50%, increase cortisol levels by up to 50%, 50%. And in fact, it's clinically And in fact, it's clinically And in fact, it's clinically significant. People who live in areas of significant. People who live in areas of significant. People who live in areas of the world where during winter there's the world where during winter there's the world where during winter there's very little availability of sunlight and very little availability of sunlight and very little availability of sunlight and just rely on artificial indoor lights just rely on artificial indoor lights just rely on artificial indoor lights often suffer from what's called seasonal often suffer from what's called seasonal often suffer from what's called seasonal effective disorder. The protocol I just effective disorder. The protocol I just effective disorder. The protocol I just described is exactly the same protocol described is exactly the same protocol described is exactly the same protocol that they have used successfully to that they have used successfully to that they have used successfully to offset seasonal depression. Now, I offset seasonal depression. Now, I offset seasonal depression. Now, I realize that most of you listening to realize that most of you listening to realize that most of you listening to this don't live in areas of the world this don't live in areas of the world this don't live in areas of the world too close to the poles. So, no doubt you too close to the poles. So, no doubt you too close to the poles. So, no doubt you get more sunlight available to you get more sunlight available to you get more sunlight available to you during the winter than you do if you during the winter than you do if you during the winter than you do if you were to say live in Scandinavia or down were to say live in Scandinavia or down were to say live in Scandinavia or down at the South Pole. However, these days, at the South Pole. However, these days, at the South Pole. However, these days, most people are not taking advantage of most people are not taking advantage of most people are not taking advantage of those early hours of the day to get those early hours of the day to get those early hours of the day to get outside and get bright light from outside and get bright light from outside and get bright light from sunlight or from a 10,000 lux artificial sunlight or from a 10,000 lux artificial sunlight or from a 10,000 lux artificial source. In fact, most people just look source. In fact, most people just look source. In fact, most people just look at their phone or flip on a few indoor at their phone or flip on a few indoor at their phone or flip on a few indoor artificial lights. And that is not going artificial lights. And that is not going artificial lights. And that is not going to be sufficient to boost your cortisol to be sufficient to boost your cortisol to be sufficient to boost your cortisol levels the way you need to in order to levels the way you need to in order to levels the way you need to in order to achieve the kind of elevation in mood achieve the kind of elevation in mood achieve the kind of elevation in mood focus and alertness. And that can offset focus and alertness. And that can offset focus and alertness. And that can offset things like not just seasonal depression things like not just seasonal depression things like not just seasonal depression but mild depression, malaise, lack of but mild depression, malaise, lack of but mild depression, malaise, lack of daytime energy and on and on. So this daytime energy and on and on. So this daytime energy and on and on. So this thing about viewing bright light early thing about viewing bright light early thing about viewing bright light early in the morning, it's a real thing from in the morning, it's a real thing from in the morning, it's a real thing from the standpoint of the mechanism is the standpoint of the mechanism is the standpoint of the mechanism is understood, the ideal timing is understood, the ideal timing is understood, the ideal timing is understood, the magnitude of the impact understood, the magnitude of the impact understood, the magnitude of the impact on cortisol is very significant. These on cortisol is very significant. These on cortisol is very significant. These are big effects and it's clinically are big effects and it's clinically are big effects and it's clinically significant with respect to mood. significant with respect to mood. significant with respect to mood. Meaning you're going to feel more Meaning you're going to feel more Meaning you're going to feel more energized. You're going to feel better. energized. You're going to feel better. energized. You're going to feel better. Okay. So now that you understand that Okay. So now that you understand that Okay. So now that you understand that getting your cortisol high upon waking getting your cortisol high upon waking getting your cortisol high upon waking is the right thing to do. This is what is the right thing to do. This is what is the right thing to do. This is what you want. Let's talk about some of the you want. Let's talk about some of the you want. Let's talk about some of the other things you can do besides viewing other things you can do besides viewing other things you can do besides viewing bright light in order to increase your bright light in order to increase your bright light in order to increase your morning cortisol. But keep in the back morning cortisol. But keep in the back morning cortisol. But keep in the back of your mind that viewing bright light of your mind that viewing bright light of your mind that viewing bright light is the foundation. Okay. So, you wake up is the foundation. Okay. So, you wake up is the foundation. Okay. So, you wake up in the morning and as quickly as you in the morning and as quickly as you in the morning and as quickly as you can, you get bright light into your can, you get bright light into your can, you get bright light into your eyes. What else should you do to boost eyes. What else should you do to boost eyes. What else should you do to boost your cortisol? Well, there are a number your cortisol? Well, there are a number your cortisol? Well, there are a number of things that you can do and that you of things that you can do and that you of things that you can do and that you should do every single day. Most of them should do every single day. Most of them should do every single day. Most of them are pretty easy and many of them can be are pretty easy and many of them can be are pretty easy and many of them can be combined. One of those is hydration. Now combined. One of those is hydration. Now combined. One of those is hydration. Now of all the protocols in the realm of all the protocols in the realm of all the protocols in the realm of mental health, physical health and mental health, physical health and mental health, physical health and performance, I think the most underrated performance, I think the most underrated performance, I think the most underrated one, believe it or not, is hydration. one, believe it or not, is hydration. one, believe it or not, is hydration. When you look at the literature on When you look at the literature on When you look at the literature on hydration and the effects of even mild hydration and the effects of even mild hydration and the effects of even mild dehydration, what you find is that dehydration, what you find is that dehydration, what you find is that cognitive function, physical function, cognitive function, physical function, cognitive function, physical function, basically cellular function, and organ basically cellular function, and organ basically cellular function, and organ function generally all suffer when function generally all suffer when function generally all suffer when you're even mildly dehydrated. So it's you're even mildly dehydrated. So it's you're even mildly dehydrated. So it's very important that you hydrate first very important that you hydrate first very important that you hydrate first thing in the morning. For me, that's 16 thing in the morning. For me, that's 16 thing in the morning. For me, that's 16 to 32 ounces of water with some to 32 ounces of water with some to 32 ounces of water with some electrolytes in it. For you, it might electrolytes in it. For you, it might electrolytes in it. For you, it might just be water, whatever. The interesting just be water, whatever. The interesting just be water, whatever. The interesting thing is that one of the major effects thing is that one of the major effects thing is that one of the major effects of proper hydration is to increase of proper hydration is to increase of proper hydration is to increase levels of alertness. And the way it does levels of alertness. And the way it does levels of alertness. And the way it does it is by acting on the adrenals, both it is by acting on the adrenals, both it is by acting on the adrenals, both epinephrine, adrenaline, and cortisol epinephrine, adrenaline, and cortisol epinephrine, adrenaline, and cortisol release. And we're not talking about big release. And we're not talking about big release. And we're not talking about big spikes in cortisol related to drinking spikes in cortisol related to drinking spikes in cortisol related to drinking water. We're talking about modest water. We're talking about modest water. We're talking about modest increases in the levels of pulsatile, as increases in the levels of pulsatile, as increases in the levels of pulsatile, as it's called, release of cortisol due to it's called, release of cortisol due to it's called, release of cortisol due to hydration. So hydrating first thing in hydration. So hydrating first thing in hydration. So hydrating first thing in the morning, also a terrific idea. You the morning, also a terrific idea. You the morning, also a terrific idea. You can do this while you get your bright can do this while you get your bright can do this while you get your bright light outside or while you get your light outside or while you get your light outside or while you get your bright light from a 10,000 lux bright light from a 10,000 lux bright light from a 10,000 lux artificial source. Hydrate first thing artificial source. Hydrate first thing artificial source. Hydrate first thing in the morning. It's going to increase in the morning. It's going to increase in the morning. It's going to increase your levels of energy then and your levels of energy then and your levels of energy then and throughout the morning and into the throughout the morning and into the throughout the morning and into the afternoon. Again, highly underrated afternoon. Again, highly underrated afternoon. Again, highly underrated protocol in part because it takes a lot protocol in part because it takes a lot protocol in part because it takes a lot a lot of dehydration before we realize a lot of dehydration before we realize a lot of dehydration before we realize that we're dehydrated. When you wake up that we're dehydrated. When you wake up that we're dehydrated. When you wake up in the morning, you use the restroom, in the morning, you use the restroom, in the morning, you use the restroom, you're probably mildly dehydrated. Get you're probably mildly dehydrated. Get you're probably mildly dehydrated. Get yourself hydrated first thing in the yourself hydrated first thing in the yourself hydrated first thing in the morning. Your cortisol levels will thank morning. Your cortisol levels will thank morning. Your cortisol levels will thank you. your levels of energy will thank you. your levels of energy will thank you. your levels of energy will thank you. Now, if you're like me, you also you. Now, if you're like me, you also you. Now, if you're like me, you also hydrate with caffeine. Okay? Now, the hydrate with caffeine. Okay? Now, the hydrate with caffeine. Okay? Now, the discussion around caffeine and cortisol discussion around caffeine and cortisol discussion around caffeine and cortisol can be a little bit confused by the sort can be a little bit confused by the sort can be a little bit confused by the sort of discrepancies in the literature as to of discrepancies in the literature as to of discrepancies in the literature as to yes, caffeine increases cortisol, or yes, caffeine increases cortisol, or yes, caffeine increases cortisol, or some studies that show no, caffeine some studies that show no, caffeine some studies that show no, caffeine doesn't increase cortisol, but it might doesn't increase cortisol, but it might doesn't increase cortisol, but it might extend the life of cortisol. Here's the extend the life of cortisol. Here's the extend the life of cortisol. Here's the big picture on caffeine and cortisol, at big picture on caffeine and cortisol, at big picture on caffeine and cortisol, at least the meaningful one. If you're a least the meaningful one. If you're a least the meaningful one. If you're a chronic caffeine user, meaning you drink chronic caffeine user, meaning you drink chronic caffeine user, meaning you drink caffeine every day or you've consumed caffeine every day or you've consumed caffeine every day or you've consumed caffeine every day for the previous five caffeine every day for the previous five caffeine every day for the previous five days, which is the typical framework in days, which is the typical framework in days, which is the typical framework in one of these studies, and then you drink one of these studies, and then you drink one of these studies, and then you drink caffeine, 100 milligrams, 200 caffeine, 100 milligrams, 200 caffeine, 100 milligrams, 200 milligrams, 300 milligrams, even an milligrams, 300 milligrams, even an milligrams, 300 milligrams, even an energy drink that includes caffeine and energy drink that includes caffeine and energy drink that includes caffeine and some other things, the increase in some other things, the increase in some other things, the increase in cortisol that you're going to experience cortisol that you're going to experience cortisol that you're going to experience is probably not that significant unless is probably not that significant unless is probably not that significant unless it's a massively elevated dose of it's a massively elevated dose of it's a massively elevated dose of caffeine for you. However, if you're caffeine for you. However, if you're caffeine for you. However, if you're somebody who's not caffeine adapted, somebody who's not caffeine adapted, somebody who's not caffeine adapted, you're not drinking caffeine every day, you're not drinking caffeine every day, you're not drinking caffeine every day, you haven't had it for the last 5 days, you haven't had it for the last 5 days, you haven't had it for the last 5 days, then yes, you will experience a then yes, you will experience a then yes, you will experience a significant increase in cortisol levels. significant increase in cortisol levels. significant increase in cortisol levels. So, you have to ask yourself, are you a So, you have to ask yourself, are you a So, you have to ask yourself, are you a chronic caffeine user? Are you an chronic caffeine user? Are you an chronic caffeine user? Are you an occasional caffeine user? Or do you not occasional caffeine user? Or do you not occasional caffeine user? Or do you not use caffeine? If you're somebody who use caffeine? If you're somebody who use caffeine? If you're somebody who avoids caffeine because it makes you avoids caffeine because it makes you avoids caffeine because it makes you anxious or you just don't like it, then anxious or you just don't like it, then anxious or you just don't like it, then by all means, don't drink caffeine just by all means, don't drink caffeine just by all means, don't drink caffeine just to spike your cortisol. it will be very to spike your cortisol. it will be very to spike your cortisol. it will be very effective in spiking your cortisol, but effective in spiking your cortisol, but effective in spiking your cortisol, but I can't really encourage you to drink I can't really encourage you to drink I can't really encourage you to drink caffeine if you don't want to. If caffeine if you don't want to. If caffeine if you don't want to. If however, you're somebody who regularly however, you're somebody who regularly however, you're somebody who regularly drinks caffeine, you now know that it's drinks caffeine, you now know that it's drinks caffeine, you now know that it's not going to boost your cortisol levels not going to boost your cortisol levels not going to boost your cortisol levels that much, maybe a little bit depending that much, maybe a little bit depending that much, maybe a little bit depending on how much you drink. If it's a typical on how much you drink. If it's a typical on how much you drink. If it's a typical amount for you, meaning your caffeine amount for you, meaning your caffeine amount for you, meaning your caffeine adapted to that amount of caffeine, adapted to that amount of caffeine, adapted to that amount of caffeine, probably not much cortisol increase will probably not much cortisol increase will probably not much cortisol increase will come from drinking that amount. However, come from drinking that amount. However, come from drinking that amount. However, it will prolong the duration of it will prolong the duration of it will prolong the duration of cortisol's effectiveness in your cortisol's effectiveness in your cortisol's effectiveness in your bloodstream. And this has to do with a bloodstream. And this has to do with a bloodstream. And this has to do with a number of different pathways. But the number of different pathways. But the number of different pathways. But the point being, if you have your caffeine, point being, if you have your caffeine, point being, if you have your caffeine, say 30 minutes after waking or 5 minutes say 30 minutes after waking or 5 minutes say 30 minutes after waking or 5 minutes after waking or 90 minutes after waking, after waking or 90 minutes after waking, after waking or 90 minutes after waking, well, it's probably not going to boost well, it's probably not going to boost well, it's probably not going to boost your cortisol levels that much if you're your cortisol levels that much if you're your cortisol levels that much if you're already viewing bright sunlight, you're already viewing bright sunlight, you're already viewing bright sunlight, you're hydrating. We'll talk about exercise and hydrating. We'll talk about exercise and hydrating. We'll talk about exercise and some other things in a moment. But if some other things in a moment. But if some other things in a moment. But if you're drinking that caffeine shortly you're drinking that caffeine shortly you're drinking that caffeine shortly after waking up or shortly close to when after waking up or shortly close to when after waking up or shortly close to when you get that big cortisol spike, it's you get that big cortisol spike, it's you get that big cortisol spike, it's going to make the downs slope of that going to make the downs slope of that going to make the downs slope of that cortisol spike a bit more gradual. Or if cortisol spike a bit more gradual. Or if cortisol spike a bit more gradual. Or if you're drinking caffeine throughout the you're drinking caffeine throughout the you're drinking caffeine throughout the morning a lot more gradual. So let me morning a lot more gradual. So let me morning a lot more gradual. So let me present two scenarios in which you can present two scenarios in which you can present two scenarios in which you can use caffeine to improve your levels of use caffeine to improve your levels of use caffeine to improve your levels of mood, focus, and alertness by way of the mood, focus, and alertness by way of the mood, focus, and alertness by way of the cortisol pathway. And here I'm only cortisol pathway. And here I'm only cortisol pathway. And here I'm only speaking to people who habitually use speaking to people who habitually use speaking to people who habitually use caffeine. So you're drinking caffeine caffeine. So you're drinking caffeine caffeine. So you're drinking caffeine every morning. The first group is one every morning. The first group is one every morning. The first group is one that I commonly encounter. These are that I commonly encounter. These are that I commonly encounter. These are people that say, "Listen, I don't care people that say, "Listen, I don't care people that say, "Listen, I don't care what I hear out there. I want my coffee what I hear out there. I want my coffee what I hear out there. I want my coffee or I want my yerba mate, which is my or I want my yerba mate, which is my or I want my yerba mate, which is my preferred source of caffeine, first preferred source of caffeine, first preferred source of caffeine, first thing in the morning, right? Ideally, thing in the morning, right? Ideally, thing in the morning, right? Ideally, even before water." Well, there I'd say even before water." Well, there I'd say even before water." Well, there I'd say please drink water first, but even if please drink water first, but even if please drink water first, but even if you're not going to, sure, go ahead and you're not going to, sure, go ahead and you're not going to, sure, go ahead and drink your caffeine. Drink that drink your caffeine. Drink that drink your caffeine. Drink that caffeine. It's not going to boost your caffeine. It's not going to boost your caffeine. It's not going to boost your cortisol that much. But make sure you're cortisol that much. But make sure you're cortisol that much. But make sure you're doing a bunch of other things. Bright doing a bunch of other things. Bright doing a bunch of other things. Bright light viewing, we'll talk about exercise light viewing, we'll talk about exercise light viewing, we'll talk about exercise in a moment, etc. in a moment, etc. in a moment, etc. do a bunch of other things to make sure do a bunch of other things to make sure do a bunch of other things to make sure that morning cortisol spike is really, that morning cortisol spike is really, that morning cortisol spike is really, really high because that's what you really high because that's what you really high because that's what you want. Now, there's a second group of want. Now, there's a second group of want. Now, there's a second group of people that say, "Hey, I want my people that say, "Hey, I want my people that say, "Hey, I want my caffeine first thing in the morning, or caffeine first thing in the morning, or caffeine first thing in the morning, or I'm drinking my caffeine first thing in I'm drinking my caffeine first thing in I'm drinking my caffeine first thing in the morning, but then I'm crashing the morning, but then I'm crashing the morning, but then I'm crashing really hard in the late morning, really hard in the late morning, really hard in the late morning, crashing really hard in the afternoon, crashing really hard in the afternoon, crashing really hard in the afternoon, and it's not because I'm not sleeping and it's not because I'm not sleeping and it's not because I'm not sleeping well at night." Like, something's well at night." Like, something's well at night." Like, something's happening. This is where the happening. This is where the happening. This is where the recommendation that I've been making for recommendation that I've been making for recommendation that I've been making for some years now of delaying your caffeine some years now of delaying your caffeine some years now of delaying your caffeine by anywhere from 60 to 90 minutes comes by anywhere from 60 to 90 minutes comes by anywhere from 60 to 90 minutes comes about. You now know that caffeine for a about. You now know that caffeine for a about. You now know that caffeine for a habitual user is not going to increase habitual user is not going to increase habitual user is not going to increase your cortisol levels that much. However, your cortisol levels that much. However, your cortisol levels that much. However, you also now know that drinking caffeine you also now know that drinking caffeine you also now know that drinking caffeine will extend the life of cortisol will extend the life of cortisol will extend the life of cortisol somewhat. So the logic here is if you somewhat. So the logic here is if you somewhat. So the logic here is if you drink your caffeine not immediately drink your caffeine not immediately drink your caffeine not immediately after waking but let's say an hour after waking but let's say an hour after waking but let's say an hour after waking or 90 minutes after waking, it's waking or 90 minutes after waking, it's waking or 90 minutes after waking, it's going to flatten out a bit the downs going to flatten out a bit the downs going to flatten out a bit the downs slope of that cortisol as you transition slope of that cortisol as you transition slope of that cortisol as you transition from late morning into the early from late morning into the early from late morning into the early afternoon. A lot of reason why people crash in the A lot of reason why people crash in the A lot of reason why people crash in the afternoon. They get that extreme fatigue afternoon. They get that extreme fatigue afternoon. They get that extreme fatigue typically after lunch. Yes, it can be typically after lunch. Yes, it can be typically after lunch. Yes, it can be due to eating too much at lunch. Yes, it due to eating too much at lunch. Yes, it due to eating too much at lunch. Yes, it can be due to eating too many starchy can be due to eating too many starchy can be due to eating too many starchy carbohydrates or sugars at lunch. It can carbohydrates or sugars at lunch. It can carbohydrates or sugars at lunch. It can be due to lack of sleep. But assuming be due to lack of sleep. But assuming be due to lack of sleep. But assuming that you're doing all the things right that you're doing all the things right that you're doing all the things right and you're still experiencing that crash and you're still experiencing that crash and you're still experiencing that crash in the afternoon, there's a good chance in the afternoon, there's a good chance in the afternoon, there's a good chance that it's because your morning cortisol that it's because your morning cortisol that it's because your morning cortisol peak, high enough or no, is coming down peak, high enough or no, is coming down peak, high enough or no, is coming down too fast. And in order to make it more too fast. And in order to make it more too fast. And in order to make it more gradual, you simply shift your caffeine gradual, you simply shift your caffeine gradual, you simply shift your caffeine intake a little bit later. So that intake a little bit later. So that intake a little bit later. So that diminishing caffeine level that it diminishing caffeine level that it diminishing caffeine level that it starts to occur around 10:00 a.m. 11:00 starts to occur around 10:00 a.m. 11:00 starts to occur around 10:00 a.m. 11:00 a.m. Of course, all of this relates to a.m. Of course, all of this relates to a.m. Of course, all of this relates to exactly when you wake up, but that exactly when you wake up, but that exactly when you wake up, but that dropping level in caffeine isn't a steep dropping level in caffeine isn't a steep dropping level in caffeine isn't a steep cliff. It's a little bit more gradual. cliff. It's a little bit more gradual. cliff. It's a little bit more gradual. And I can't tell you how many thousands And I can't tell you how many thousands And I can't tell you how many thousands of people have contacted me and said, of people have contacted me and said, of people have contacted me and said, "Oh my goodness, I can't believe it." "Oh my goodness, I can't believe it." "Oh my goodness, I can't believe it." Simply by pushing out my caffeine intake Simply by pushing out my caffeine intake Simply by pushing out my caffeine intake by 60 minutes or even 30 minutes or in by 60 minutes or even 30 minutes or in by 60 minutes or even 30 minutes or in some cases 90 minutes after waking, I've some cases 90 minutes after waking, I've some cases 90 minutes after waking, I've been able to not experience that crash been able to not experience that crash been able to not experience that crash in energy in the afternoon. And they in energy in the afternoon. And they in energy in the afternoon. And they generally thank me for this. Indeed, generally thank me for this. Indeed, generally thank me for this. Indeed, most all of them are writing to me to most all of them are writing to me to most all of them are writing to me to thank me for this. For those of you that thank me for this. For those of you that thank me for this. For those of you that absolutely love your caffeine first absolutely love your caffeine first absolutely love your caffeine first thing in the morning, you want your thing in the morning, you want your thing in the morning, you want your caffeine first thing in the morning and caffeine first thing in the morning and caffeine first thing in the morning and you just refuse to delay it. Fine. I you just refuse to delay it. Fine. I you just refuse to delay it. Fine. I never ever said that you couldn't do never ever said that you couldn't do never ever said that you couldn't do that. In fact, you can do whatever you that. In fact, you can do whatever you that. In fact, you can do whatever you want. I'm simply giving you an want. I'm simply giving you an want. I'm simply giving you an opportunity to extend the life of that opportunity to extend the life of that opportunity to extend the life of that morning cortisol pulse. Caffeine is a morning cortisol pulse. Caffeine is a morning cortisol pulse. Caffeine is a great way to do that. And for those of great way to do that. And for those of great way to do that. And for those of you that don't consume caffeine you that don't consume caffeine you that don't consume caffeine regularly, but like to use it as an regularly, but like to use it as an regularly, but like to use it as an occasional tool, like if you need to occasional tool, like if you need to occasional tool, like if you need to stay up late, for instance, or, you stay up late, for instance, or, you stay up late, for instance, or, you know, only under conditions in which you know, only under conditions in which you know, only under conditions in which you really, really need to wake up quickly. really, really need to wake up quickly. really, really need to wake up quickly. Well, in that case, it's actually going Well, in that case, it's actually going Well, in that case, it's actually going to be a pretty terrific tool because you to be a pretty terrific tool because you to be a pretty terrific tool because you will indeed achieve a big increase in will indeed achieve a big increase in will indeed achieve a big increase in cortisol, energy, and alertness, which cortisol, energy, and alertness, which cortisol, energy, and alertness, which for the rest of us habitual caffeine for the rest of us habitual caffeine for the rest of us habitual caffeine users, you're seeking every day. We're users, you're seeking every day. We're users, you're seeking every day. We're drinking our caffeine and it's harder drinking our caffeine and it's harder drinking our caffeine and it's harder and harder to get. That's just the and harder to get. That's just the and harder to get. That's just the nature of caffeine tolerance. Okay, nature of caffeine tolerance. Okay, nature of caffeine tolerance. Okay, let's talk about exercise and its let's talk about exercise and its let's talk about exercise and its effects on cortisol. In many ways, effects on cortisol. In many ways, effects on cortisol. In many ways, exercise's effects on cortisol are exercise's effects on cortisol are exercise's effects on cortisol are similar to those of caffeine. And I say similar to those of caffeine. And I say similar to those of caffeine. And I say that because it really depends on how that because it really depends on how that because it really depends on how regularly you perform a particular type regularly you perform a particular type regularly you perform a particular type of exercise. Now, studies of the effects of exercise. Now, studies of the effects of exercise. Now, studies of the effects of exercise on cortisol are complicated of exercise on cortisol are complicated of exercise on cortisol are complicated by the fact that sometimes they looked by the fact that sometimes they looked by the fact that sometimes they looked at people who are regular exercisers. at people who are regular exercisers. at people who are regular exercisers. Let's say they were runners. They look Let's say they were runners. They look Let's say they were runners. They look at the effects of running on cortisol or at the effects of running on cortisol or at the effects of running on cortisol or they were resistance trainers. Okay? So they were resistance trainers. Okay? So they were resistance trainers. Okay? So they do weightlifting they do weightlifting they do weightlifting and then they look at the effects of and then they look at the effects of and then they look at the effects of weightlifting on cortisol. They look weightlifting on cortisol. They look weightlifting on cortisol. They look before, during and after this kind of before, during and after this kind of before, during and after this kind of thing. They look as a function of thing. They look as a function of thing. They look as a function of frequency of training. All of that's frequency of training. All of that's frequency of training. All of that's been done. However, some labs have also been done. However, some labs have also been done. However, some labs have also explored the effects of say runners who explored the effects of say runners who explored the effects of say runners who take up resistance training or people take up resistance training or people take up resistance training or people who are non-ex exercisers who suddenly who are non-ex exercisers who suddenly who are non-ex exercisers who suddenly start resistance training or running. start resistance training or running. start resistance training or running. When I looked at all of that literature, When I looked at all of that literature, When I looked at all of that literature, you come away with a picture where just you come away with a picture where just you come away with a picture where just like with caffeine, if you are like with caffeine, if you are like with caffeine, if you are accustomed to exercising in a particular accustomed to exercising in a particular accustomed to exercising in a particular way and at a particular time of day, way and at a particular time of day, way and at a particular time of day, the elevation in cortisol that you the elevation in cortisol that you the elevation in cortisol that you experience from that workout is going to experience from that workout is going to experience from that workout is going to be less than if it's a completely novel be less than if it's a completely novel be less than if it's a completely novel scenario, both in terms of time and the scenario, both in terms of time and the scenario, both in terms of time and the type of workout. In other words, if type of workout. In other words, if type of workout. In other words, if you're like me and you like to exercise you're like me and you like to exercise you're like me and you like to exercise within the first three hours of the day within the first three hours of the day within the first three hours of the day and you exercise in the first three and you exercise in the first three and you exercise in the first three hours of the day, doing either hours of the day, doing either hours of the day, doing either resistance training or cardiovascular resistance training or cardiovascular resistance training or cardiovascular exercise because I'll do both on exercise because I'll do both on exercise because I'll do both on separate days, but I'll do both. Neither separate days, but I'll do both. Neither separate days, but I'll do both. Neither of those is particularly novel to me. of those is particularly novel to me. of those is particularly novel to me. And I do those at the intensity that is And I do those at the intensity that is And I do those at the intensity that is familiar to me, which for me is moderate familiar to me, which for me is moderate familiar to me, which for me is moderate to high intensity. Well, the increase in to high intensity. Well, the increase in to high intensity. Well, the increase in cortisol that one experiences is not cortisol that one experiences is not cortisol that one experiences is not that great. You get big increases in that great. You get big increases in that great. You get big increases in other things like the catakolamines, other things like the catakolamines, other things like the catakolamines, dopamine, epinephrine, and dopamine, epinephrine, and dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. And yes, you do get some norepinephrine. And yes, you do get some norepinephrine. And yes, you do get some increase in cortisol in particular in increase in cortisol in particular in increase in cortisol in particular in the late stages, meaning late in the late stages, meaning late in the late stages, meaning late in the first hour of exercise. Typically, my first hour of exercise. Typically, my first hour of exercise. Typically, my resistance training sessions don't span resistance training sessions don't span resistance training sessions don't span longer than 90 minutes. That includes longer than 90 minutes. That includes longer than 90 minutes. That includes the warm-up and the cool down. So, after the warm-up and the cool down. So, after the warm-up and the cool down. So, after about 70 minutes of resistance training about 70 minutes of resistance training about 70 minutes of resistance training with real effort, close to failure or to with real effort, close to failure or to with real effort, close to failure or to failure, you know, this kind of thing, failure, you know, this kind of thing, failure, you know, this kind of thing, cortisol levels are way up and they'll cortisol levels are way up and they'll cortisol levels are way up and they'll stay up for a short while, meaning an stay up for a short while, meaning an stay up for a short while, meaning an hour or so after exercise, and then hour or so after exercise, and then hour or so after exercise, and then they'll come back down, especially if they'll come back down, especially if they'll come back down, especially if you're doing things to deliberately you're doing things to deliberately you're doing things to deliberately bring them down, including eating a meal bring them down, including eating a meal bring them down, including eating a meal laden with carbohydrates will which will laden with carbohydrates will which will laden with carbohydrates will which will help bring those uh cortisol levels help bring those uh cortisol levels help bring those uh cortisol levels down. But if for instance somebody who's down. But if for instance somebody who's down. But if for instance somebody who's never resistance trained or who's never resistance trained or who's never resistance trained or who's primarily an endurance athlete starts primarily an endurance athlete starts primarily an endurance athlete starts resistance training in that way, the resistance training in that way, the resistance training in that way, the literature points to the fact that they literature points to the fact that they literature points to the fact that they will experience much higher cortisol will experience much higher cortisol will experience much higher cortisol levels and those cortisol levels will be levels and those cortisol levels will be levels and those cortisol levels will be sustained over many more hours. The same sustained over many more hours. The same sustained over many more hours. The same thing could be said for endurance thing could be said for endurance thing could be said for endurance exercise or for high-intensity interval exercise or for high-intensity interval exercise or for high-intensity interval training. I don't want to complicate training. I don't want to complicate training. I don't want to complicate things too much by spelling out each of things too much by spelling out each of things too much by spelling out each of the different scenarios. I will provide the different scenarios. I will provide the different scenarios. I will provide a link to what I consider a really nice a link to what I consider a really nice a link to what I consider a really nice paper. It's just one of the several paper. It's just one of the several paper. It's just one of the several pointing to this, but the title of the pointing to this, but the title of the pointing to this, but the title of the paper is endocrine responses of the paper is endocrine responses of the paper is endocrine responses of the stress system to different types of stress system to different types of stress system to different types of exercise. And they looked at single bout exercise. And they looked at single bout exercise. And they looked at single bout endurance, regular endurance, single endurance, regular endurance, single endurance, regular endurance, single bout highintensity bout highintensity bout highintensity exercise, regular high-intensity exercise, regular high-intensity exercise, regular high-intensity exercise, single bout resistance, exercise, single bout resistance, exercise, single bout resistance, regular resistance. So they went through regular resistance. So they went through regular resistance. So they went through not all but many of the permutations not all but many of the permutations not all but many of the permutations that are possible and spell out what are that are possible and spell out what are that are possible and spell out what are the effects on cortisol, what are the effects on cortisol, what are the effects on cortisol, what are the effects on the catakolamines, effects on the catakolamines, effects on the catakolamines, norepinephrine and epinephrine in this norepinephrine and epinephrine in this norepinephrine and epinephrine in this case, what are the effects on case, what are the effects on case, what are the effects on inflammatory cytoines? We sometimes inflammatory cytoines? We sometimes inflammatory cytoines? We sometimes forget this, but inflammatory cytoines forget this, but inflammatory cytoines forget this, but inflammatory cytoines are a healthy byproduct of exercise are a healthy byproduct of exercise are a healthy byproduct of exercise because those trigger the adaptations in because those trigger the adaptations in because those trigger the adaptations in your immune system and other tissues to your immune system and other tissues to your immune system and other tissues to adapt to get stronger, including your adapt to get stronger, including your adapt to get stronger, including your immune system. And they also looked at immune system. And they also looked at immune system. And they also looked at growth hormone. It was kind of growth hormone. It was kind of growth hormone. It was kind of interesting because where you find big interesting because where you find big interesting because where you find big increases in cortisol, you also see big increases in cortisol, you also see big increases in cortisol, you also see big increases in growth hormone in response increases in growth hormone in response increases in growth hormone in response to exercise. meaning when the exercise to exercise. meaning when the exercise to exercise. meaning when the exercise is novel either because it's a new form is novel either because it's a new form is novel either because it's a new form of exercise or because the intensity is of exercise or because the intensity is of exercise or because the intensity is novel. So we can take a step back and novel. So we can take a step back and novel. So we can take a step back and say with certainty exercise increases say with certainty exercise increases say with certainty exercise increases cortisol. However, if the form of cortisol. However, if the form of cortisol. However, if the form of exercise and the timing is very familiar exercise and the timing is very familiar exercise and the timing is very familiar to you, the amount of cortisol and in to you, the amount of cortisol and in to you, the amount of cortisol and in particular the duration of cortisol particular the duration of cortisol particular the duration of cortisol increase is not going to be that increase is not going to be that increase is not going to be that significant as compared to if it's a significant as compared to if it's a significant as compared to if it's a completely novel form or timing of completely novel form or timing of completely novel form or timing of exercise. now is the increase in exercise. now is the increase in exercise. now is the increase in cortisol that's achieved with your let's cortisol that's achieved with your let's cortisol that's achieved with your let's call them your regular workouts, right? call them your regular workouts, right? call them your regular workouts, right? Typically, if you run or you lift Typically, if you run or you lift Typically, if you run or you lift weights or you do some sort of interval weights or you do some sort of interval weights or you do some sort of interval training, if you're doing any number or training, if you're doing any number or training, if you're doing any number or just one of those things, is the amount just one of those things, is the amount just one of those things, is the amount of cortisol increase that you experience of cortisol increase that you experience of cortisol increase that you experience going to be significant in terms of going to be significant in terms of going to be significant in terms of helping you anchor that cortisol cycle helping you anchor that cortisol cycle helping you anchor that cortisol cycle so that cortisol is higher in the so that cortisol is higher in the so that cortisol is higher in the morning and lower in the afternoon and morning and lower in the afternoon and morning and lower in the afternoon and evening? The answer is yes. Exercise of evening? The answer is yes. Exercise of evening? The answer is yes. Exercise of a type that's familiar to you, of an a type that's familiar to you, of an a type that's familiar to you, of an intensity that's familiar to you, may intensity that's familiar to you, may intensity that's familiar to you, may not significantly increase your cortisol not significantly increase your cortisol not significantly increase your cortisol levels as compared to a form of exercise levels as compared to a form of exercise levels as compared to a form of exercise that's completely novel. However, that's completely novel. However, that's completely novel. However, exercise provides a very strong what's exercise provides a very strong what's exercise provides a very strong what's called entrainment cue. Entrainment cues called entrainment cue. Entrainment cues called entrainment cue. Entrainment cues are cues of things that we do. These are cues of things that we do. These are cues of things that we do. These could be meals, it could be light could be meals, it could be light could be meals, it could be light exposure, it could be exercise, it could exposure, it could be exercise, it could exposure, it could be exercise, it could be all sorts of things, even social be all sorts of things, even social be all sorts of things, even social engagement that feed back onto the SCN, engagement that feed back onto the SCN, engagement that feed back onto the SCN, the supercaismatic nucleus, and the supercaismatic nucleus, and the supercaismatic nucleus, and reinforce the timing of the cortisol reinforce the timing of the cortisol reinforce the timing of the cortisol release that the SCN causes. So there release that the SCN causes. So there release that the SCN causes. So there are these beautiful interactions between are these beautiful interactions between are these beautiful interactions between exercise, the SCN, and cortisol release exercise, the SCN, and cortisol release exercise, the SCN, and cortisol release that when we exercise at roughly the that when we exercise at roughly the that when we exercise at roughly the same period of time each day, doesn't same period of time each day, doesn't same period of time each day, doesn't have to be right on the minute, but have to be right on the minute, but have to be right on the minute, but within the same two or three hour window within the same two or three hour window within the same two or three hour window each day, and since like most people, each day, and since like most people, each day, and since like most people, you're probably not exercising every you're probably not exercising every you're probably not exercising every single day, perhaps three days a week, single day, perhaps three days a week, single day, perhaps three days a week, four days a week, ideally five or six four days a week, ideally five or six four days a week, ideally five or six days a week. When you do that, pretty days a week. When you do that, pretty days a week. When you do that, pretty soon you get a cortisol increase simply soon you get a cortisol increase simply soon you get a cortisol increase simply in response to the timing rolling around in response to the timing rolling around in response to the timing rolling around in a very Pavlovian way. Even if you in a very Pavlovian way. Even if you in a very Pavlovian way. Even if you don't exercise now, you have to keep don't exercise now, you have to keep don't exercise now, you have to keep exercising to maintain that. But the exercising to maintain that. But the exercising to maintain that. But the key here is that when you exercise in key here is that when you exercise in key here is that when you exercise in the same two to three hour window each the same two to three hour window each the same two to three hour window each day or at least three days a week, day or at least three days a week, day or at least three days a week, ideally four, five, six days per week. I ideally four, five, six days per week. I ideally four, five, six days per week. I do think it's important to have at least do think it's important to have at least do think it's important to have at least one complete rest day. When you do that, one complete rest day. When you do that, one complete rest day. When you do that, that big peak in cortisol that's that big peak in cortisol that's that big peak in cortisol that's endogenously generated by your SCN, endogenously generated by your SCN, endogenously generated by your SCN, that's just internally generated without that's just internally generated without that's just internally generated without doing anything else, it gets anchored to doing anything else, it gets anchored to doing anything else, it gets anchored to that stage of the day in a very solid that stage of the day in a very solid that stage of the day in a very solid way as compared to people who don't way as compared to people who don't way as compared to people who don't exercise early in the day. So the point exercise early in the day. So the point exercise early in the day. So the point here is that you exercise, sure, to here is that you exercise, sure, to here is that you exercise, sure, to increase your cortisol, but probably for increase your cortisol, but probably for increase your cortisol, but probably for a bunch of other reasons more than you a bunch of other reasons more than you a bunch of other reasons more than you do to increase your cortisol. But do to increase your cortisol. But do to increase your cortisol. But getting your cortisol rhythm correct is getting your cortisol rhythm correct is getting your cortisol rhythm correct is absolutely essential. In fact, it's absolutely essential. In fact, it's absolutely essential. In fact, it's going to give you the anticipatory going to give you the anticipatory going to give you the anticipatory energy for exercise. In fact, you can energy for exercise. In fact, you can energy for exercise. In fact, you can try this. It's remarkable. If you try this. It's remarkable. If you try this. It's remarkable. If you exercise at the same time of day for say exercise at the same time of day for say exercise at the same time of day for say four to five, maybe six days per week, four to five, maybe six days per week, four to five, maybe six days per week, you just do that for a week. And it you just do that for a week. And it you just do that for a week. And it doesn't have to be again exactly at the doesn't have to be again exactly at the doesn't have to be again exactly at the same time you start, exactly same time same time you start, exactly same time same time you start, exactly same time you stop, plus or minus 30 minutes. What you stop, plus or minus 30 minutes. What you stop, plus or minus 30 minutes. What you'll find is that in the hour leading you'll find is that in the hour leading you'll find is that in the hour leading into that exercise, you will start to into that exercise, you will start to into that exercise, you will start to experience an increase in energy. And experience an increase in energy. And experience an increase in energy. And it's not just psychological. There's an it's not just psychological. There's an it's not just psychological. There's an anticipatory rise in cortisol that's anticipatory rise in cortisol that's anticipatory rise in cortisol that's governed by the SCEN and this process governed by the SCEN and this process governed by the SCEN and this process that we call entrainment, which is that we call entrainment, which is that we call entrainment, which is anticipation. It's kind of like a anticipation. It's kind of like a anticipation. It's kind of like a Pavlovian response, but it's on a longer Pavlovian response, but it's on a longer Pavlovian response, but it's on a longer time scale. Well, regardless of time scale. Well, regardless of time scale. Well, regardless of time scale, it's a very real thing. So, if scale, it's a very real thing. So, if scale, it's a very real thing. So, if you're somebody who doesn't seem to have you're somebody who doesn't seem to have you're somebody who doesn't seem to have much energy, much get up and go in the much energy, much get up and go in the much energy, much get up and go in the morning, and you're getting your bright morning, and you're getting your bright morning, and you're getting your bright light, you're getting your hydration, light, you're getting your hydration, light, you're getting your hydration, maybe you're even drinking caffeine, maybe you're even drinking caffeine, maybe you're even drinking caffeine, you're doing all of that, and you're doing all of that, and you're doing all of that, and you're still feeling kind of sluggish, still feeling kind of sluggish, still feeling kind of sluggish, exercising for three or four days, not exercising for three or four days, not exercising for three or four days, not necessarily in a row. Feel free to necessarily in a row. Feel free to necessarily in a row. Feel free to introduce a rest day as needed. But introduce a rest day as needed. But introduce a rest day as needed. But doing that across the course of a week, doing that across the course of a week, doing that across the course of a week, for four to six days, will lead you into for four to six days, will lead you into for four to six days, will lead you into a second week, a third week, etc., a second week, a third week, etc., a second week, a third week, etc., provided you keep it up where you're provided you keep it up where you're provided you keep it up where you're going to have more energy heading into going to have more energy heading into going to have more energy heading into the exercise, therefore more energy to the exercise, therefore more energy to the exercise, therefore more energy to exercise and it's just going to be a exercise and it's just going to be a exercise and it's just going to be a positive feedback loop on your cortisol positive feedback loop on your cortisol positive feedback loop on your cortisol levels. This is a very robust effect and levels. This is a very robust effect and levels. This is a very robust effect and in fact it's so robust that you can in fact it's so robust that you can in fact it's so robust that you can observe it in mice. You can observe it observe it in mice. You can observe it observe it in mice. You can observe it in dogs. Your dog knows when it's time in dogs. Your dog knows when it's time in dogs. Your dog knows when it's time for a walk even if you don't say walk. for a walk even if you don't say walk. for a walk even if you don't say walk. It has internal endogenous cues that you It has internal endogenous cues that you It has internal endogenous cues that you know between the hours of whatever 7 and know between the hours of whatever 7 and know between the hours of whatever 7 and 9:00 a.m. it's time for a walk and it 9:00 a.m. it's time for a walk and it 9:00 a.m. it's time for a walk and it will start to experience a surge in will start to experience a surge in will start to experience a surge in energy. you are the exact same way. energy. you are the exact same way. energy. you are the exact same way. These are hardwired, These are hardwired, These are hardwired, very longestablished systems in our very longestablished systems in our very longestablished systems in our brain and body. And you can absolutely brain and body. And you can absolutely brain and body. And you can absolutely give yourself more energy to do the give yourself more energy to do the give yourself more energy to do the things that require energy by exercising things that require energy by exercising things that require energy by exercising at roughly the same time. Again, within at roughly the same time. Again, within at roughly the same time. Again, within the same three-hour window is probably the same three-hour window is probably the same three-hour window is probably the broadest, but you know, even better the broadest, but you know, even better the broadest, but you know, even better would be in the same two-hour window would be in the same two-hour window would be in the same two-hour window each day. And if you miss a day, no big each day. And if you miss a day, no big each day. And if you miss a day, no big deal. You'll just have more energy deal. You'll just have more energy deal. You'll just have more energy during that time to devote to other during that time to devote to other during that time to devote to other things. Okay. What about deliberate cold things. Okay. What about deliberate cold things. Okay. What about deliberate cold exposure? Cold showers, cold plunges, exposure? Cold showers, cold plunges, exposure? Cold showers, cold plunges, this kind of thing. You all know that this kind of thing. You all know that this kind of thing. You all know that deliberate cold exposure wakes you up. deliberate cold exposure wakes you up. deliberate cold exposure wakes you up. Okay, despite it being somewhat Okay, despite it being somewhat Okay, despite it being somewhat controversial in other domains like controversial in other domains like controversial in other domains like metabolism, deliberate cold exposure definitely deliberate cold exposure definitely deliberate cold exposure definitely wakes you up and it wakes you up very wakes you up and it wakes you up very wakes you up and it wakes you up very fast. And it does that because it causes fast. And it does that because it causes fast. And it does that because it causes the release of epinephrine and the release of epinephrine and the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine and then you get this norepinephrine and then you get this norepinephrine and then you get this long arc of dopamine release. This is long arc of dopamine release. This is long arc of dopamine release. This is one of the major reasons, if not the one of the major reasons, if not the one of the major reasons, if not the major reason, why people who start major reason, why people who start major reason, why people who start deliberate cold exposure continue to do deliberate cold exposure continue to do deliberate cold exposure continue to do it. Right? If for no other reason, it it. Right? If for no other reason, it it. Right? If for no other reason, it wakes people up, makes them feel good wakes people up, makes them feel good wakes people up, makes them feel good for many hours afterwards. Now, I know for many hours afterwards. Now, I know for many hours afterwards. Now, I know many people are averse to the cold. They many people are averse to the cold. They many people are averse to the cold. They really don't like it. And frankly, if really don't like it. And frankly, if really don't like it. And frankly, if you don't like it, you don't have to do you don't like it, you don't have to do you don't like it, you don't have to do it. But it absolutely causes an increase in But it absolutely causes an increase in But it absolutely causes an increase in the catakolamines, dopamine, the catakolamines, dopamine, the catakolamines, dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. And the epinephrine, and norepinephrine. And the epinephrine, and norepinephrine. And the long-lasting effects on dopamine are long-lasting effects on dopamine are long-lasting effects on dopamine are quite striking. Meaning there are very quite striking. Meaning there are very quite striking. Meaning there are very few other things that can cause that few other things that can cause that few other things that can cause that long slow release of dopamine to the long slow release of dopamine to the long slow release of dopamine to the levels that it does which changes mood levels that it does which changes mood levels that it does which changes mood alertness etc for many hours after. Now alertness etc for many hours after. Now alertness etc for many hours after. Now the big question for sake of this the big question for sake of this the big question for sake of this discussion is does deliberate cold discussion is does deliberate cold discussion is does deliberate cold exposure cause the release of cortisol. exposure cause the release of cortisol. exposure cause the release of cortisol. And just like with exercise, just like And just like with exercise, just like And just like with exercise, just like with caffeine, the real question that we with caffeine, the real question that we with caffeine, the real question that we have to ask ourselves is how novel how have to ask ourselves is how novel how have to ask ourselves is how novel how unfamiliar is that deliberate cold unfamiliar is that deliberate cold unfamiliar is that deliberate cold exposure? Because while the perfect exposure? Because while the perfect exposure? Because while the perfect experiment has never really been done, experiment has never really been done, experiment has never really been done, if you amass the literature on this, if you amass the literature on this, if you amass the literature on this, what you find is that if you put people what you find is that if you put people what you find is that if you put people into very cold water or even just cold into very cold water or even just cold into very cold water or even just cold for them, uncomfortably cold for them, for them, uncomfortably cold for them, for them, uncomfortably cold for them, water, yes, they'll increase more water, yes, they'll increase more water, yes, they'll increase more cortisol. Yes, they'll release cortisol cortisol. Yes, they'll release cortisol cortisol. Yes, they'll release cortisol into their bloodstream. However, if they into their bloodstream. However, if they into their bloodstream. However, if they do this habitually, then the increases do this habitually, then the increases do this habitually, then the increases in cortisol are not meaningful. They're in cortisol are not meaningful. They're in cortisol are not meaningful. They're not statistically significant. So, that not statistically significant. So, that not statistically significant. So, that actually leads to two important actually leads to two important actually leads to two important takeaways. The first one is if you want takeaways. The first one is if you want takeaways. The first one is if you want to use deliberate cold exposure as a way to use deliberate cold exposure as a way to use deliberate cold exposure as a way to increase cortisol, great, do that. to increase cortisol, great, do that. to increase cortisol, great, do that. But probably don't do it more than say But probably don't do it more than say But probably don't do it more than say one or two times per week. Otherwise, it one or two times per week. Otherwise, it one or two times per week. Otherwise, it will lose its effectiveness for that will lose its effectiveness for that will lose its effectiveness for that purpose. It will still be very effective purpose. It will still be very effective purpose. It will still be very effective for all the other reasons that for all the other reasons that for all the other reasons that deliberate cold exposure has been deliberate cold exposure has been deliberate cold exposure has been purported to be effective, including purported to be effective, including purported to be effective, including increased release of catakolamines. So, increased release of catakolamines. So, increased release of catakolamines. So, the takeaway here is very the takeaway here is very the takeaway here is very straightforward. If you want to boost straightforward. If you want to boost straightforward. If you want to boost your cortisol levels using deliberate your cortisol levels using deliberate your cortisol levels using deliberate cold exposure, cold shower, ice plunge, cold exposure, cold shower, ice plunge, cold exposure, cold shower, ice plunge, whatever it is, you can do that. But it whatever it is, you can do that. But it whatever it is, you can do that. But it needs to be occasional deliberate cold needs to be occasional deliberate cold needs to be occasional deliberate cold exposure, probably not more than twice exposure, probably not more than twice exposure, probably not more than twice per week. Otherwise, you're not going to per week. Otherwise, you're not going to per week. Otherwise, you're not going to get a significant increase in cortisol get a significant increase in cortisol get a significant increase in cortisol as a consequence of that deliberate cold as a consequence of that deliberate cold as a consequence of that deliberate cold exposure. However, if you're somebody exposure. However, if you're somebody exposure. However, if you're somebody who likes doing deliberate cold who likes doing deliberate cold who likes doing deliberate cold exposure, keep in mind that it's not exposure, keep in mind that it's not exposure, keep in mind that it's not going to chronically elevate your going to chronically elevate your going to chronically elevate your cortisol. This is advantageous for a cortisol. This is advantageous for a cortisol. This is advantageous for a number of reasons. First of all, it number of reasons. First of all, it number of reasons. First of all, it will, yes, continue to elevate your will, yes, continue to elevate your will, yes, continue to elevate your levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, and levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, and levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine for increased mood and epinephrine for increased mood and epinephrine for increased mood and energy. that effect persists. As far as energy. that effect persists. As far as energy. that effect persists. As far as we know, that effect never saturates. we know, that effect never saturates. we know, that effect never saturates. But if you're somebody who's concerned But if you're somebody who's concerned But if you're somebody who's concerned about elevating your cortisol too much, about elevating your cortisol too much, about elevating your cortisol too much, you're concerned about chronic elevation you're concerned about chronic elevation you're concerned about chronic elevation of cortisol, and I hear a lot about this of cortisol, and I hear a lot about this of cortisol, and I hear a lot about this in the circles around, you know, in the circles around, you know, in the circles around, you know, important differences between men's important differences between men's important differences between men's fitness and health and women's fitness and health and women's fitness and health and women's fitness and health and maybe that deliberate and health and maybe that deliberate and health and maybe that deliberate cold exposure is good for men and not cold exposure is good for men and not cold exposure is good for men and not for women. There's really no evidence to for women. There's really no evidence to for women. There's really no evidence to support that. In fact, the evidence support that. In fact, the evidence support that. In fact, the evidence points in exactly the opposite points in exactly the opposite points in exactly the opposite direction, which is that when people, direction, which is that when people, direction, which is that when people, men or women, do deliberate cold men or women, do deliberate cold men or women, do deliberate cold exposure regularly, more than twice per exposure regularly, more than twice per exposure regularly, more than twice per week, then the impact on cortisol is not week, then the impact on cortisol is not week, then the impact on cortisol is not significant. And yet, they still can significant. And yet, they still can significant. And yet, they still can benefit by getting those increases in benefit by getting those increases in benefit by getting those increases in dopamine, epinephrine, and dopamine, epinephrine, and dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. I'd like to take a quick norepinephrine. I'd like to take a quick norepinephrine. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body is critical for optimal brain and body is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and dehydration can diminish cognitive and dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklnt.com/huberman, to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Okay, let's to claim a free sample pack. Okay, let's to claim a free sample pack. Okay, let's talk about some of the other things that talk about some of the other things that talk about some of the other things that you can do to increase your morning you can do to increase your morning you can do to increase your morning cortisol levels. If you're starting to cortisol levels. If you're starting to cortisol levels. If you're starting to get the picture that cortisol is get the picture that cortisol is get the picture that cortisol is something that you want high early in something that you want high early in something that you want high early in the day and that you want tapering off the day and that you want tapering off the day and that you want tapering off later into the day, great. Then you're later into the day, great. Then you're later into the day, great. Then you're getting the picture correctly. In fact, getting the picture correctly. In fact, getting the picture correctly. In fact, one way to think about it is that one way to think about it is that one way to think about it is that cortisol is kind of like a wave that cortisol is kind of like a wave that cortisol is kind of like a wave that starts on its own, but for which you can starts on its own, but for which you can starts on its own, but for which you can increase the height of that wave and increase the height of that wave and increase the height of that wave and catch that wave early in the day and catch that wave early in the day and catch that wave early in the day and into the afternoon. If you imagine it into the afternoon. If you imagine it into the afternoon. If you imagine it that way, then you're probably saying, that way, then you're probably saying, that way, then you're probably saying, "What other things can I do besides "What other things can I do besides "What other things can I do besides viewing light, besides hydration, viewing light, besides hydration, viewing light, besides hydration, besides caffeine, besides exercise?" And besides caffeine, besides exercise?" And besides caffeine, besides exercise?" And probably part of the reason you're probably part of the reason you're probably part of the reason you're asking is that not all of us are able to asking is that not all of us are able to asking is that not all of us are able to do all of those things every single day. do all of those things every single day. do all of those things every single day. I do acknowledge that. So the larger the I do acknowledge that. So the larger the I do acknowledge that. So the larger the toolkit of things that you can use to toolkit of things that you can use to toolkit of things that you can use to increase your morning cortisol peak, the increase your morning cortisol peak, the increase your morning cortisol peak, the more flexibility you have when trying to more flexibility you have when trying to more flexibility you have when trying to come up with those when traveling, when come up with those when traveling, when come up with those when traveling, when especially busy, and so on and so forth. especially busy, and so on and so forth. especially busy, and so on and so forth. So if we take a step back and ask So if we take a step back and ask So if we take a step back and ask ourselves what sorts of chemical ourselves what sorts of chemical ourselves what sorts of chemical compounds out there can help us increase compounds out there can help us increase compounds out there can help us increase our cortisol levels, we come up with our cortisol levels, we come up with our cortisol levels, we come up with some pretty interesting answers. And no, some pretty interesting answers. And no, some pretty interesting answers. And no, we're not going to talk about we're not going to talk about we're not going to talk about supplements. It is true that certain supplements. It is true that certain supplements. It is true that certain supplements like yohimine, like elyroine supplements like yohimine, like elyroine supplements like yohimine, like elyroine can have a modest effect in increasing can have a modest effect in increasing can have a modest effect in increasing cortisol, but we're not going to cortisol, but we're not going to cortisol, but we're not going to emphasize those. We're actually going to emphasize those. We're actually going to emphasize those. We're actually going to emphasize two naturally occurring foods emphasize two naturally occurring foods emphasize two naturally occurring foods that have a significant impact on that have a significant impact on that have a significant impact on cortisol levels. Both the amount of cortisol levels. Both the amount of cortisol levels. Both the amount of cortisol that you're capable of cortisol that you're capable of cortisol that you're capable of releasing early in the day and the releasing early in the day and the releasing early in the day and the duration for which that cortisol lasts. duration for which that cortisol lasts. duration for which that cortisol lasts. The first one is of all things The first one is of all things The first one is of all things grapefruit. Yes, grapefruit. Here I'm grapefruit. Yes, grapefruit. Here I'm grapefruit. Yes, grapefruit. Here I'm talking about the whole fruit. Could be talking about the whole fruit. Could be talking about the whole fruit. Could be pink grapefruit. could be not pink grapefruit. could be not pink grapefruit. could be not pink grapefruit, yellow grapefruit, could be grapefruit, yellow grapefruit, could be grapefruit, yellow grapefruit, could be grapefruit juice. And before I get into grapefruit juice. And before I get into grapefruit juice. And before I get into the mechanism and the protocol, I should the mechanism and the protocol, I should the mechanism and the protocol, I should emphasize that the effects of grapefruit emphasize that the effects of grapefruit emphasize that the effects of grapefruit on cortisol are not trivial. They're on cortisol are not trivial. They're on cortisol are not trivial. They're significant. So if you eat a grapefruit significant. So if you eat a grapefruit significant. So if you eat a grapefruit or you drink a I don't know 6 to 8 or you drink a I don't know 6 to 8 or you drink a I don't know 6 to 8 ounces of grapefruit juice, it's going ounces of grapefruit juice, it's going ounces of grapefruit juice, it's going to have a meaningful impact on how long to have a meaningful impact on how long to have a meaningful impact on how long the cortisol that's already in your the cortisol that's already in your the cortisol that's already in your bloodstream lasts. The way it does that bloodstream lasts. The way it does that bloodstream lasts. The way it does that is grapefruit contains compounds that is grapefruit contains compounds that is grapefruit contains compounds that inhibit the enzymes that break down inhibit the enzymes that break down inhibit the enzymes that break down cortisol. In particular, compounds in cortisol. In particular, compounds in cortisol. In particular, compounds in grapefruit inhibit the action of an grapefruit inhibit the action of an grapefruit inhibit the action of an enzyme called CYP3A4 enzyme called CYP3A4 enzyme called CYP3A4 and maybe A5 as well. And that enzyme is and maybe A5 as well. And that enzyme is and maybe A5 as well. And that enzyme is responsible in large part for breaking responsible in large part for breaking responsible in large part for breaking down cortisol. It's not the only way down cortisol. It's not the only way down cortisol. It's not the only way that cortisol is broken down, but it's that cortisol is broken down, but it's that cortisol is broken down, but it's one of the major ways. And grapefruit one of the major ways. And grapefruit one of the major ways. And grapefruit has a significant impact in inhibiting has a significant impact in inhibiting has a significant impact in inhibiting the enzyme that breaks down cortisol. the enzyme that breaks down cortisol. the enzyme that breaks down cortisol. So, believe it or not, many studies have So, believe it or not, many studies have So, believe it or not, many studies have been done in humans, men and women, and been done in humans, men and women, and been done in humans, men and women, and the net takeaway is the same in every the net takeaway is the same in every the net takeaway is the same in every case. If you were to eat a grapefruit, case. If you were to eat a grapefruit, case. If you were to eat a grapefruit, you're going to extend the life of you're going to extend the life of you're going to extend the life of cortisol in your bloodstream by anywhere cortisol in your bloodstream by anywhere cortisol in your bloodstream by anywhere from 25 to 50%. Right? That's from 25 to 50%. Right? That's from 25 to 50%. Right? That's significant. And it has actually been significant. And it has actually been significant. And it has actually been shown to be clinically significant. And shown to be clinically significant. And shown to be clinically significant. And the reason I say clinically significant the reason I say clinically significant the reason I say clinically significant in this case is that indeed there are in this case is that indeed there are in this case is that indeed there are some people that need to deliberately some people that need to deliberately some people that need to deliberately elevate their cortisol using medication. elevate their cortisol using medication. elevate their cortisol using medication. Those people typically are instructed Those people typically are instructed Those people typically are instructed not to eat grapefruit or drink not to eat grapefruit or drink not to eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice because then they're grapefruit juice because then they're grapefruit juice because then they're not going to get as clear a picture on not going to get as clear a picture on not going to get as clear a picture on how a given dose of their medication is how a given dose of their medication is how a given dose of their medication is impacting their cortisol. Likewise, impacting their cortisol. Likewise, impacting their cortisol. Likewise, people who have chronically elevated people who have chronically elevated people who have chronically elevated cortisol are told not to eat grapefruit cortisol are told not to eat grapefruit cortisol are told not to eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice because it can or drink grapefruit juice because it can or drink grapefruit juice because it can further elevate their cortisol. However, further elevate their cortisol. However, further elevate their cortisol. However, most people who don't have things like most people who don't have things like most people who don't have things like Cushings disease or Addison's don't have Cushings disease or Addison's don't have Cushings disease or Addison's don't have to worry about this. And most people, to worry about this. And most people, to worry about this. And most people, probably you are interested in having a probably you are interested in having a probably you are interested in having a lot more energy, get up and go early in lot more energy, get up and go early in lot more energy, get up and go early in the day. And you now know that elevating the day. And you now know that elevating the day. And you now know that elevating your morning cortisol is one way to do your morning cortisol is one way to do your morning cortisol is one way to do that. And many of you presumably don't that. And many of you presumably don't that. And many of you presumably don't always have time to exercise or you always have time to exercise or you always have time to exercise or you don't always have time to get morning don't always have time to get morning don't always have time to get morning light. I know it sounds outrageous, but light. I know it sounds outrageous, but light. I know it sounds outrageous, but every once in a while you can't get every once in a while you can't get every once in a while you can't get sunlight or bright light into your eyes. sunlight or bright light into your eyes. sunlight or bright light into your eyes. Well, you might be thinking about ways Well, you might be thinking about ways Well, you might be thinking about ways that you could increase your cortisol that you could increase your cortisol that you could increase your cortisol under those conditions. Well, eating a under those conditions. Well, eating a under those conditions. Well, eating a grapefruit would do that or drinking grapefruit would do that or drinking grapefruit would do that or drinking some grapefruit juice. And of course, some grapefruit juice. And of course, some grapefruit juice. And of course, you can eat a grapefruit or drink some you can eat a grapefruit or drink some you can eat a grapefruit or drink some grapefruit juice in combination with all grapefruit juice in combination with all grapefruit juice in combination with all the other things that we've discussed. the other things that we've discussed. the other things that we've discussed. In fact, there are compounds in In fact, there are compounds in In fact, there are compounds in grapefruit juice that will also extend grapefruit juice that will also extend grapefruit juice that will also extend the effectiveness of caffeine. So, this the effectiveness of caffeine. So, this the effectiveness of caffeine. So, this effect of grapefruit on the various effect of grapefruit on the various effect of grapefruit on the various enzymes that break down things like enzymes that break down things like enzymes that break down things like caffeine and cortisol is a meaningful caffeine and cortisol is a meaningful caffeine and cortisol is a meaningful impact. It's not a trivial one. And so impact. It's not a trivial one. And so impact. It's not a trivial one. And so while it might seem kind of silly to while it might seem kind of silly to while it might seem kind of silly to say, "Oh yeah, eat grapefruit to say, "Oh yeah, eat grapefruit to say, "Oh yeah, eat grapefruit to increase your morning energy," it's increase your morning energy," it's increase your morning energy," it's actually a real thing that's separable actually a real thing that's separable actually a real thing that's separable from the effects of grapefruit on say from the effects of grapefruit on say from the effects of grapefruit on say blood sugar that comes from the fructose blood sugar that comes from the fructose blood sugar that comes from the fructose in grapefruit that comes from the in grapefruit that comes from the in grapefruit that comes from the vitamins and minerals and other things vitamins and minerals and other things vitamins and minerals and other things in grapefruit. There's a real and in grapefruit. There's a real and in grapefruit. There's a real and meaningful impact of grapefruit on the meaningful impact of grapefruit on the meaningful impact of grapefruit on the cortisol breakdown pathway. So if you're cortisol breakdown pathway. So if you're cortisol breakdown pathway. So if you're interested in boosting your morning interested in boosting your morning interested in boosting your morning cortisol, simply eat a grapefruit in the cortisol, simply eat a grapefruit in the cortisol, simply eat a grapefruit in the morning. I've started doing that late morning. I've started doing that late morning. I've started doing that late morning. I typically eat my first meal morning. I typically eat my first meal morning. I typically eat my first meal of the day somewhere around 10:30, 11:00 of the day somewhere around 10:30, 11:00 of the day somewhere around 10:30, 11:00 a.m. It sort of varies from day to day. a.m. It sort of varies from day to day. a.m. It sort of varies from day to day. I don't typically eat first thing upon I don't typically eat first thing upon I don't typically eat first thing upon waking. I do drink caffeine first thing waking. I do drink caffeine first thing waking. I do drink caffeine first thing upon waking if I'm going to exercise. upon waking if I'm going to exercise. upon waking if I'm going to exercise. Most other days I delay my caffeine a Most other days I delay my caffeine a Most other days I delay my caffeine a bit. In any case, in the last few weeks, bit. In any case, in the last few weeks, bit. In any case, in the last few weeks, as I've been researching this episode, as I've been researching this episode, as I've been researching this episode, I've started consuming one pink I've started consuming one pink I've started consuming one pink grapefruit, which I personally find grapefruit, which I personally find grapefruit, which I personally find delicious, late morning before my first delicious, late morning before my first delicious, late morning before my first meal. And indeed, I notice a tangible meal. And indeed, I notice a tangible meal. And indeed, I notice a tangible increase in energy both late morning and increase in energy both late morning and increase in energy both late morning and into the early afternoon. Yes, perhaps into the early afternoon. Yes, perhaps into the early afternoon. Yes, perhaps some of that is placebo effect because I some of that is placebo effect because I some of that is placebo effect because I anticipated this effect of grapefruit. anticipated this effect of grapefruit. anticipated this effect of grapefruit. But the data in the literature and the But the data in the literature and the But the data in the literature and the mechanistic pathway is very clear. mechanistic pathway is very clear. mechanistic pathway is very clear. Grapefruit extends the life of cortisol. Grapefruit extends the life of cortisol. Grapefruit extends the life of cortisol. The other food that can increase The other food that can increase The other food that can increase cortisol is licorice. In particular, cortisol is licorice. In particular, cortisol is licorice. In particular, black licorice. We're not talking about black licorice. We're not talking about black licorice. We're not talking about red licorice. We're talking about black red licorice. We're talking about black red licorice. We're talking about black licorice. You might be thinking, what is licorice. You might be thinking, what is licorice. You might be thinking, what is this? Are we like getting into the realm this? Are we like getting into the realm this? Are we like getting into the realm of like really alternative medicine? No. of like really alternative medicine? No. of like really alternative medicine? No. All you have to do is look at the list All you have to do is look at the list All you have to do is look at the list of things that people who are trying to of things that people who are trying to of things that people who are trying to reduce their cortisol or who are taking reduce their cortisol or who are taking reduce their cortisol or who are taking medications to increase or decrease medications to increase or decrease medications to increase or decrease cortisol for a disease state are told cortisol for a disease state are told cortisol for a disease state are told not to eat. And you get an insight into not to eat. And you get an insight into not to eat. And you get an insight into just how powerful licorice is or I just how powerful licorice is or I just how powerful licorice is or I should say things within licorice are should say things within licorice are should say things within licorice are for increasing cortisol levels. What I'm for increasing cortisol levels. What I'm for increasing cortisol levels. What I'm talking about here is a compound called talking about here is a compound called talking about here is a compound called glycerin. Glycerin is in black licorice glycerin. Glycerin is in black licorice glycerin. Glycerin is in black licorice and glycerizin has been shown to have and glycerizin has been shown to have and glycerizin has been shown to have very big effects on increasing cortisol. very big effects on increasing cortisol. very big effects on increasing cortisol. So much so that if you are going to So much so that if you are going to So much so that if you are going to experiment with licorice or glycerizon experiment with licorice or glycerizon experiment with licorice or glycerizon that comes from licorice root, you need that comes from licorice root, you need that comes from licorice root, you need to actually be pretty careful to not to actually be pretty careful to not to actually be pretty careful to not boost your cortisol levels too much. boost your cortisol levels too much. boost your cortisol levels too much. Start with the lowest possible dose of Start with the lowest possible dose of Start with the lowest possible dose of licorice root if you're going to use it licorice root if you're going to use it licorice root if you're going to use it in capsule form. If you're going to eat in capsule form. If you're going to eat in capsule form. If you're going to eat black licorice, a lot of people like black licorice, a lot of people like black licorice, a lot of people like blackish, a lot of people are averse to blackish, a lot of people are averse to blackish, a lot of people are averse to black licorice. It's kind of a um black licorice. It's kind of a um black licorice. It's kind of a um individual thing. If you're going to do individual thing. If you're going to do individual thing. If you're going to do that, you're going to need to be that, you're going to need to be that, you're going to need to be cautious about not spiking your cortisol cautious about not spiking your cortisol cautious about not spiking your cortisol too much, especially if you're eating it too much, especially if you're eating it too much, especially if you're eating it later in the day. We're not to late day later in the day. We're not to late day later in the day. We're not to late day cortisol control just yet, but licorice cortisol control just yet, but licorice cortisol control just yet, but licorice significantly boosts your cortisol significantly boosts your cortisol significantly boosts your cortisol levels. And it does so by inhibiting the levels. And it does so by inhibiting the levels. And it does so by inhibiting the enzyme 11 beta hydroxy dehydrogenase or enzyme 11 beta hydroxy dehydrogenase or enzyme 11 beta hydroxy dehydrogenase or 11 beta HSD for short. This is the 11 beta HSD for short. This is the 11 beta HSD for short. This is the enzyme that's involved in the conversion enzyme that's involved in the conversion enzyme that's involved in the conversion of cortisol to cortisone. So cortisol of cortisol to cortisone. So cortisol of cortisol to cortisone. So cortisol when released into the blood eventually when released into the blood eventually when released into the blood eventually is broken down into a bunch of other is broken down into a bunch of other is broken down into a bunch of other things. And in order to keep the things. And in order to keep the things. And in order to keep the cortisol active and here we didn't get cortisol active and here we didn't get cortisol active and here we didn't get into a discussion about cortisol either into a discussion about cortisol either into a discussion about cortisol either being bound or free. Okay, the free form being bound or free. Okay, the free form being bound or free. Okay, the free form is the one that active and can impact is the one that active and can impact is the one that active and can impact tissues just like free testosterone can tissues just like free testosterone can tissues just like free testosterone can impact tissues as opposed to bound impact tissues as opposed to bound impact tissues as opposed to bound testosterone because it's also a steroid testosterone because it's also a steroid testosterone because it's also a steroid hormone. Cortisol goes through some of hormone. Cortisol goes through some of hormone. Cortisol goes through some of the same regulation. The important point the same regulation. The important point the same regulation. The important point here is that licorice can be used to here is that licorice can be used to here is that licorice can be used to potently increase cortisol. Not just the potently increase cortisol. Not just the potently increase cortisol. Not just the duration of cortisol's impact, but also duration of cortisol's impact, but also duration of cortisol's impact, but also apparently the release of cortisol. Now, apparently the release of cortisol. Now, apparently the release of cortisol. Now, the data on that are a little bit mixed. the data on that are a little bit mixed. the data on that are a little bit mixed. Some people would even argue that Some people would even argue that Some people would even argue that licorice can increase the synthesis of licorice can increase the synthesis of licorice can increase the synthesis of cortisol. But there there's even less cortisol. But there there's even less cortisol. But there there's even less data. The data are very clear, however, data. The data are very clear, however, data. The data are very clear, however, that glycerizin, which is prominently that glycerizin, which is prominently that glycerizin, which is prominently found in black licorice, you are going found in black licorice, you are going found in black licorice, you are going to increase the amount of cortisol to increase the amount of cortisol to increase the amount of cortisol circulating in your bloodstream. So, if circulating in your bloodstream. So, if circulating in your bloodstream. So, if you're having a really difficult time you're having a really difficult time you're having a really difficult time boosting your cortisol in the morning boosting your cortisol in the morning boosting your cortisol in the morning despite doing all the other things that despite doing all the other things that despite doing all the other things that I'm describing, or let's just say I'm describing, or let's just say I'm describing, or let's just say there's a day in which you can't there's a day in which you can't there's a day in which you can't exercise, you don't have access to exercise, you don't have access to exercise, you don't have access to bright light, you can't do all the bright light, you can't do all the bright light, you can't do all the things that you would need to in order things that you would need to in order things that you would need to in order to boost cortisol, but you want to, to boost cortisol, but you want to, to boost cortisol, but you want to, maybe that's the day that you try a maybe that's the day that you try a maybe that's the day that you try a small amount of licorice root or a small amount of licorice root or a small amount of licorice root or a small amount of black licorice. One very amount of black licorice. One very amount of black licorice. One very important point, licorice has a potent important point, licorice has a potent important point, licorice has a potent enough effect on cortisol and cortisol enough effect on cortisol and cortisol enough effect on cortisol and cortisol has a potent enough effect on blood has a potent enough effect on blood has a potent enough effect on blood pressure that if you suffer from pressure that if you suffer from pressure that if you suffer from hypertension or high blood pressure or hypertension or high blood pressure or hypertension or high blood pressure or if you are pregnant or breastfeeding, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding, you absolutely do not want to eat black you absolutely do not want to eat black you absolutely do not want to eat black licorice. I don't know whether or not licorice. I don't know whether or not licorice. I don't know whether or not this is commonly told to women who are this is commonly told to women who are this is commonly told to women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, but when I pregnant or breastfeeding, but when I pregnant or breastfeeding, but when I looked in the literature, this was a looked in the literature, this was a looked in the literature, this was a repeated theme. Women who are pregnant repeated theme. Women who are pregnant repeated theme. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, people with elevated or breastfeeding, people with elevated or breastfeeding, people with elevated blood pressures should not be consuming blood pressures should not be consuming blood pressures should not be consuming black licorice. the glycerizin is black licorice. the glycerizin is black licorice. the glycerizin is potentially hazardous for them or the potentially hazardous for them or the potentially hazardous for them or the fetus. So I say that in part to inform fetus. So I say that in part to inform fetus. So I say that in part to inform you about licorice and its effects on you about licorice and its effects on you about licorice and its effects on cortisol, but also that you be mindful cortisol, but also that you be mindful cortisol, but also that you be mindful that licorice has a potent effect on the that licorice has a potent effect on the that licorice has a potent effect on the cortisol pathways. Okay, so we've talked cortisol pathways. Okay, so we've talked cortisol pathways. Okay, so we've talked about how to control your cortisol in about how to control your cortisol in about how to control your cortisol in the morning for more energy, focus, the morning for more energy, focus, the morning for more energy, focus, alertness, etc. all day long. However, alertness, etc. all day long. However, alertness, etc. all day long. However, your indogenous rhythm of cortisol your indogenous rhythm of cortisol your indogenous rhythm of cortisol dictates, right? You don't have control dictates, right? You don't have control dictates, right? You don't have control over this. It dictates that your over this. It dictates that your over this. It dictates that your cortisol is going to start to fall cortisol is going to start to fall cortisol is going to start to fall somewhere around noon, maybe 11:00 a.m., somewhere around noon, maybe 11:00 a.m., somewhere around noon, maybe 11:00 a.m., maybe noon, maybe 1:00 p.m. Remember, it maybe noon, maybe 1:00 p.m. Remember, it maybe noon, maybe 1:00 p.m. Remember, it all depends on when you woke up because all depends on when you woke up because all depends on when you woke up because waking up is actually what triggers that waking up is actually what triggers that waking up is actually what triggers that big inflection in cortisol early in the big inflection in cortisol early in the big inflection in cortisol early in the day. But as your cortisol starts to fall day. But as your cortisol starts to fall day. But as your cortisol starts to fall into the early afternoon, late into the early afternoon, late into the early afternoon, late afternoon, and so on, you may notice afternoon, and so on, you may notice afternoon, and so on, you may notice something, which is you can experience something, which is you can experience something, which is you can experience stress. Sure, if you have a stress stress. Sure, if you have a stress stress. Sure, if you have a stress event, you'll get a spike in cortisol event, you'll get a spike in cortisol event, you'll get a spike in cortisol and it will come back down. But if and it will come back down. But if and it will come back down. But if you've ever been outside during the you've ever been outside during the you've ever been outside during the middle of the day, got some sunlight in middle of the day, got some sunlight in middle of the day, got some sunlight in your eyes, maybe sitting with your eyes your eyes, maybe sitting with your eyes your eyes, maybe sitting with your eyes closed, maybe even relaxing in the sun, closed, maybe even relaxing in the sun, closed, maybe even relaxing in the sun, you'd probably say, "Getting bright you'd probably say, "Getting bright you'd probably say, "Getting bright light in my eyes, getting sunlight in light in my eyes, getting sunlight in light in my eyes, getting sunlight in the afternoon keeps me calm. If the afternoon keeps me calm. If the afternoon keeps me calm. If anything, it makes me mellower. It anything, it makes me mellower. It anything, it makes me mellower. It doesn't tend to wake me up." But doesn't tend to wake me up." But doesn't tend to wake me up." But remember, it was only in the first hour remember, it was only in the first hour remember, it was only in the first hour or so after waking up in the morning or so after waking up in the morning or so after waking up in the morning that bright light causes this big that bright light causes this big that bright light causes this big inflection in your cortisol and inflection in your cortisol and inflection in your cortisol and contributes to more energy. In the contributes to more energy. In the contributes to more energy. In the afternoon, that system is gated. It's afternoon, that system is gated. It's afternoon, that system is gated. It's shut down. This is what's referred to as shut down. This is what's referred to as shut down. This is what's referred to as the circadian dead zone in circadian the circadian dead zone in circadian the circadian dead zone in circadian biology. You can't actually shift your biology. You can't actually shift your biology. You can't actually shift your biological clock with light at that biological clock with light at that biological clock with light at that time, which doesn't mean that getting time, which doesn't mean that getting time, which doesn't mean that getting sunlight on your skin or in your eyes sunlight on your skin or in your eyes sunlight on your skin or in your eyes isn't a good thing. It indeed is a good isn't a good thing. It indeed is a good isn't a good thing. It indeed is a good thing. Of course, you want to guard thing. Of course, you want to guard thing. Of course, you want to guard yourself against too much UV exposure by yourself against too much UV exposure by yourself against too much UV exposure by wearing clothing or perhaps a wearing clothing or perhaps a wearing clothing or perhaps a mineral-based sunscreen, etc. But mineral-based sunscreen, etc. But mineral-based sunscreen, etc. But getting sunlight in the middle of the getting sunlight in the middle of the getting sunlight in the middle of the day can be a terrific thing for your day can be a terrific thing for your day can be a terrific thing for your mood. There are great studies showing mood. There are great studies showing mood. There are great studies showing that it can enhance hormone production, that it can enhance hormone production, that it can enhance hormone production, including testosterone and estrogen, including testosterone and estrogen, including testosterone and estrogen, feelings of well-being. But indeed, feelings of well-being. But indeed, feelings of well-being. But indeed, getting sunlight and other forms of getting sunlight and other forms of getting sunlight and other forms of bright light in your eyes and on your bright light in your eyes and on your bright light in your eyes and on your skin in the afternoon tends to make you skin in the afternoon tends to make you skin in the afternoon tends to make you feel kind of relaxed. And that's because feel kind of relaxed. And that's because feel kind of relaxed. And that's because that positive feedback loop that the SCN that positive feedback loop that the SCN that positive feedback loop that the SCN can trigger whereby light increases your can trigger whereby light increases your can trigger whereby light increases your cortisol is completely shut down from cortisol is completely shut down from cortisol is completely shut down from the hours of about noon time or so until the hours of about noon time or so until the hours of about noon time or so until about 5 or 6 in the evening. Now I say about 5 or 6 in the evening. Now I say about 5 or 6 in the evening. Now I say until about 5 or 6 in the evening until about 5 or 6 in the evening until about 5 or 6 in the evening because in the evening cortisol is going because in the evening cortisol is going because in the evening cortisol is going even lower lower. But then something even lower lower. But then something even lower lower. But then something happens. The gate the opportunity for happens. The gate the opportunity for happens. The gate the opportunity for light to start triggering increases in light to start triggering increases in light to start triggering increases in cortisol opens. And as you'll soon cortisol opens. And as you'll soon cortisol opens. And as you'll soon learn, not only does it open, but it's learn, not only does it open, but it's learn, not only does it open, but it's extra sensitive. Put differently in the extra sensitive. Put differently in the extra sensitive. Put differently in the evening past sundown. So, this will be evening past sundown. So, this will be evening past sundown. So, this will be different times of year, different times of year, different times of year, different locations on Earth, but about different locations on Earth, but about different locations on Earth, but about two hours after sundown or so, any two hours after sundown or so, any two hours after sundown or so, any bright light from an artificial source, bright light from an artificial source, bright light from an artificial source, especially shortwavelength light of the especially shortwavelength light of the especially shortwavelength light of the type that comes from LEDs and computer type that comes from LEDs and computer type that comes from LEDs and computer screens and phones, that sort of thing, screens and phones, that sort of thing, screens and phones, that sort of thing, can cause big increases in cortisol. And can cause big increases in cortisol. And can cause big increases in cortisol. And that, of course, provides a perfect that, of course, provides a perfect that, of course, provides a perfect segue for us to talk about the things segue for us to talk about the things segue for us to talk about the things that you should do in the evening and at that you should do in the evening and at that you should do in the evening and at night to make sure that your cortisol is night to make sure that your cortisol is night to make sure that your cortisol is low and dropping further still. Okay, so low and dropping further still. Okay, so low and dropping further still. Okay, so let's talk about the things to do in the let's talk about the things to do in the let's talk about the things to do in the evening and at night in order to quote evening and at night in order to quote evening and at night in order to quote unquote optimize your cortisol levels. unquote optimize your cortisol levels. unquote optimize your cortisol levels. And when I say optimize, of course, And when I say optimize, of course, And when I say optimize, of course, there's no optimal exact level. There's there's no optimal exact level. There's there's no optimal exact level. There's no optimal level for one exact time. no optimal level for one exact time. no optimal level for one exact time. Everyone's on slightly different Everyone's on slightly different Everyone's on slightly different schedules. I tend to go to sleep schedules. I tend to go to sleep schedules. I tend to go to sleep somewhere between 10:00 p.m. and somewhere between 10:00 p.m. and somewhere between 10:00 p.m. and midnight most nights. Sometimes it's midnight most nights. Sometimes it's midnight most nights. Sometimes it's 9:30. Sometimes I'll stay up past 9:30. Sometimes I'll stay up past 9:30. Sometimes I'll stay up past midnight. It happens every once in a midnight. It happens every once in a midnight. It happens every once in a while. You may go to bed at 8. You may while. You may go to bed at 8. You may while. You may go to bed at 8. You may go to bed at 1:00 a.m. The point here is go to bed at 1:00 a.m. The point here is go to bed at 1:00 a.m. The point here is that we're focused now on the portion of that we're focused now on the portion of that we're focused now on the portion of your indogenous naturally generated your indogenous naturally generated your indogenous naturally generated cortisol rhythm that occurs in the hours cortisol rhythm that occurs in the hours cortisol rhythm that occurs in the hours before bedtime when your goal is to get before bedtime when your goal is to get before bedtime when your goal is to get to sleep and get terrific sleep. And to sleep and get terrific sleep. And to sleep and get terrific sleep. And what that requires is that your cortisol what that requires is that your cortisol what that requires is that your cortisol is low and continuing to go lower. So is low and continuing to go lower. So is low and continuing to go lower. So there are various things that you should there are various things that you should there are various things that you should do in the afternoon and evening and do in the afternoon and evening and do in the afternoon and evening and nighttime to make sure that pattern nighttime to make sure that pattern nighttime to make sure that pattern occurs. The first has to do with occurs. The first has to do with occurs. The first has to do with lighting. As I just described, in the lighting. As I just described, in the lighting. As I just described, in the evening about two hours after sundown is evening about two hours after sundown is evening about two hours after sundown is really when this phase of your cortisol really when this phase of your cortisol really when this phase of your cortisol cycle begins where not much light is cycle begins where not much light is cycle begins where not much light is required in order to create big required in order to create big required in order to create big increases in cortisol, which is the increases in cortisol, which is the increases in cortisol, which is the exact opposite of what you want in the exact opposite of what you want in the exact opposite of what you want in the evening and at night. You want your evening and at night. You want your evening and at night. You want your cortisol going down, not up. So, how do cortisol going down, not up. So, how do cortisol going down, not up. So, how do you control your lighting in order to you control your lighting in order to you control your lighting in order to ensure that pattern occurs? There are ensure that pattern occurs? There are ensure that pattern occurs? There are several ways. First of all, you just dim several ways. First of all, you just dim several ways. First of all, you just dim the indoor lights, right? Dim them as the indoor lights, right? Dim them as the indoor lights, right? Dim them as much as possible. Especially overhead much as possible. Especially overhead much as possible. Especially overhead lights, the neurons in your eye that lights, the neurons in your eye that lights, the neurons in your eye that send information about overall send information about overall send information about overall luminance, how bright it is in your luminance, how bright it is in your luminance, how bright it is in your environment. They're all over your eye, environment. They're all over your eye, environment. They're all over your eye, but they reside primarily in the lower but they reside primarily in the lower but they reside primarily in the lower twothirds of your eyes because their twothirds of your eyes because their twothirds of your eyes because their role is to view the upper visual field. role is to view the upper visual field. role is to view the upper visual field. And that's how that circuit is arranged. And that's how that circuit is arranged. And that's how that circuit is arranged. So, if you have to have lights on in So, if you have to have lights on in So, if you have to have lights on in your indoor environment at night, which your indoor environment at night, which your indoor environment at night, which most people do, you should dim as many most people do, you should dim as many most people do, you should dim as many lights as you can. Turn off as many lights as you can. Turn off as many lights as you can. Turn off as many overhead lights as you can. Table lamps overhead lights as you can. Table lamps overhead lights as you can. Table lamps are better than overhead lights and are better than overhead lights and are better than overhead lights and floor lights are better than table floor lights are better than table floor lights are better than table lamps. Most people aren't going to lamps. Most people aren't going to lamps. Most people aren't going to install floor lights. But if you find install floor lights. But if you find install floor lights. But if you find that you're having trouble mellowing out that you're having trouble mellowing out that you're having trouble mellowing out and getting to sleep, and there isn't and getting to sleep, and there isn't and getting to sleep, and there isn't some other reason for that, like you some other reason for that, like you some other reason for that, like you drank a bunch of caffeine at 8:00 p.m. drank a bunch of caffeine at 8:00 p.m. drank a bunch of caffeine at 8:00 p.m. or 6:00 p.m., then dimming the lights is or 6:00 p.m., then dimming the lights is or 6:00 p.m., then dimming the lights is going to be a terrific idea. Now, the going to be a terrific idea. Now, the going to be a terrific idea. Now, the wavelength, the color of those lights wavelength, the color of those lights wavelength, the color of those lights can also have a big impact. As I can also have a big impact. As I can also have a big impact. As I mentioned before, you want to avoid mentioned before, you want to avoid mentioned before, you want to avoid shortwavelength light exposure. So this shortwavelength light exposure. So this shortwavelength light exposure. So this would be your white LED lights, blue would be your white LED lights, blue would be your white LED lights, blue lights, green lights if you can. All lights, green lights if you can. All lights, green lights if you can. All right? And there are various ways you right? And there are various ways you right? And there are various ways you can do this. You could purchase a red can do this. You could purchase a red can do this. You could purchase a red light bulb. I'm not talking light bulb. I'm not talking light bulb. I'm not talking about red light therapy, but there are about red light therapy, but there are about red light therapy, but there are various sources of red lights that you various sources of red lights that you various sources of red lights that you can install. They're very inexpensive. can install. They're very inexpensive. can install. They're very inexpensive. Again, it's not red light therapy. It's Again, it's not red light therapy. It's Again, it's not red light therapy. It's just restricted such that I'm only just restricted such that I'm only just restricted such that I'm only getting long wavelength light in my getting long wavelength light in my getting long wavelength light in my eyes. Why? Well, there are a number of eyes. Why? Well, there are a number of eyes. Why? Well, there are a number of papers showing that if we restrict our papers showing that if we restrict our papers showing that if we restrict our visual exposure to medium and long visual exposure to medium and long visual exposure to medium and long wavelength light in the evenings and at wavelength light in the evenings and at wavelength light in the evenings and at night, it does not have nearly as much night, it does not have nearly as much night, it does not have nearly as much impact on increasing cortisol. Now, if impact on increasing cortisol. Now, if impact on increasing cortisol. Now, if it's very bright, we're talking it's very bright, we're talking it's very bright, we're talking like bursting bright red lights, it can like bursting bright red lights, it can like bursting bright red lights, it can increase cortisol even in the evening. increase cortisol even in the evening. increase cortisol even in the evening. But if it's relatively bright to dim red But if it's relatively bright to dim red But if it's relatively bright to dim red light or amber colored light of the sort light or amber colored light of the sort light or amber colored light of the sort that you would get with an incandescent that you would get with an incandescent that you would get with an incandescent bulb as opposed to an LED bulb, that's bulb as opposed to an LED bulb, that's bulb as opposed to an LED bulb, that's going to keep cortisol low. And the going to keep cortisol low. And the going to keep cortisol low. And the effect of these lighting changes is not effect of these lighting changes is not effect of these lighting changes is not trivial. These are meaningful protocols trivial. These are meaningful protocols trivial. These are meaningful protocols that will actually help keep your that will actually help keep your that will actually help keep your cortisol low, help keep you calm and cortisol low, help keep you calm and cortisol low, help keep you calm and mellow. And of course, you should dim mellow. And of course, you should dim mellow. And of course, you should dim the screen on your phone and your the screen on your phone and your the screen on your phone and your computer. There's actually a way if you computer. There's actually a way if you computer. There's actually a way if you have an Apple phone that you can very have an Apple phone that you can very have an Apple phone that you can very easily program in a triple click easily program in a triple click easily program in a triple click shortcut so that your screen turns red. shortcut so that your screen turns red. shortcut so that your screen turns red. We can provide an instruction of how to We can provide an instruction of how to We can provide an instruction of how to do that in the show note captions. It do that in the show note captions. It do that in the show note captions. It takes about 2 minutes to do. I have this takes about 2 minutes to do. I have this takes about 2 minutes to do. I have this on all my phone devices. So you can on all my phone devices. So you can on all my phone devices. So you can triple click on the side and then it triple click on the side and then it triple click on the side and then it brings your phone screen uh from its brings your phone screen uh from its brings your phone screen uh from its standard uh luminance to a basically a standard uh luminance to a basically a standard uh luminance to a basically a red screen. So it cuts out all the short red screen. So it cuts out all the short red screen. So it cuts out all the short wavelength light. And of course if wavelength light. And of course if wavelength light. And of course if you're interested in using glasses that you're interested in using glasses that you're interested in using glasses that restrict short wavelength light as some restrict short wavelength light as some restrict short wavelength light as some of you probably know I worked in of you probably know I worked in of you probably know I worked in collaboration with ROA glasses to collaboration with ROA glasses to collaboration with ROA glasses to develop what we call the windown develop what we call the windown develop what we call the windown glasses. They're not just blue blockers. glasses. They're not just blue blockers. glasses. They're not just blue blockers. They don't just cut out the blue They don't just cut out the blue They don't just cut out the blue wavelengths of the visual spectrum. They wavelengths of the visual spectrum. They wavelengths of the visual spectrum. They cut out all the short wavelength light cut out all the short wavelength light cut out all the short wavelength light that can stimulate the cells that can that can stimulate the cells that can that can stimulate the cells that can increase cortisol and so on and so increase cortisol and so on and so increase cortisol and so on and so forth. So the glasses are convenient forth. So the glasses are convenient forth. So the glasses are convenient because oftentimes you don't have because oftentimes you don't have because oftentimes you don't have control over your indoor lighting control over your indoor lighting control over your indoor lighting environment, right? If you're out to environment, right? If you're out to environment, right? If you're out to dinner or you're in a hotel, you didn't dinner or you're in a hotel, you didn't dinner or you're in a hotel, you didn't bring a red light bulb, this kind of bring a red light bulb, this kind of bring a red light bulb, this kind of thing. You go into the bathroom, you thing. You go into the bathroom, you thing. You go into the bathroom, you know, what are you going to do there if know, what are you going to do there if know, what are you going to do there if the red light bulb is in the bedroom and the red light bulb is in the bedroom and the red light bulb is in the bedroom and you this kind of thing. So you could use you this kind of thing. So you could use you this kind of thing. So you could use those. You could use a red light bulb. those. You could use a red light bulb. those. You could use a red light bulb. Certainly dim all the lights that you Certainly dim all the lights that you Certainly dim all the lights that you can. This makes a meaningful and can. This makes a meaningful and can. This makes a meaningful and powerful contribution to keeping your powerful contribution to keeping your powerful contribution to keeping your cortisol levels low. It will also cortisol levels low. It will also cortisol levels low. It will also prevent you from reducing levels of prevent you from reducing levels of prevent you from reducing levels of melatonin, which is the hormone that melatonin, which is the hormone that melatonin, which is the hormone that makes you sleepy at night. So, as makes you sleepy at night. So, as makes you sleepy at night. So, as cortisol is going down, melatonin is cortisol is going down, melatonin is cortisol is going down, melatonin is going up in the evening and at night. going up in the evening and at night. going up in the evening and at night. And that's what you want. You want And that's what you want. You want And that's what you want. You want cortisol as low as possible. You want cortisol as low as possible. You want cortisol as low as possible. You want melatonin as high as possible. Keep in melatonin as high as possible. Keep in melatonin as high as possible. Keep in mind that bright light, especially short mind that bright light, especially short mind that bright light, especially short wavelength bright light, so blue wavelength bright light, so blue wavelength bright light, so blue screens, etc., the type that comes from screens, etc., the type that comes from screens, etc., the type that comes from white light from screens, unless you do white light from screens, unless you do white light from screens, unless you do something to alter that light, is going something to alter that light, is going something to alter that light, is going to be a potent stimulus for increasing to be a potent stimulus for increasing to be a potent stimulus for increasing cortisol and for decreasing melatonin. cortisol and for decreasing melatonin. cortisol and for decreasing melatonin. And here I should remind you that you And here I should remind you that you And here I should remind you that you know exactly why even moderately bright know exactly why even moderately bright know exactly why even moderately bright light, that short wavelength light in light, that short wavelength light in light, that short wavelength light in the evening is so effective at the evening is so effective at the evening is so effective at increasing cortisol because cortisol increasing cortisol because cortisol increasing cortisol because cortisol levels are so low, that negative levels are so low, that negative levels are so low, that negative feedback loop, right? your hypothalamus feedback loop, right? your hypothalamus feedback loop, right? your hypothalamus is registering the levels of cortisol in is registering the levels of cortisol in is registering the levels of cortisol in your system in the evening and they're your system in the evening and they're your system in the evening and they're very low. So it is primed to make very low. So it is primed to make very low. So it is primed to make more cortisol if it needs to. This again more cortisol if it needs to. This again more cortisol if it needs to. This again is an ancient mechanism by which your is an ancient mechanism by which your is an ancient mechanism by which your brain has learned how to control levels brain has learned how to control levels brain has learned how to control levels of cortisol in your bloodstream so that of cortisol in your bloodstream so that of cortisol in your bloodstream so that they're never too high or too low. And they're never too high or too low. And they're never too high or too low. And presumably this creates an adaptive presumably this creates an adaptive presumably this creates an adaptive advantage whereby you know if you got advantage whereby you know if you got advantage whereby you know if you got into some sort of trouble in the evening into some sort of trouble in the evening into some sort of trouble in the evening and needed to escape a predator or um or and needed to escape a predator or um or and needed to escape a predator or um or whatever maybe you need to stay up all whatever maybe you need to stay up all whatever maybe you need to stay up all night in order to search for food night in order to search for food night in order to search for food because food had been scarce in the because food had been scarce in the because food had been scarce in the previous days. You could do that right previous days. You could do that right previous days. You could do that right your cortisol levels are very low and your cortisol levels are very low and your cortisol levels are very low and you can stimulate them to increase very you can stimulate them to increase very you can stimulate them to increase very easily. Put differently it's very easy easily. Put differently it's very easy easily. Put differently it's very easy to stress at night. It's very easy to stress at night. It's very easy to stress at night. It's very easy to create increases in cortisol because create increases in cortisol because create increases in cortisol because your indogenous your circadian levels of your indogenous your circadian levels of your indogenous your circadian levels of cortisol are so low. So you have to be cortisol are so low. So you have to be cortisol are so low. So you have to be very careful not to trigger yourself to very careful not to trigger yourself to very careful not to trigger yourself to not create these inflections in not create these inflections in not create these inflections in cortisol. If you're somebody who's cortisol. If you're somebody who's cortisol. If you're somebody who's notice that in the evening you tend to notice that in the evening you tend to notice that in the evening you tend to be a bit more reactive that things that be a bit more reactive that things that be a bit more reactive that things that you see online or different you see online or different you see online or different conversations you might have by text or conversations you might have by text or conversations you might have by text or thoughts within your head tend to make thoughts within your head tend to make thoughts within your head tend to make you more anxious later in the day. Well, you more anxious later in the day. Well, you more anxious later in the day. Well, that's probably because you're that's probably because you're that's probably because you're experiencing these sharp inflections in experiencing these sharp inflections in experiencing these sharp inflections in cortisol relative to your already low, cortisol relative to your already low, cortisol relative to your already low, appropriately low, I should say, levels appropriately low, I should say, levels appropriately low, I should say, levels of baseline cortisol at those times of baseline cortisol at those times of baseline cortisol at those times of evening and night. There are a few other evening and night. There are a few other evening and night. There are a few other things you should do to keep your things you should do to keep your things you should do to keep your cortisol low. And then I'll talk about cortisol low. And then I'll talk about cortisol low. And then I'll talk about some of the things that you can do to some of the things that you can do to some of the things that you can do to proactively keep your cortisol low, proactively keep your cortisol low, proactively keep your cortisol low, meaning the to-dos, not just the don'ts. meaning the to-dos, not just the don'ts. meaning the to-dos, not just the don'ts. A couple of other do nots are things A couple of other do nots are things A couple of other do nots are things like ingesting caffeine. This is kind of like ingesting caffeine. This is kind of like ingesting caffeine. This is kind of an obvious one, right? I tend to drink a an obvious one, right? I tend to drink a an obvious one, right? I tend to drink a lot of caffeine early in the day for lot of caffeine early in the day for lot of caffeine early in the day for reasons you now understand. reasons you now understand. reasons you now understand. You may drink your caffeine early in the You may drink your caffeine early in the You may drink your caffeine early in the day as well, perhaps in the early day as well, perhaps in the early day as well, perhaps in the early afternoon. If you're having trouble afternoon. If you're having trouble afternoon. If you're having trouble falling and staying asleep throughout falling and staying asleep throughout falling and staying asleep throughout the night, maybe just waking up once in the night, maybe just waking up once in the night, maybe just waking up once in the middle of the night to use the middle of the night to use the middle of the night to use the bathroom, which is fine. But if you're bathroom, which is fine. But if you're bathroom, which is fine. But if you're finding that you're waking up multiple finding that you're waking up multiple finding that you're waking up multiple times during the night or you're not times during the night or you're not times during the night or you're not waking up feeling fully rested, you waking up feeling fully rested, you waking up feeling fully rested, you should really explore how late in the should really explore how late in the should really explore how late in the day you're continuing to consume day you're continuing to consume day you're continuing to consume caffeine. I recommend a cut off of about caffeine. I recommend a cut off of about caffeine. I recommend a cut off of about 2 p.m. Now, I'm very caffeine tolerant, 2 p.m. Now, I'm very caffeine tolerant, 2 p.m. Now, I'm very caffeine tolerant, so for some people, noon might be the so for some people, noon might be the so for some people, noon might be the cut off. For other people, 4 p.m. might cut off. For other people, 4 p.m. might cut off. For other people, 4 p.m. might be that cut off. But in general, because be that cut off. But in general, because be that cut off. But in general, because most people go to sleep sometime between most people go to sleep sometime between most people go to sleep sometime between 9:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., it's a good 9:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., it's a good 9:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., it's a good idea to cut your caffeine intake off idea to cut your caffeine intake off idea to cut your caffeine intake off somewhere around 2:30 or 3 p.m. at the somewhere around 2:30 or 3 p.m. at the somewhere around 2:30 or 3 p.m. at the very latest so that you can fall and very latest so that you can fall and very latest so that you can fall and stay asleep easily. Remember, caffeine stay asleep easily. Remember, caffeine stay asleep easily. Remember, caffeine is not necessarily increasing your is not necessarily increasing your is not necessarily increasing your cortisol that much if you're a chronic cortisol that much if you're a chronic cortisol that much if you're a chronic caffeine user, but it's extending the caffeine user, but it's extending the caffeine user, but it's extending the life of cortisol so that cortisol life of cortisol so that cortisol life of cortisol so that cortisol curve, that level of cortisol in your curve, that level of cortisol in your curve, that level of cortisol in your bloodstream is going to come down more bloodstream is going to come down more bloodstream is going to come down more slowly if you're drinking caffeine in slowly if you're drinking caffeine in slowly if you're drinking caffeine in the late afternoon. The other one is of the late afternoon. The other one is of the late afternoon. The other one is of course to limit your stress. Now I've course to limit your stress. Now I've course to limit your stress. Now I've done entire episodes about stress and done entire episodes about stress and done entire episodes about stress and stress is a multiaceted thing. We can't stress is a multiaceted thing. We can't stress is a multiaceted thing. We can't always limit our stress. Life, I should always limit our stress. Life, I should always limit our stress. Life, I should say even a good life includes stress, say even a good life includes stress, say even a good life includes stress, short-term stress, long-term stress. And short-term stress, long-term stress. And short-term stress, long-term stress. And we'll talk more about chronic long-term we'll talk more about chronic long-term we'll talk more about chronic long-term stress in a little bit. We're certainly stress in a little bit. We're certainly stress in a little bit. We're certainly going to talk about burnout and the going to talk about burnout and the going to talk about burnout and the different types of burnout that can different types of burnout that can different types of burnout that can result from different kinds of stress. result from different kinds of stress. result from different kinds of stress. But here's the key point about limiting But here's the key point about limiting But here's the key point about limiting your stress. The best things you can do your stress. The best things you can do your stress. The best things you can do for stress involve controlling your for stress involve controlling your for stress involve controlling your stress response in real time. Okay? I'm stress response in real time. Okay? I'm stress response in real time. Okay? I'm a big fan of meditation. I'm a big fan a big fan of meditation. I'm a big fan a big fan of meditation. I'm a big fan of getting great sleep every night. I'm of getting great sleep every night. I'm of getting great sleep every night. I'm a big fan of vacations. However, when a big fan of vacations. However, when a big fan of vacations. However, when stress hits, we don't often have the stress hits, we don't often have the stress hits, we don't often have the opportunity to take a vacation, get a opportunity to take a vacation, get a opportunity to take a vacation, get a massage, do meditation. If you do, massage, do meditation. If you do, massage, do meditation. If you do, great. But most people don't have that great. But most people don't have that great. But most people don't have that level of control over their life in the level of control over their life in the level of control over their life in the moment. So having tools that you can moment. So having tools that you can moment. So having tools that you can deploy to deal with stress in real time deploy to deal with stress in real time deploy to deal with stress in real time and bring your levels of what we call and bring your levels of what we call and bring your levels of what we call sympathetic autonomic nervous system sympathetic autonomic nervous system sympathetic autonomic nervous system activity which is just nerd speak for activity which is just nerd speak for activity which is just nerd speak for stress down is going to be very useful stress down is going to be very useful stress down is going to be very useful and the best tool that I'm aware of and the best tool that I'm aware of and the best tool that I'm aware of that's backed by terrific science not that's backed by terrific science not that's backed by terrific science not just from my lab I have been involved in just from my lab I have been involved in just from my lab I have been involved in some of the science but from other some of the science but from other some of the science but from other laboratories as well and the body of laboratories as well and the body of laboratories as well and the body of research on this is ever expanding and research on this is ever expanding and research on this is ever expanding and it all points in the same direction it all points in the same direction it all points in the same direction which is that exhale emphasized which is that exhale emphasized which is that exhale emphasized breathing slows your heart rate down breathing slows your heart rate down breathing slows your heart rate down through a process called respiratory through a process called respiratory through a process called respiratory sinus arrhythmia sinus arrhythmia sinus arrhythmia and exhale emphasized breathing engages and exhale emphasized breathing engages and exhale emphasized breathing engages the diaphragm which helps balance levels the diaphragm which helps balance levels the diaphragm which helps balance levels of carbon dioxide and oxygen in your of carbon dioxide and oxygen in your of carbon dioxide and oxygen in your bloodstream and brain in ways that bring bloodstream and brain in ways that bring bloodstream and brain in ways that bring your levels of stress down all very your levels of stress down all very your levels of stress down all very quickly in fact and I know some of you quickly in fact and I know some of you quickly in fact and I know some of you have heard this before the fastest way have heard this before the fastest way have heard this before the fastest way to calm down in real time is going to be to calm down in real time is going to be to calm down in real time is going to be the so-called physiological sigh which the so-called physiological sigh which the so-called physiological sigh which is just a big deep inhale through your is just a big deep inhale through your is just a big deep inhale through your nose then a second sharp inhale to try nose then a second sharp inhale to try nose then a second sharp inhale to try and maximally inflate your lungs and maximally inflate your lungs and maximally inflate your lungs and then a long exhale until your lungs are then a long exhale until your lungs are then a long exhale until your lungs are empty. And that long exhale should be empty. And that long exhale should be empty. And that long exhale should be done through your mouth. Even though done through your mouth. Even though done through your mouth. Even though I've demonstrated this many times I've demonstrated this many times I've demonstrated this many times before, I'm going to demonstrate it before, I'm going to demonstrate it before, I'm going to demonstrate it again for those of you that haven't seen again for those of you that haven't seen again for those of you that haven't seen it. It goes like this. All right. Can feel my heart rate go All right. Can feel my heart rate go All right. Can feel my heart rate go down. You probably even just hear it in down. You probably even just hear it in down. You probably even just hear it in my voice. the tamber of the voice my voice. the tamber of the voice my voice. the tamber of the voice and your levels of autonomic activation and your levels of autonomic activation and your levels of autonomic activation are very closely linked. We all know are very closely linked. We all know are very closely linked. We all know this because when people are really this because when people are really this because when people are really stressed they sound stressed and when stressed they sound stressed and when stressed they sound stressed and when they're relaxed they sound more down they're relaxed they sound more down they're relaxed they sound more down here. Okay. It's really key that the here. Okay. It's really key that the here. Okay. It's really key that the first inhale be a big long deliberate first inhale be a big long deliberate first inhale be a big long deliberate inhale through your nose. It's really inhale through your nose. It's really inhale through your nose. It's really key that the second inhale be also key that the second inhale be also key that the second inhale be also through your nose. Even though it's a through your nose. Even though it's a through your nose. Even though it's a sharp little inhale where you're not sharp little inhale where you're not sharp little inhale where you're not sneaking much air in, it causes maximal sneaking much air in, it causes maximal sneaking much air in, it causes maximal inflation of all the little sacks in inflation of all the little sacks in inflation of all the little sacks in your lungs. And then that allows you to your lungs. And then that allows you to your lungs. And then that allows you to maximally offload carbon dioxide when maximally offload carbon dioxide when maximally offload carbon dioxide when you do that long to lungs empty exhale. you do that long to lungs empty exhale. you do that long to lungs empty exhale. The whole thing, as you just saw, The whole thing, as you just saw, The whole thing, as you just saw, probably takes about 30 40 seconds, probably takes about 30 40 seconds, probably takes about 30 40 seconds, maybe a minute maximum. And it is the maybe a minute maximum. And it is the maybe a minute maximum. And it is the fastest and most effective way to calm fastest and most effective way to calm fastest and most effective way to calm yourself down in real time. So if you're yourself down in real time. So if you're yourself down in real time. So if you're experiencing stress, especially in the experiencing stress, especially in the experiencing stress, especially in the evening and nighttime hours, do one to evening and nighttime hours, do one to evening and nighttime hours, do one to three physiological size. If you can't three physiological size. If you can't three physiological size. If you can't remember to do that because you're so remember to do that because you're so remember to do that because you're so stressed, just do some emphasized exhale stressed, just do some emphasized exhale stressed, just do some emphasized exhale breathing. Just just think about dumping breathing. Just just think about dumping breathing. Just just think about dumping your air through your mouth until your air through your mouth until your air through your mouth until your lungs are empty and then do a lungs are empty and then do a lungs are empty and then do a physiological sigh or two. I can't physiological sigh or two. I can't physiological sigh or two. I can't overemphasize just how powerful this overemphasize just how powerful this overemphasize just how powerful this tool is. There have been now recordings tool is. There have been now recordings tool is. There have been now recordings of what's going on in the brain. People of what's going on in the brain. People of what's going on in the brain. People have looked at what's happening with have looked at what's happening with have looked at what's happening with carbon dioxide and oxygen ratios. Your carbon dioxide and oxygen ratios. Your carbon dioxide and oxygen ratios. Your heart rate slows down. There are a bunch heart rate slows down. There are a bunch heart rate slows down. There are a bunch of things that all contribute to of things that all contribute to of things that all contribute to shifting your autonomic nervous system shifting your autonomic nervous system shifting your autonomic nervous system from a more sympathetic activated mode from a more sympathetic activated mode from a more sympathetic activated mode to parasympathetic so-called rest and to parasympathetic so-called rest and to parasympathetic so-called rest and digest mode. And it happens very, very digest mode. And it happens very, very digest mode. And it happens very, very quickly. So, use breathing as a way to quickly. So, use breathing as a way to quickly. So, use breathing as a way to deal with stress in the evening. Again, deal with stress in the evening. Again, deal with stress in the evening. Again, it's a potent technique and it's one it's a potent technique and it's one it's a potent technique and it's one that then puts you into the mental frame that then puts you into the mental frame that then puts you into the mental frame of being able to do the other things of being able to do the other things of being able to do the other things that you need to do in order to keep that you need to do in order to keep that you need to do in order to keep your cortisol low, like make sure that your cortisol low, like make sure that your cortisol low, like make sure that the lights are dim, to make sure that the lights are dim, to make sure that the lights are dim, to make sure that you're not engaging in any kind of you're not engaging in any kind of you're not engaging in any kind of texting or online activity late at night texting or online activity late at night texting or online activity late at night that's going to further exacerbate your that's going to further exacerbate your that's going to further exacerbate your stress. The diabolical thing about stress. The diabolical thing about stress. The diabolical thing about stress is that when we are more stress is that when we are more stress is that when we are more stressed, when our sympathetic nervous stressed, when our sympathetic nervous stressed, when our sympathetic nervous system is activated, we tend to do more system is activated, we tend to do more system is activated, we tend to do more things that make us more stressed. This things that make us more stressed. This things that make us more stressed. This has to do with some of the adaptive has to do with some of the adaptive has to do with some of the adaptive nature of stress, why it's wired into us nature of stress, why it's wired into us nature of stress, why it's wired into us in the way that it is. But what I can in the way that it is. But what I can in the way that it is. But what I can tell you is if you can bring your levels tell you is if you can bring your levels tell you is if you can bring your levels of autonomic activation down, calm of autonomic activation down, calm of autonomic activation down, calm yourself down, you have a lot more yourself down, you have a lot more yourself down, you have a lot more agency and control to direct your agency and control to direct your agency and control to direct your behavior and even to direct your behavior and even to direct your behavior and even to direct your thinking, the patterns of internal thinking, the patterns of internal thinking, the patterns of internal dialogue. And then you can navigate your dialogue. And then you can navigate your dialogue. And then you can navigate your nighttime and evening much more nighttime and evening much more nighttime and evening much more effectively. Even if you are facing a effectively. Even if you are facing a effectively. Even if you are facing a night where you know you're going to get night where you know you're going to get night where you know you're going to get less sleep, right? The thoughts about, less sleep, right? The thoughts about, less sleep, right? The thoughts about, oh, well, what if then if I can't fall oh, well, what if then if I can't fall oh, well, what if then if I can't fall asleep and then tomorrow? All of that asleep and then tomorrow? All of that asleep and then tomorrow? All of that can be dealt with if you just bring your can be dealt with if you just bring your can be dealt with if you just bring your levels of autonomic activation down. So, levels of autonomic activation down. So, levels of autonomic activation down. So, the breathing tool plus dimming the breathing tool plus dimming the breathing tool plus dimming the lights is going to be very effective for lights is going to be very effective for lights is going to be very effective for doing that. The other thing that you can doing that. The other thing that you can doing that. The other thing that you can do to bring your cortisol levels down in do to bring your cortisol levels down in do to bring your cortisol levels down in the evening and at night time is to the evening and at night time is to the evening and at night time is to consume some starchy carbohydrates. Now, consume some starchy carbohydrates. Now, consume some starchy carbohydrates. Now, I know I've talked a lot before about I know I've talked a lot before about I know I've talked a lot before about how most people should probably not eat how most people should probably not eat how most people should probably not eat for the two hours before they go to for the two hours before they go to for the two hours before they go to sleep or ideally even the three hours sleep or ideally even the three hours sleep or ideally even the three hours before they go to sleep. I'm gonna be before they go to sleep. I'm gonna be before they go to sleep. I'm gonna be real honest with you. I find it hard to real honest with you. I find it hard to real honest with you. I find it hard to fall asleep when I'm really hungry. So, fall asleep when I'm really hungry. So, fall asleep when I'm really hungry. So, if it means having a small snack an hour if it means having a small snack an hour if it means having a small snack an hour or even 30 minutes before bed, I'll or even 30 minutes before bed, I'll or even 30 minutes before bed, I'll sometimes do that. But ideally, you're sometimes do that. But ideally, you're sometimes do that. But ideally, you're not eating anything for about two hours not eating anything for about two hours not eating anything for about two hours before you go to sleep. However, if you before you go to sleep. However, if you before you go to sleep. However, if you just have such gnawing hunger that you just have such gnawing hunger that you just have such gnawing hunger that you can't fall asleep, then you're going to can't fall asleep, then you're going to can't fall asleep, then you're going to have to eat something closer to bedtime. have to eat something closer to bedtime. have to eat something closer to bedtime. Right? I think uh we should give Right? I think uh we should give Right? I think uh we should give ourselves permission to strike a balance ourselves permission to strike a balance ourselves permission to strike a balance between not having gnawing hunger that between not having gnawing hunger that between not having gnawing hunger that prevents us from sleeping and also not prevents us from sleeping and also not prevents us from sleeping and also not eating too close to bedtime, which can eating too close to bedtime, which can eating too close to bedtime, which can impair the quality of your sleep. And impair the quality of your sleep. And impair the quality of your sleep. And indeed it can also impair the release of indeed it can also impair the release of indeed it can also impair the release of growth hormone in the first hours of growth hormone in the first hours of growth hormone in the first hours of sleep. So what I recommend is eating in sleep. So what I recommend is eating in sleep. So what I recommend is eating in the evening and at night time. I usually the evening and at night time. I usually the evening and at night time. I usually eat dinner somewhere around, you know, eat dinner somewhere around, you know, eat dinner somewhere around, you know, ideally for me it would be 6:30 to 8:30 ideally for me it would be 6:30 to 8:30 ideally for me it would be 6:30 to 8:30 somewhere in there. I'm flexible with somewhere in there. I'm flexible with somewhere in there. I'm flexible with these things depending on my schedule, these things depending on my schedule, these things depending on my schedule, depending on the day. But if I'm going depending on the day. But if I'm going depending on the day. But if I'm going to eat dinner somewhere around 7:30 p.m. to eat dinner somewhere around 7:30 p.m. to eat dinner somewhere around 7:30 p.m. I try to get some starchy carbohydrates I try to get some starchy carbohydrates I try to get some starchy carbohydrates in that meal. I tend to eat pretty in that meal. I tend to eat pretty in that meal. I tend to eat pretty moderate to low carb throughout the day. moderate to low carb throughout the day. moderate to low carb throughout the day. And then in the evening for my last And then in the evening for my last And then in the evening for my last meal, which again comes around 7:30 p.m. meal, which again comes around 7:30 p.m. meal, which again comes around 7:30 p.m. for me, 7 p.m. I make sure that I have for me, 7 p.m. I make sure that I have for me, 7 p.m. I make sure that I have some starches. I have some rice or I some starches. I have some rice or I some starches. I have some rice or I have some potatoes or yams or, you know, have some potatoes or yams or, you know, have some potatoes or yams or, you know, I like clean starches, so I tend to I like clean starches, so I tend to I like clean starches, so I tend to focus on those things. Maybe some focus on those things. Maybe some focus on those things. Maybe some homemade pasta, whatever you're eating homemade pasta, whatever you're eating homemade pasta, whatever you're eating for starches. What you'll find is that for starches. What you'll find is that for starches. What you'll find is that eating starches in the evening will help eating starches in the evening will help eating starches in the evening will help keep your cortisol low. And guess what? keep your cortisol low. And guess what? keep your cortisol low. And guess what? It's absolutely obvious why that would It's absolutely obvious why that would It's absolutely obvious why that would be. Also, guess what? You know why? You be. Also, guess what? You know why? You be. Also, guess what? You know why? You know the mechanism. Remember, cortisol's know the mechanism. Remember, cortisol's know the mechanism. Remember, cortisol's main job is not to deal with stress. It main job is not to deal with stress. It main job is not to deal with stress. It does that, but it's to deploy blood does that, but it's to deploy blood does that, but it's to deploy blood glucose so that you can deal, yes, with glucose so that you can deal, yes, with glucose so that you can deal, yes, with stress, but with all sorts of things in stress, but with all sorts of things in stress, but with all sorts of things in your schedule. Anything that requires your schedule. Anything that requires your schedule. Anything that requires energy and activity and certainly energy and activity and certainly energy and activity and certainly energy of the brain, but also energy of the of the brain, but also energy of the of the brain, but also energy of the body. So when you hear that there are body. So when you hear that there are body. So when you hear that there are quote unquote comfort foods, those foods quote unquote comfort foods, those foods quote unquote comfort foods, those foods tend to be things that are very tend to be things that are very tend to be things that are very carbohydrate laden because those carbohydrate laden because those carbohydrate laden because those increase your blood glucose. And when increase your blood glucose. And when increase your blood glucose. And when your blood glucose levels are elevated, your blood glucose levels are elevated, your blood glucose levels are elevated, cortisol is not as readily released. I'm cortisol is not as readily released. I'm cortisol is not as readily released. I'm going to say that again. When your blood going to say that again. When your blood going to say that again. When your blood glucose levels are elevated, your glucose levels are elevated, your glucose levels are elevated, your cortisol levels tend to stay low as well cortisol levels tend to stay low as well cortisol levels tend to stay low as well because it's not as readily released. because it's not as readily released. because it's not as readily released. So, there's a reason why people find So, there's a reason why people find So, there's a reason why people find that carbohydrates kind of calm them that carbohydrates kind of calm them that carbohydrates kind of calm them down, that they're comfort foods, and down, that they're comfort foods, and down, that they're comfort foods, and that they relax them. It's because they that they relax them. It's because they that they relax them. It's because they don't directly suppress cortisol, but don't directly suppress cortisol, but don't directly suppress cortisol, but they act through the blood sugar they act through the blood sugar they act through the blood sugar regulation mechanisms that feed back to regulation mechanisms that feed back to regulation mechanisms that feed back to the hypothalamus to control release of the hypothalamus to control release of the hypothalamus to control release of cortisol. There are a couple steps there cortisol. There are a couple steps there cortisol. There are a couple steps there in between, but think about it. the in between, but think about it. the in between, but think about it. the hypothalamus, this structure over the hypothalamus, this structure over the hypothalamus, this structure over the roof of your mouth that contains the roof of your mouth that contains the roof of your mouth that contains the neurons that can trigger the release of neurons that can trigger the release of neurons that can trigger the release of more cortisol or suppress its release. more cortisol or suppress its release. more cortisol or suppress its release. They're in a position because remember They're in a position because remember They're in a position because remember they're parentricular and they have they're parentricular and they have they're parentricular and they have access to what's going on in the access to what's going on in the access to what's going on in the bloodstream to register levels of blood bloodstream to register levels of blood bloodstream to register levels of blood glucose. And so when blood glucose glucose. And so when blood glucose glucose. And so when blood glucose levels are elevated, and I'm not talking levels are elevated, and I'm not talking levels are elevated, and I'm not talking about extra high or, you know, about extra high or, you know, about extra high or, you know, pathologically high. I'm talking about, pathologically high. I'm talking about, pathologically high. I'm talking about, you know, after you have some pasta or you know, after you have some pasta or you know, after you have some pasta or you have a bowl of rice or you have you have a bowl of rice or you have you have a bowl of rice or you have some oatmeal or whatever your favorite some oatmeal or whatever your favorite some oatmeal or whatever your favorite starchy carbohydrate is, the probability starchy carbohydrate is, the probability starchy carbohydrate is, the probability that you're going to release cortisol is that you're going to release cortisol is that you're going to release cortisol is going to be reduced. And the probability going to be reduced. And the probability going to be reduced. And the probability that you're going to continue to make that you're going to continue to make that you're going to continue to make cortisol at high levels is going to be cortisol at high levels is going to be cortisol at high levels is going to be reduced. So, in the evening or at least reduced. So, in the evening or at least reduced. So, in the evening or at least for your last meal of the day, having for your last meal of the day, having for your last meal of the day, having some starches if that's within your some starches if that's within your some starches if that's within your nutritional plan is a good idea if your nutritional plan is a good idea if your nutritional plan is a good idea if your goal is to keep cortisol low. And guess goal is to keep cortisol low. And guess goal is to keep cortisol low. And guess what? Your goal should be to keep what? Your goal should be to keep what? Your goal should be to keep cortisol low because you want to be cortisol low because you want to be cortisol low because you want to be relaxed in the evening and be able to relaxed in the evening and be able to relaxed in the evening and be able to sleep easily. Now, this opens up a sleep easily. Now, this opens up a sleep easily. Now, this opens up a broader conversation about what broader conversation about what broader conversation about what nutrition does in its different nutrition does in its different nutrition does in its different forms, high carb, low carb, etc. to forms, high carb, low carb, etc. to forms, high carb, low carb, etc. to cortisol. Here's a key takeaway, and I'm cortisol. Here's a key takeaway, and I'm cortisol. Here's a key takeaway, and I'm going to keep this very brief because in going to keep this very brief because in going to keep this very brief because in a future episode, we could really go a future episode, we could really go a future episode, we could really go down the rabbit hole of how different down the rabbit hole of how different down the rabbit hole of how different diets impact different hormones, diets impact different hormones, diets impact different hormones, including cortisol. But the big takeaway including cortisol. But the big takeaway including cortisol. But the big takeaway here is they've done studies that here is they've done studies that here is they've done studies that explore low carbohydrate diets versus explore low carbohydrate diets versus explore low carbohydrate diets versus more typical carbohydrate diets. When I more typical carbohydrate diets. When I more typical carbohydrate diets. When I say low versus typical, the general say low versus typical, the general say low versus typical, the general contour of these across studies is contour of these across studies is contour of these across studies is something like this. What they call low something like this. What they call low something like this. What they call low carb means fewer than 30% of calories carb means fewer than 30% of calories carb means fewer than 30% of calories coming from carbohydrate. So here's the coming from carbohydrate. So here's the coming from carbohydrate. So here's the key takeaway. If somebody goes on a low key takeaway. If somebody goes on a low key takeaway. If somebody goes on a low carbohydrate diet and they've not been carbohydrate diet and they've not been carbohydrate diet and they've not been on a low carbohydrate diet, so fewer on a low carbohydrate diet, so fewer on a low carbohydrate diet, so fewer than 30% of daily calories from than 30% of daily calories from than 30% of daily calories from carbohydrates, maybe even lower. So it carbohydrates, maybe even lower. So it carbohydrates, maybe even lower. So it could be, you know, 5%, could be 20%, could be, you know, 5%, could be 20%, could be, you know, 5%, could be 20%, but relatively low carbohydrates. For but relatively low carbohydrates. For but relatively low carbohydrates. For the first three weeks that they're on the first three weeks that they're on the first three weeks that they're on that diet, you see a significant, it's that diet, you see a significant, it's that diet, you see a significant, it's not an enormous, but you see a not an enormous, but you see a not an enormous, but you see a statistically significant increase in statistically significant increase in statistically significant increase in cortisol. And it matches the normal cortisol. And it matches the normal cortisol. And it matches the normal endogenous pattern that they already endogenous pattern that they already endogenous pattern that they already which frankly everybody expresses, which frankly everybody expresses, which frankly everybody expresses, which is higher in the morning, lower in the is higher in the morning, lower in the is higher in the morning, lower in the afternoon and evening. So it's not like afternoon and evening. So it's not like afternoon and evening. So it's not like the endogenous pattern is thrown the endogenous pattern is thrown the endogenous pattern is thrown off. It's just that curve is kind of off. It's just that curve is kind of off. It's just that curve is kind of shifted up a bit at various points, not shifted up a bit at various points, not shifted up a bit at various points, not every point. However, after about three every point. However, after about three every point. However, after about three weeks on that low carbohydrate diet, it weeks on that low carbohydrate diet, it weeks on that low carbohydrate diet, it normalizes. It comes back to their normalizes. It comes back to their normalizes. It comes back to their original level. Now, there's a lot of original level. Now, there's a lot of original level. Now, there's a lot of opportunity for speculation in there. opportunity for speculation in there. opportunity for speculation in there. Like, we could say, wait, after three Like, we could say, wait, after three Like, we could say, wait, after three weeks, the people on the low carb diet, weeks, the people on the low carb diet, weeks, the people on the low carb diet, their cortisol levels came back down. their cortisol levels came back down. their cortisol levels came back down. Does that mean that their blood glucose Does that mean that their blood glucose Does that mean that their blood glucose levels went up? That doesn't appear to levels went up? That doesn't appear to levels went up? That doesn't appear to be the reason. There could be some other be the reason. There could be some other be the reason. There could be some other compensatory mechanisms, but the compensatory mechanisms, but the compensatory mechanisms, but the basic takeaway here is if you're on a basic takeaway here is if you're on a basic takeaway here is if you're on a low carbohydrate diet already and that's low carbohydrate diet already and that's low carbohydrate diet already and that's working for you, you're able to sleep at working for you, you're able to sleep at working for you, you're able to sleep at night just fine. And I think that's night just fine. And I think that's night just fine. And I think that's probably the key um thing that you probably the key um thing that you probably the key um thing that you should be asking yourself. You know, if should be asking yourself. You know, if should be asking yourself. You know, if you're on a low carbohydrate diet, how's you're on a low carbohydrate diet, how's you're on a low carbohydrate diet, how's your sleep? If your sleep is great, your sleep? If your sleep is great, your sleep? If your sleep is great, terrific. If it's not, maybe you want to terrific. If it's not, maybe you want to terrific. If it's not, maybe you want to explore introducing some starchy explore introducing some starchy explore introducing some starchy carbohydrates to your last meal of the carbohydrates to your last meal of the carbohydrates to your last meal of the day. See how that goes. In any case, if day. See how that goes. In any case, if day. See how that goes. In any case, if you're on a low carbohydrate diet and you're on a low carbohydrate diet and you're on a low carbohydrate diet and you're sleeping fine, I wouldn't worry you're sleeping fine, I wouldn't worry you're sleeping fine, I wouldn't worry about its net impact on your cortisol about its net impact on your cortisol about its net impact on your cortisol because the studies I just described because the studies I just described because the studies I just described point to the fact that it's not point to the fact that it's not point to the fact that it's not chronically long-term increasing your chronically long-term increasing your chronically long-term increasing your cortisol. If you're somebody who's cortisol. If you're somebody who's cortisol. If you're somebody who's moving from a higher carbohydrate diet moving from a higher carbohydrate diet moving from a higher carbohydrate diet to a lower carbohydrate diet and you're to a lower carbohydrate diet and you're to a lower carbohydrate diet and you're noticing that you're, I don't know, noticing that you're, I don't know, noticing that you're, I don't know, feeling a bit more stressed, higher feeling a bit more stressed, higher feeling a bit more stressed, higher levels of sympathetic autonomic arousal, levels of sympathetic autonomic arousal, levels of sympathetic autonomic arousal, you're feeling a little more activated, you're feeling a little more activated, you're feeling a little more activated, keep in mind if you're still in the keep in mind if you're still in the keep in mind if you're still in the first three weeks of that transition, first three weeks of that transition, first three weeks of that transition, that's to be expected. Your cortisol that's to be expected. Your cortisol that's to be expected. Your cortisol levels are shifted upward a bit. See how levels are shifted upward a bit. See how levels are shifted upward a bit. See how you feel in the fourth and fifth week you feel in the fourth and fifth week you feel in the fourth and fifth week and then assess if it's right for you. and then assess if it's right for you. and then assess if it's right for you. Again, the relationship between starchy Again, the relationship between starchy Again, the relationship between starchy carbohydrates, glucose increases, and carbohydrates, glucose increases, and carbohydrates, glucose increases, and the relationship between cortisol being the relationship between cortisol being the relationship between cortisol being a mobilizer of glucose makes it all a mobilizer of glucose makes it all a mobilizer of glucose makes it all very, very clear as to why there's this very, very clear as to why there's this very, very clear as to why there's this relationship between carbohydrate intake relationship between carbohydrate intake relationship between carbohydrate intake and cortisol, they're in a kind of a and cortisol, they're in a kind of a and cortisol, they're in a kind of a reciprocal relationship. Now, the one reciprocal relationship. Now, the one reciprocal relationship. Now, the one caveat to that is indeed if you are caveat to that is indeed if you are caveat to that is indeed if you are dealing with metabolic syndrome, like dealing with metabolic syndrome, like dealing with metabolic syndrome, like you are um insulin insensitive because you are um insulin insensitive because you are um insulin insensitive because you've been ingesting too many calories you've been ingesting too many calories you've been ingesting too many calories or too many carbohydrates in particular, or too many carbohydrates in particular, or too many carbohydrates in particular, too many simple sugars, etc., are all too many simple sugars, etc., are all too many simple sugars, etc., are all the things that can start to lead to the things that can start to lead to the things that can start to lead to insulin insensitivity where you start insulin insensitivity where you start insulin insensitivity where you start cranking out more and more glucose cranking out more and more glucose cranking out more and more glucose because your insulin isn't doing such a because your insulin isn't doing such a because your insulin isn't doing such a good job of uh getting that glucose good job of uh getting that glucose good job of uh getting that glucose to your cells. What we call insulin to your cells. What we call insulin to your cells. What we call insulin insensitivity nowadays people refer to insensitivity nowadays people refer to insensitivity nowadays people refer to as metabolic syndrome, although that's a as metabolic syndrome, although that's a as metabolic syndrome, although that's a much bigger theme. Well, then keep in much bigger theme. Well, then keep in much bigger theme. Well, then keep in mind that your cortisol levels will go mind that your cortisol levels will go mind that your cortisol levels will go up as you have less ability to use the up as you have less ability to use the up as you have less ability to use the glucose that you're making. And guess glucose that you're making. And guess glucose that you're making. And guess what? That makes perfect sense because what? That makes perfect sense because what? That makes perfect sense because as you can't use the glucose that you're as you can't use the glucose that you're as you can't use the glucose that you're making, it doesn't matter if your blood making, it doesn't matter if your blood making, it doesn't matter if your blood glucose levels are high because that glucose levels are high because that glucose levels are high because that hypothalamus, it also needs to respond hypothalamus, it also needs to respond hypothalamus, it also needs to respond to glucose in an insulin dependent way. to glucose in an insulin dependent way. to glucose in an insulin dependent way. It needs to actually be able to use It needs to actually be able to use It needs to actually be able to use those high levels of glucose. So again, those high levels of glucose. So again, those high levels of glucose. So again, the relationship between glucose and the relationship between glucose and the relationship between glucose and insulin sensitivity and cortisol all insulin sensitivity and cortisol all insulin sensitivity and cortisol all jibes perfectly well when we think about jibes perfectly well when we think about jibes perfectly well when we think about mechanisms. And the reason I'm going mechanisms. And the reason I'm going mechanisms. And the reason I'm going into all of this is so that you can have into all of this is so that you can have into all of this is so that you can have a thoughtful look at your nutrition. a thoughtful look at your nutrition. a thoughtful look at your nutrition. What are you eating? What percentage of What are you eating? What percentage of What are you eating? What percentage of it comes from starchy carbohydrates? How it comes from starchy carbohydrates? How it comes from starchy carbohydrates? How are those distributed across the day? are those distributed across the day? are those distributed across the day? When are you stressed? How stressed are When are you stressed? How stressed are When are you stressed? How stressed are you? Are you, you know, just having a you? Are you, you know, just having a you? Are you, you know, just having a really light dinner and you're feeling really light dinner and you're feeling really light dinner and you're feeling like kind of anxious at night? Are you like kind of anxious at night? Are you like kind of anxious at night? Are you got bright lights on? Just as for got bright lights on? Just as for got bright lights on? Just as for controlling your cortisol in the controlling your cortisol in the controlling your cortisol in the morning, you want to stack various morning, you want to stack various morning, you want to stack various things, bright light exposure, caffeine, things, bright light exposure, caffeine, things, bright light exposure, caffeine, hydration, exercise, etc. In the hydration, exercise, etc. In the hydration, exercise, etc. In the evening, in order to get your cortisol evening, in order to get your cortisol evening, in order to get your cortisol levels right, in order to be able to levels right, in order to be able to levels right, in order to be able to fall and stay deeply asleep, you want to fall and stay deeply asleep, you want to fall and stay deeply asleep, you want to also stack these various things. No also stack these various things. No also stack these various things. No one's perfect about all of them. And if one's perfect about all of them. And if one's perfect about all of them. And if you can't control one of them, let's say you can't control one of them, let's say you can't control one of them, let's say you're under the bright lights at night you're under the bright lights at night you're under the bright lights at night because you're working late or you're at because you're working late or you're at because you're working late or you're at a concert, fine. That's life. You know, a concert, fine. That's life. You know, a concert, fine. That's life. You know, that's just kind of what a good life is. that's just kind of what a good life is. that's just kind of what a good life is. I don't think optimizing means not I don't think optimizing means not I don't think optimizing means not living or going to a concert, you know, living or going to a concert, you know, living or going to a concert, you know, this kind of thing or being in a this kind of thing or being in a this kind of thing or being in a restaurant. You need to live and enjoy restaurant. You need to live and enjoy restaurant. You need to live and enjoy your life. But then maybe you do a few your life. But then maybe you do a few your life. But then maybe you do a few other things to be able to try and bring other things to be able to try and bring other things to be able to try and bring your cortisol levels down that evening. your cortisol levels down that evening. your cortisol levels down that evening. Things that are easily accessible and Things that are easily accessible and Things that are easily accessible and that are going to allow you to achieve that are going to allow you to achieve that are going to allow you to achieve what you want, which is to get a great what you want, which is to get a great what you want, which is to get a great night's sleep. Let's take a moment and night's sleep. Let's take a moment and night's sleep. Let's take a moment and talk about exercise late in the day. And talk about exercise late in the day. And talk about exercise late in the day. And when I say late in the day, I mean when I say late in the day, I mean when I say late in the day, I mean anytime after sundown, right? I think by anytime after sundown, right? I think by anytime after sundown, right? I think by now you already are realizing that the now you already are realizing that the now you already are realizing that the kind of ideal situation, regardless of kind of ideal situation, regardless of kind of ideal situation, regardless of whether or not you wake up later in the whether or not you wake up later in the whether or not you wake up later in the day or you wake up at 5:00 a.m. or day or you wake up at 5:00 a.m. or day or you wake up at 5:00 a.m. or you're like Jaco, you wake up at 4:30 you're like Jaco, you wake up at 4:30 you're like Jaco, you wake up at 4:30 a.m. and you get into your exercise a.m. and you get into your exercise a.m. and you get into your exercise right away. The ideal situation for your right away. The ideal situation for your right away. The ideal situation for your cortisol rhythm would be to exercise cortisol rhythm would be to exercise cortisol rhythm would be to exercise early in the day. You know, I realize early in the day. You know, I realize early in the day. You know, I realize not everyone is an early riser. So when not everyone is an early riser. So when not everyone is an early riser. So when they hear that, they think, "Oh, I don't they hear that, they think, "Oh, I don't they hear that, they think, "Oh, I don't want to exercise early in the day or I want to exercise early in the day or I want to exercise early in the day or I can't." I'm not saying you necessarily can't." I'm not saying you necessarily can't." I'm not saying you necessarily have to exercise right as you wake up. have to exercise right as you wake up. have to exercise right as you wake up. But when you are thinking about your But when you are thinking about your But when you are thinking about your cortisol rhythm, the ideal pattern of cortisol rhythm, the ideal pattern of cortisol rhythm, the ideal pattern of exercise and cortisol release would be exercise and cortisol release would be exercise and cortisol release would be where you exercise early in the day where you exercise early in the day where you exercise early in the day after sunlight exposure or under bright after sunlight exposure or under bright after sunlight exposure or under bright light exposure. We talked about all that light exposure. We talked about all that light exposure. We talked about all that before, but let's face it, some people before, but let's face it, some people before, but let's face it, some people can't exercise early in the day and can't exercise early in the day and can't exercise early in the day and certainly not every day. We have certainly not every day. We have certainly not every day. We have schedules, we have constraints, and it's schedules, we have constraints, and it's schedules, we have constraints, and it's very important that we get our very important that we get our very important that we get our resistance training and it's very resistance training and it's very resistance training and it's very important that we get our cardiovascular important that we get our cardiovascular important that we get our cardiovascular exercise on a regular basis. So, if exercise on a regular basis. So, if exercise on a regular basis. So, if you're somebody who prefers to exercise you're somebody who prefers to exercise you're somebody who prefers to exercise at noon time or 1:00 p.m. or 2 p.m. or 3 at noon time or 1:00 p.m. or 2 p.m. or 3 at noon time or 1:00 p.m. or 2 p.m. or 3 p.m., great. You already know based on p.m., great. You already know based on p.m., great. You already know based on what we described about the indogenous what we described about the indogenous what we described about the indogenous pattern of cortisol release that that's pattern of cortisol release that that's pattern of cortisol release that that's a time of day when it's really hard to a time of day when it's really hard to a time of day when it's really hard to trigger a positive feedback loop on trigger a positive feedback loop on trigger a positive feedback loop on cortisol. So, if you have a really cortisol. So, if you have a really cortisol. So, if you have a really grueling, hard, intense workout at 2 grueling, hard, intense workout at 2 grueling, hard, intense workout at 2 p.m. and before that you drink an energy p.m. and before that you drink an energy p.m. and before that you drink an energy drink or a big cup of coffee or if drink or a big cup of coffee or if drink or a big cup of coffee or if you're me some yerba mate plus a big cup you're me some yerba mate plus a big cup you're me some yerba mate plus a big cup of coffee, maybe an alpha GPC every once of coffee, maybe an alpha GPC every once of coffee, maybe an alpha GPC every once in a while. I'll do that and then hit in a while. I'll do that and then hit in a while. I'll do that and then hit the gym really hard in the early the gym really hard in the early the gym really hard in the early afternoon. You know, I prefer to do that afternoon. You know, I prefer to do that afternoon. You know, I prefer to do that in the morning and I don't always take in the morning and I don't always take in the morning and I don't always take all those things before I work out, all those things before I work out, all those things before I work out, right? Only before resistance training right? Only before resistance training right? Only before resistance training do I drink caffeine usually. And only do I drink caffeine usually. And only do I drink caffeine usually. And only before really hard workouts do I do before really hard workouts do I do before really hard workouts do I do things besides drink caffeine. and I'll things besides drink caffeine. and I'll things besides drink caffeine. and I'll do caffeine and alpha GPC and you know do caffeine and alpha GPC and you know do caffeine and alpha GPC and you know in some cases a lot of caffeine but I in some cases a lot of caffeine but I in some cases a lot of caffeine but I get it you know some of you like to work get it you know some of you like to work get it you know some of you like to work out in the afternoon and actually if you out in the afternoon and actually if you out in the afternoon and actually if you look at the data on resistance training look at the data on resistance training look at the data on resistance training and athletic performance the bulk of it and athletic performance the bulk of it and athletic performance the bulk of it points to the fact that performance at points to the fact that performance at points to the fact that performance at those activities strength tends to be at those activities strength tends to be at those activities strength tends to be greater in the afternoon as opposed to greater in the afternoon as opposed to greater in the afternoon as opposed to the morning for most people but the morning for most people but the morning for most people but the basic takeaway is train when you can basic takeaway is train when you can basic takeaway is train when you can train when it's available to you but you train when it's available to you but you train when it's available to you but you don't want to spike your cortisol too don't want to spike your cortisol too don't want to spike your cortisol too late in the day so that it disrupts your late in the day so that it disrupts your late in the day so that it disrupts your sleep. So, the good news is that if you sleep. So, the good news is that if you sleep. So, the good news is that if you train resistance training or train resistance training or train resistance training or cardiovascular exercise, doesn't matter, cardiovascular exercise, doesn't matter, cardiovascular exercise, doesn't matter, or a combination of the two, if that's or a combination of the two, if that's or a combination of the two, if that's what you're doing, if you end up doing what you're doing, if you end up doing what you're doing, if you end up doing that in the early afternoon or even as that in the early afternoon or even as that in the early afternoon or even as late as sundown, you're probably going late as sundown, you're probably going late as sundown, you're probably going to be okay. Your cortisol rhythm is to be okay. Your cortisol rhythm is to be okay. Your cortisol rhythm is still going to continue to drop. Your still going to continue to drop. Your still going to continue to drop. Your indogenous cortisol rhythm is going to indogenous cortisol rhythm is going to indogenous cortisol rhythm is going to continue to drop into the late evening continue to drop into the late evening continue to drop into the late evening and nighttime hours, and you'll be and nighttime hours, and you'll be and nighttime hours, and you'll be allowed to sleep. Yes, you will have to allowed to sleep. Yes, you will have to allowed to sleep. Yes, you will have to do certain things to ensure that do certain things to ensure that do certain things to ensure that happens. I would suggest eating some happens. I would suggest eating some happens. I would suggest eating some starchy carbohydrates, especially after starchy carbohydrates, especially after starchy carbohydrates, especially after a hard resistance training workout that a hard resistance training workout that a hard resistance training workout that comes later in the day. A hard that is a comes later in the day. A hard that is a comes later in the day. A hard that is a moderate to highintensity exercise moderate to highintensity exercise moderate to highintensity exercise session has been shown to triple or session has been shown to triple or session has been shown to triple or quadruple your cortisol levels when it quadruple your cortisol levels when it quadruple your cortisol levels when it comes later in the day or in the comes later in the day or in the comes later in the day or in the evening. And remember, that's a time evening. And remember, that's a time evening. And remember, that's a time when your basil, your indogenous when your basil, your indogenous when your basil, your indogenous cortisol levels are very, very low. So, cortisol levels are very, very low. So, cortisol levels are very, very low. So, you get this big inflection in cortisol you get this big inflection in cortisol you get this big inflection in cortisol from the workout. So, if you're going to from the workout. So, if you're going to from the workout. So, if you're going to work out much later in the day, like a work out much later in the day, like a work out much later in the day, like a like you're getting off work at 5 or 6 like you're getting off work at 5 or 6 like you're getting off work at 5 or 6 p.m. or 7:00 p.m. I've had phases of my p.m. or 7:00 p.m. I've had phases of my p.m. or 7:00 p.m. I've had phases of my life when this was the case for me and I life when this was the case for me and I life when this was the case for me and I still want to get my gym workout in and still want to get my gym workout in and still want to get my gym workout in and it's bright lights in the gym. I wasn't it's bright lights in the gym. I wasn't it's bright lights in the gym. I wasn't somebody who wore sunglasses in the gym. somebody who wore sunglasses in the gym. somebody who wore sunglasses in the gym. Sorry. Back then, we didn't have the Sorry. Back then, we didn't have the Sorry. Back then, we didn't have the windown glasses. I wish I had them. windown glasses. I wish I had them. windown glasses. I wish I had them. They would be great for a gym workout, They would be great for a gym workout, They would be great for a gym workout, but I will caution you. Uh, those but I will caution you. Uh, those but I will caution you. Uh, those glasses do make it hard to see certain glasses do make it hard to see certain glasses do make it hard to see certain boundaries between objects, and you boundaries between objects, and you boundaries between objects, and you always want to prioritize safety over always want to prioritize safety over always want to prioritize safety over everything else. So, if you're in a gym, everything else. So, if you're in a gym, everything else. So, if you're in a gym, bright lights, working out at 5 or 6 bright lights, working out at 5 or 6 bright lights, working out at 5 or 6 p.m., you do your hard workout, when you p.m., you do your hard workout, when you p.m., you do your hard workout, when you walk out of there, your cortisol levels walk out of there, your cortisol levels walk out of there, your cortisol levels are ratcheted way up. This is just the are ratcheted way up. This is just the are ratcheted way up. This is just the reality, and there are good data on reality, and there are good data on reality, and there are good data on this. Now, that's not necessarily a this. Now, that's not necessarily a this. Now, that's not necessarily a problem, but your goal is to fall asleep problem, but your goal is to fall asleep problem, but your goal is to fall asleep that night. So, it would be very wise to that night. So, it would be very wise to that night. So, it would be very wise to certainly get some quality protein, but certainly get some quality protein, but certainly get some quality protein, but also some starchy carbohydrate, probably also some starchy carbohydrate, probably also some starchy carbohydrate, probably some fruit or something else to really some fruit or something else to really some fruit or something else to really get your glycogen stores uh replenished get your glycogen stores uh replenished get your glycogen stores uh replenished again. But you're also going to want to again. But you're also going to want to again. But you're also going to want to do some long exhale breathing. Maybe do some long exhale breathing. Maybe do some long exhale breathing. Maybe just take two or three minutes and do just take two or three minutes and do just take two or three minutes and do some long exhale breathing after your some long exhale breathing after your some long exhale breathing after your workout in your car before you drive workout in your car before you drive workout in your car before you drive home or when you get home. You want to home or when you get home. You want to home or when you get home. You want to take a hot shower. Great. If you can sit take a hot shower. Great. If you can sit take a hot shower. Great. If you can sit in a sauna, then take a warm shower, in a sauna, then take a warm shower, in a sauna, then take a warm shower, kind of a neutral shower, not a cold kind of a neutral shower, not a cold kind of a neutral shower, not a cold shower that's going to like blast your shower that's going to like blast your shower that's going to like blast your stress levels up. You know, take a your stress levels up. You know, take a your stress levels up. You know, take a nice mellow shower. You just want to do nice mellow shower. You just want to do nice mellow shower. You just want to do some things to bring your cortisol some things to bring your cortisol some things to bring your cortisol levels down, increase the levels of that levels down, increase the levels of that levels down, increase the levels of that parasympathetic autonomic activity. long parasympathetic autonomic activity. long parasympathetic autonomic activity. long exhale breathing, starchy carbohydrates, exhale breathing, starchy carbohydrates, exhale breathing, starchy carbohydrates, dim the lights. Hot shower is great, dim the lights. Hot shower is great, dim the lights. Hot shower is great, sauna if you have access to it. Take sauna if you have access to it. Take sauna if you have access to it. Take everything down a notch. And then everything down a notch. And then everything down a notch. And then certainly don't stimulate your certainly don't stimulate your certainly don't stimulate your nervous system with bright light of any nervous system with bright light of any nervous system with bright light of any kind, right? Red light, dim light, kind, right? Red light, dim light, kind, right? Red light, dim light, windown glasses, all that's going to windown glasses, all that's going to windown glasses, all that's going to help you. But don't get on your phone or help you. But don't get on your phone or help you. But don't get on your phone or computer right before getting into bed computer right before getting into bed computer right before getting into bed because you've already spiked your because you've already spiked your because you've already spiked your cortisol from that workout and your cortisol from that workout and your cortisol from that workout and your basil cortisol levels are low. And so basil cortisol levels are low. And so basil cortisol levels are low. And so it's a perfect time to send yourself it's a perfect time to send yourself it's a perfect time to send yourself into later hours of the night when your into later hours of the night when your into later hours of the night when your cortisol is way too high. And the big cortisol is way too high. And the big cortisol is way too high. And the big problem there is not only will it problem there is not only will it problem there is not only will it disrupt your nighttime sleep, but it disrupt your nighttime sleep, but it disrupt your nighttime sleep, but it also disrupts your next morning cortisol also disrupts your next morning cortisol also disrupts your next morning cortisol levels. I'm going to remind you how that levels. I'm going to remind you how that levels. I'm going to remind you how that happens in a moment. But before we do happens in a moment. But before we do happens in a moment. But before we do that, I'm going to remind you of this that, I'm going to remind you of this that, I'm going to remind you of this really terrific study that we discussed really terrific study that we discussed really terrific study that we discussed at the beginning of this episode was at the beginning of this episode was at the beginning of this episode was I'll repeat the title again. 24-hour I'll repeat the title again. 24-hour I'll repeat the title again. 24-hour pattern of the episodic secretion of pattern of the episodic secretion of pattern of the episodic secretion of cortisol in normal subjects. And cortisol in normal subjects. And cortisol in normal subjects. And remember, there's this phase one, remember, there's this phase one, remember, there's this phase one, they've referred to it as a 6-h hour they've referred to it as a 6-h hour they've referred to it as a 6-h hour period of minimal secrettory activity. period of minimal secrettory activity. period of minimal secrettory activity. That means extremely low levels of That means extremely low levels of That means extremely low levels of cortisol being released that spans from cortisol being released that spans from cortisol being released that spans from 4 hours before and 2 hours after lights 4 hours before and 2 hours after lights 4 hours before and 2 hours after lights out. 4 hours before and 2 hours after out. 4 hours before and 2 hours after out. 4 hours before and 2 hours after going to sleep. going to sleep. going to sleep. That's when you want your cortisol That's when you want your cortisol That's when you want your cortisol lowest. So, if you're working out in the lowest. So, if you're working out in the lowest. So, if you're working out in the late evening and closer to sleep, you're late evening and closer to sleep, you're late evening and closer to sleep, you're going to need to do a number of things going to need to do a number of things going to need to do a number of things to really try and offset any increases to really try and offset any increases to really try and offset any increases in cortisol. It's so critical that you in cortisol. It's so critical that you in cortisol. It's so critical that you get this phase one correct. And the get this phase one correct. And the get this phase one correct. And the reason is if your cortisol is spiked, reason is if your cortisol is spiked, reason is if your cortisol is spiked, then even if you do a bunch of things to then even if you do a bunch of things to then even if you do a bunch of things to be able to fall asleep, you're going to be able to fall asleep, you're going to be able to fall asleep, you're going to blunt your next morning cortisol. And blunt your next morning cortisol. And blunt your next morning cortisol. And you know why that would be the case? you know why that would be the case? you know why that would be the case? Think about it. Think about it. Think about it. The whole rhythm in cortisol is The whole rhythm in cortisol is The whole rhythm in cortisol is generated by this negative feedback loop generated by this negative feedback loop generated by this negative feedback loop where if cortisol levels get too high, where if cortisol levels get too high, where if cortisol levels get too high, your hypothalamus suppresses this the your hypothalamus suppresses this the your hypothalamus suppresses this the creation of more cortisol. So if at creation of more cortisol. So if at creation of more cortisol. So if at night when your cortisol is supposed to night when your cortisol is supposed to night when your cortisol is supposed to be especially low, you spike your be especially low, you spike your be especially low, you spike your cortisol and it stays up too long, you cortisol and it stays up too long, you cortisol and it stays up too long, you don't do things to bring it down after a don't do things to bring it down after a don't do things to bring it down after a workout or you drank too much caffeine workout or you drank too much caffeine workout or you drank too much caffeine before that workout and then you really before that workout and then you really before that workout and then you really are up late and the whole thing starts are up late and the whole thing starts are up late and the whole thing starts to span into the hours that you really to span into the hours that you really to span into the hours that you really should be sleeping. What's going to should be sleeping. What's going to should be sleeping. What's going to happen? What's going to happen is the happen? What's going to happen is the happen? What's going to happen is the next morning your cortisol levels are next morning your cortisol levels are next morning your cortisol levels are going to be suppressed because your going to be suppressed because your going to be suppressed because your hypothalamus is seeing levels of hypothalamus is seeing levels of hypothalamus is seeing levels of cortisol that are far too high much cortisol that are far too high much cortisol that are far too high much higher than normal. And so the next higher than normal. And so the next higher than normal. And so the next morning you're going to feel sluggish. morning you're going to feel sluggish. morning you're going to feel sluggish. You're going to have a hard time waking You're going to have a hard time waking You're going to have a hard time waking up. You're going to have a really hard up. You're going to have a really hard up. You're going to have a really hard time focusing. You're going to feel like time focusing. You're going to feel like time focusing. You're going to feel like you're in a fog. And most people deal you're in a fog. And most people deal you're in a fog. And most people deal with this by what? By drinking more with this by what? By drinking more with this by what? By drinking more caffeine, which on its own is not a caffeine, which on its own is not a caffeine, which on its own is not a terribly bad thing, right? It's going to terribly bad thing, right? It's going to terribly bad thing, right? It's going to prolong the release of cortisol, but prolong the release of cortisol, but prolong the release of cortisol, but it's not going to spike the increase in it's not going to spike the increase in it's not going to spike the increase in cortisol. So, if you screw up and you cortisol. So, if you screw up and you cortisol. So, if you screw up and you train too late and you drank caffeine train too late and you drank caffeine train too late and you drank caffeine before and you don't have the before and you don't have the before and you don't have the opportunity to dim the lights, you're opportunity to dim the lights, you're opportunity to dim the lights, you're not doing your long exhale breathing and not doing your long exhale breathing and not doing your long exhale breathing and you have this, you know, you basically you have this, you know, you basically you have this, you know, you basically are eating into the hours that you are eating into the hours that you are eating into the hours that you should be sleeping or you spike your should be sleeping or you spike your should be sleeping or you spike your cortisol some other way, you get into an cortisol some other way, you get into an cortisol some other way, you get into an argument before sleep or you're up late argument before sleep or you're up late argument before sleep or you're up late because you're dealing with some stress. because you're dealing with some stress. because you're dealing with some stress. Guess what? the next morning, especially Guess what? the next morning, especially Guess what? the next morning, especially if you've had a shortened night of if you've had a shortened night of if you've had a shortened night of sleep, especially if you had stress the sleep, especially if you had stress the sleep, especially if you had stress the night before of any kind, you want to night before of any kind, you want to night before of any kind, you want to take an extra effort to spike your take an extra effort to spike your take an extra effort to spike your cortisol levels. You're going to need to cortisol levels. You're going to need to cortisol levels. You're going to need to try and boost your cortisol levels even try and boost your cortisol levels even try and boost your cortisol levels even higher through bright light, hydration, higher through bright light, hydration, higher through bright light, hydration, maybe not exercising again if you maybe not exercising again if you maybe not exercising again if you already train the night before, maybe already train the night before, maybe already train the night before, maybe cold shower. you're really going to want cold shower. you're really going to want cold shower. you're really going to want to do all the things you can to try and to do all the things you can to try and to do all the things you can to try and spike your cortisol so that at least the spike your cortisol so that at least the spike your cortisol so that at least the next day and the next night your next day and the next night your next day and the next night your cortisol levels are back on track. So cortisol levels are back on track. So cortisol levels are back on track. So many people get this wrong and for years many people get this wrong and for years many people get this wrong and for years I got this wrong. I would occasionally I got this wrong. I would occasionally I got this wrong. I would occasionally work out in the morning, then I'd work out in the morning, then I'd work out in the morning, then I'd work out in the evening and then I noticed out in the evening and then I noticed out in the evening and then I noticed that my schedule just was getting that my schedule just was getting that my schedule just was getting tougher and tougher to adhere to because tougher and tougher to adhere to because tougher and tougher to adhere to because some mornings I was dragging, other some mornings I was dragging, other some mornings I was dragging, other mornings I was feeling great because I mornings I was feeling great because I mornings I was feeling great because I got to bed early the night before. The got to bed early the night before. The got to bed early the night before. The whole thing was kind of a mess. If I had whole thing was kind of a mess. If I had whole thing was kind of a mess. If I had only understood that if I were to have only understood that if I were to have only understood that if I were to have some stress the night before going to some stress the night before going to some stress the night before going to sleep, anytime in that first secrettory sleep, anytime in that first secrettory sleep, anytime in that first secrettory phase, as it's referred to, the four phase, as it's referred to, the four phase, as it's referred to, the four hours before and the two hours after hours before and the two hours after hours before and the two hours after sleep, any stress that eats into that sleep, any stress that eats into that sleep, any stress that eats into that period, whether it's exercise caused or period, whether it's exercise caused or period, whether it's exercise caused or psychologically called caused, excuse psychologically called caused, excuse psychologically called caused, excuse me, whatever, needed to be offset by me, whatever, needed to be offset by me, whatever, needed to be offset by spiking my morning cortisol more using spiking my morning cortisol more using spiking my morning cortisol more using the various tools that I've described. the various tools that I've described. the various tools that I've described. So, you now understand the global rhythm So, you now understand the global rhythm So, you now understand the global rhythm in cortisol. higher in the morning and in cortisol. higher in the morning and in cortisol. higher in the morning and you want to amplify that lower in the you want to amplify that lower in the you want to amplify that lower in the afternoon and evening, you know, afternoon and evening, you know, afternoon and evening, you know, dropping in the early afternoon, later dropping in the early afternoon, later dropping in the early afternoon, later afternoon and evening and then ideally afternoon and evening and then ideally afternoon and evening and then ideally staying low at night time so that they staying low at night time so that they staying low at night time so that they can come back up again in the morning. can come back up again in the morning. can come back up again in the morning. So, if you're exercising late in the So, if you're exercising late in the So, if you're exercising late in the day, that's when you can do it. That's day, that's when you can do it. That's day, that's when you can do it. That's when you like to do it. Great. But do when you like to do it. Great. But do when you like to do it. Great. But do things to bring your cortisol levels things to bring your cortisol levels things to bring your cortisol levels back down. Okay, let's talk about back down. Okay, let's talk about back down. Okay, let's talk about compounds aka supplements that one can compounds aka supplements that one can compounds aka supplements that one can take to reduce their cortisol since your take to reduce their cortisol since your take to reduce their cortisol since your goal is to reduce your cortisol in the goal is to reduce your cortisol in the goal is to reduce your cortisol in the evening and at night. There are many evening and at night. There are many evening and at night. There are many supplements that have been purported to supplements that have been purported to supplements that have been purported to reduce cortisol. These include things reduce cortisol. These include things reduce cortisol. These include things like ashwagandha, apagenine, which we'll like ashwagandha, apagenine, which we'll like ashwagandha, apagenine, which we'll discuss, things like phosphotidal discuss, things like phosphotidal discuss, things like phosphotidal serereine, even rodeiola. There are a serereine, even rodeiola. There are a serereine, even rodeiola. There are a long list of things that have been long list of things that have been long list of things that have been purported to reduce cortisol. However, purported to reduce cortisol. However, purported to reduce cortisol. However, there's a short list of things that have there's a short list of things that have there's a short list of things that have been shown to do that relatively been shown to do that relatively been shown to do that relatively potently and to act pretty quickly and potently and to act pretty quickly and potently and to act pretty quickly and that are generally available out there. that are generally available out there. that are generally available out there. The most commonly discussed one in the The most commonly discussed one in the The most commonly discussed one in the context of reducing cortisol is context of reducing cortisol is context of reducing cortisol is ashwagandha. Now, if you look at the ashwagandha. Now, if you look at the ashwagandha. Now, if you look at the literature on ashwagandha, you will see literature on ashwagandha, you will see literature on ashwagandha, you will see that indeed it can be effective in that indeed it can be effective in that indeed it can be effective in reducing cortisol levels by anywhere reducing cortisol levels by anywhere reducing cortisol levels by anywhere from about 11% to 29%. And there may be from about 11% to 29%. And there may be from about 11% to 29%. And there may be studies that fall outside those margins, studies that fall outside those margins, studies that fall outside those margins, but if you look at the best studies, but if you look at the best studies, but if you look at the best studies, that's really what it points to. Now, that's really what it points to. Now, that's really what it points to. Now, here's a key thing. You already know here's a key thing. You already know here's a key thing. You already know that you want your cortisol levels that you want your cortisol levels that you want your cortisol levels relatively high to high early in the relatively high to high early in the relatively high to high early in the morning and through the midm morning and morning and through the midm morning and morning and through the midm morning and dropping into the early afternoon and dropping into the early afternoon and dropping into the early afternoon and you want them low in the late afternoon you want them low in the late afternoon you want them low in the late afternoon and at night. So if you're going to and at night. So if you're going to and at night. So if you're going to experiment with ashwagandha as a means experiment with ashwagandha as a means experiment with ashwagandha as a means to reduce your cortisol levels and to reduce your cortisol levels and to reduce your cortisol levels and you're going to take ashwagandha at the you're going to take ashwagandha at the you're going to take ashwagandha at the dosages that significantly decrease dosages that significantly decrease dosages that significantly decrease cortisol levels which would be dosages cortisol levels which would be dosages cortisol levels which would be dosages somewhere between 300 milligrams and somewhere between 300 milligrams and somewhere between 300 milligrams and it's been explored all the way up to 900 it's been explored all the way up to 900 it's been explored all the way up to 900 milligrams but typically I would milligrams but typically I would milligrams but typically I would recommend if you're going to explore recommend if you're going to explore recommend if you're going to explore ashwagandha that you would explore lower ashwagandha that you would explore lower ashwagandha that you would explore lower dosages somewhere in the neighborhood of dosages somewhere in the neighborhood of dosages somewhere in the neighborhood of 300 milligrams at least to start right 300 milligrams at least to start right 300 milligrams at least to start right you always want to look for the minimal you always want to look for the minimal you always want to look for the minimal effective dose that you restrict your effective dose that you restrict your effective dose that you restrict your intake of ashwagandha to the late intake of ashwagandha to the late intake of ashwagandha to the late afternoon and evening and nighttime afternoon and evening and nighttime afternoon and evening and nighttime hours to keep your cortisol levels low hours to keep your cortisol levels low hours to keep your cortisol levels low and that you avoid taking dosages of and that you avoid taking dosages of and that you avoid taking dosages of ashwagandha certainly as high as 300 ashwagandha certainly as high as 300 ashwagandha certainly as high as 300 milligrams anytime early in the day. In milligrams anytime early in the day. In milligrams anytime early in the day. In fact, if you're going to take fact, if you're going to take fact, if you're going to take ashwagandha and it is it contained in ashwagandha and it is it contained in ashwagandha and it is it contained in various uh compound blends like AG1 and various uh compound blends like AG1 and various uh compound blends like AG1 and other things but at very low levels, low other things but at very low levels, low other things but at very low levels, low milligram count, that's going to be fine milligram count, that's going to be fine milligram count, that's going to be fine early in the day. Anything less than say early in the day. Anything less than say early in the day. Anything less than say 50 or 100 milligrams early in the day, 50 or 100 milligrams early in the day, 50 or 100 milligrams early in the day, not going to have a significant impact not going to have a significant impact not going to have a significant impact on cortisol. But taken later in the day on cortisol. But taken later in the day on cortisol. But taken later in the day in order to reduce your levels of in order to reduce your levels of in order to reduce your levels of cortisol, 300 milligrams, 600 cortisol, 300 milligrams, 600 cortisol, 300 milligrams, 600 milligrams, that really should just be milligrams, that really should just be milligrams, that really should just be restricted to later in the day for restricted to later in the day for restricted to later in the day for obvious reasons or at least they should obvious reasons or at least they should obvious reasons or at least they should be obvious to you now. So as I mentioned be obvious to you now. So as I mentioned be obvious to you now. So as I mentioned there are data pointing to the fact that there are data pointing to the fact that there are data pointing to the fact that ashwagandha can reduce cortisol levels ashwagandha can reduce cortisol levels ashwagandha can reduce cortisol levels by a significant degree. You still need by a significant degree. You still need by a significant degree. You still need to do and ideally you are already doing to do and ideally you are already doing to do and ideally you are already doing all the various things to reduce your all the various things to reduce your all the various things to reduce your cortisol levels before you even take cortisol levels before you even take cortisol levels before you even take ashwagandha or experiment with it. I ashwagandha or experiment with it. I ashwagandha or experiment with it. I always recommend that you do the always recommend that you do the always recommend that you do the behavioral things first and then decide behavioral things first and then decide behavioral things first and then decide whether or not you need supplementation whether or not you need supplementation whether or not you need supplementation in order to further increase an effect in order to further increase an effect in order to further increase an effect like lowering cortisol in the evening like lowering cortisol in the evening like lowering cortisol in the evening and at night. So dimming the lights, not and at night. So dimming the lights, not and at night. So dimming the lights, not drinking too much caffeine. If you're drinking too much caffeine. If you're drinking too much caffeine. If you're exercising, bring your levels of exercising, bring your levels of exercising, bring your levels of autonomic arousal down. All the things I autonomic arousal down. All the things I autonomic arousal down. All the things I just talked about a moment ago, you have just talked about a moment ago, you have just talked about a moment ago, you have to be doing those things. It's not going to be doing those things. It's not going to be doing those things. It's not going to be sufficient to just take 300 to 600 to be sufficient to just take 300 to 600 to be sufficient to just take 300 to 600 milligrams of ashwagandha and keep your milligrams of ashwagandha and keep your milligrams of ashwagandha and keep your cortisol levels low if you're blasting cortisol levels low if you're blasting cortisol levels low if you're blasting your eyes with bright light. You're your eyes with bright light. You're your eyes with bright light. You're under a lot of stress at night. But under a lot of stress at night. But under a lot of stress at night. But because it can produce a significant because it can produce a significant because it can produce a significant reduction in cortisol, it can augment reduction in cortisol, it can augment reduction in cortisol, it can augment your overall program for trying to keep your overall program for trying to keep your overall program for trying to keep cortisol low in the evening and at cortisol low in the evening and at cortisol low in the evening and at night. The other compound that some of night. The other compound that some of night. The other compound that some of you might be interested in for reducing you might be interested in for reducing you might be interested in for reducing cortisol levels again in the evening and cortisol levels again in the evening and cortisol levels again in the evening and at night is apagenine. Apagenine is at night is apagenine. Apagenine is at night is apagenine. Apagenine is found in chamomile tea. Chamomile tea is found in chamomile tea. Chamomile tea is found in chamomile tea. Chamomile tea is sort of long known to be a you know sort of long known to be a you know sort of long known to be a you know sort of relaxing agent but apagenine comes of relaxing agent but apagenine comes of relaxing agent but apagenine comes from chamomile. You can take apagenine from chamomile. You can take apagenine from chamomile. You can take apagenine as a concentrated capsule right uh I do as a concentrated capsule right uh I do as a concentrated capsule right uh I do that. It's actually in the sleep stack that. It's actually in the sleep stack that. It's actually in the sleep stack that I've taken for years and that I've that I've taken for years and that I've that I've taken for years and that I've um I don't recommend in the sense that um I don't recommend in the sense that um I don't recommend in the sense that everyone has to take it. But I've talked everyone has to take it. But I've talked everyone has to take it. But I've talked about apagenine before in the context of about apagenine before in the context of about apagenine before in the context of the so-called hubberman lab sleep stack the so-called hubberman lab sleep stack the so-called hubberman lab sleep stack which is a stack of apagenine magnesium which is a stack of apagenine magnesium which is a stack of apagenine magnesium 3 and8 which by the way is 3 and8 which by the way is 3 and8 which by the way is interchangeable with bislycinate for interchangeable with bislycinate for interchangeable with bislycinate for sleep but 38 is going to be better for a sleep but 38 is going to be better for a sleep but 38 is going to be better for a variety of reasons. So apagenine variety of reasons. So apagenine variety of reasons. So apagenine magnesium 3en8ate and theanine is the magnesium 3en8ate and theanine is the magnesium 3en8ate and theanine is the so-called hubman lab sleep stack that so-called hubman lab sleep stack that so-called hubman lab sleep stack that has worked exceptionally well for me. has worked exceptionally well for me. has worked exceptionally well for me. I've taken it for many years. Appenine I've taken it for many years. Appenine I've taken it for many years. Appenine because it works on both the GABA because it works on both the GABA because it works on both the GABA pathway and some chloride channel pathway and some chloride channel pathway and some chloride channel pathways has been shown to decrease pathways has been shown to decrease pathways has been shown to decrease cortisol. Now, it's not as big an effect cortisol. Now, it's not as big an effect cortisol. Now, it's not as big an effect on reducing cortisol as is ashwagandha on reducing cortisol as is ashwagandha on reducing cortisol as is ashwagandha at dosages of 300 milligrams or more, at dosages of 300 milligrams or more, at dosages of 300 milligrams or more, but I take 50 milligrams of apagenine in but I take 50 milligrams of apagenine in but I take 50 milligrams of apagenine in capsule form every night before I go to capsule form every night before I go to capsule form every night before I go to sleep. I've been doing that for well sleep. I've been doing that for well sleep. I've been doing that for well over eight years now. Um, and will over eight years now. Um, and will over eight years now. Um, and will continue to because I find it's very continue to because I find it's very continue to because I find it's very helpful for my sleep. And here's a great helpful for my sleep. And here's a great helpful for my sleep. And here's a great opportunity for me to also say that opportunity for me to also say that opportunity for me to also say that there's evidence that mag 3 and8 can there's evidence that mag 3 and8 can there's evidence that mag 3 and8 can indirectly activate pathways that might indirectly activate pathways that might indirectly activate pathways that might further help suppress cortisol. So it further help suppress cortisol. So it further help suppress cortisol. So it makes sense why the sleep stack would makes sense why the sleep stack would makes sense why the sleep stack would include apagenine. Why apagenine can be include apagenine. Why apagenine can be include apagenine. Why apagenine can be useful for sleep because it's reducing useful for sleep because it's reducing useful for sleep because it's reducing cortisol. Again, the four hours before cortisol. Again, the four hours before cortisol. Again, the four hours before sleep and the 2 hours after sleep are sleep and the 2 hours after sleep are sleep and the 2 hours after sleep are this key time for keeping cortisol low. this key time for keeping cortisol low. this key time for keeping cortisol low. The logic I'm using is that apagenine is The logic I'm using is that apagenine is The logic I'm using is that apagenine is useful for enough things related to useful for enough things related to useful for enough things related to sleep and reducing cortisol that it sleep and reducing cortisol that it sleep and reducing cortisol that it makes sense to keep in my evening makes sense to keep in my evening makes sense to keep in my evening routine. I do take ashwagandha at a routine. I do take ashwagandha at a routine. I do take ashwagandha at a dosage of 300 milligrams. I take it of dosage of 300 milligrams. I take it of dosage of 300 milligrams. I take it of course in the evening and at night. If course in the evening and at night. If course in the evening and at night. If you're going to do anything to reduce you're going to do anything to reduce you're going to do anything to reduce your cortisol in the evening and at your cortisol in the evening and at your cortisol in the evening and at night, the best timing for that is going night, the best timing for that is going night, the best timing for that is going to be sometime after dinner, right? I'm to be sometime after dinner, right? I'm to be sometime after dinner, right? I'm not going to say it's always 30 minutes not going to say it's always 30 minutes not going to say it's always 30 minutes before sleep or 60 minutes before sleep. before sleep or 60 minutes before sleep. before sleep or 60 minutes before sleep. I tend to take apenine and magnesium 3 I tend to take apenine and magnesium 3 I tend to take apenine and magnesium 3 and8 about 30 to 60 minutes before I and8 about 30 to 60 minutes before I and8 about 30 to 60 minutes before I want to fall asleep. But the ashwagandha want to fall asleep. But the ashwagandha want to fall asleep. But the ashwagandha can come pretty much at any time in the can come pretty much at any time in the can come pretty much at any time in the evening with dinner or after dinner. evening with dinner or after dinner. evening with dinner or after dinner. Frankly, uh its effects are known to Frankly, uh its effects are known to Frankly, uh its effects are known to last uh many hours. And that's the time last uh many hours. And that's the time last uh many hours. And that's the time when you want your cortisol lowest. I when you want your cortisol lowest. I when you want your cortisol lowest. I want to reiterate supplementation should want to reiterate supplementation should want to reiterate supplementation should never be the first line of attack when never be the first line of attack when never be the first line of attack when you're trying to adjust some biological you're trying to adjust some biological you're trying to adjust some biological mechanism or some health metric. I mean, mechanism or some health metric. I mean, mechanism or some health metric. I mean, there are cases where people need there are cases where people need there are cases where people need prescription medication for that. I do prescription medication for that. I do prescription medication for that. I do think when it comes to supplementation think when it comes to supplementation think when it comes to supplementation that you not only get the best effects, that you not only get the best effects, that you not only get the best effects, but you understand whether something's but you understand whether something's but you understand whether something's working for you at a given dosage, if working for you at a given dosage, if working for you at a given dosage, if it's worth your money and time, etc. it's worth your money and time, etc. it's worth your money and time, etc. Only once you're doing all the Only once you're doing all the Only once you're doing all the behavioral things, right, I can't behavioral things, right, I can't behavioral things, right, I can't emphasize this enough. Unless you're emphasize this enough. Unless you're emphasize this enough. Unless you're getting your behavioral steps correct, getting your behavioral steps correct, getting your behavioral steps correct, supplementation just doesn't make a supplementation just doesn't make a supplementation just doesn't make a whole lot of sense. That said, rational whole lot of sense. That said, rational whole lot of sense. That said, rational supplementation with things like supplementation with things like supplementation with things like ashwagandha and apagenine, maybe ashwagandha and apagenine, maybe ashwagandha and apagenine, maybe magnesium thrienate as well, they make magnesium thrienate as well, they make magnesium thrienate as well, they make sense from a mechanistic level. There sense from a mechanistic level. There sense from a mechanistic level. There are decent enough studies in humans to are decent enough studies in humans to are decent enough studies in humans to support their use for reducing cortisol. support their use for reducing cortisol. support their use for reducing cortisol. And if you're somebody who's really And if you're somebody who's really And if you're somebody who's really trying to optimize your cortisol trying to optimize your cortisol trying to optimize your cortisol patterns across the 24-hour cycle, I do patterns across the 24-hour cycle, I do patterns across the 24-hour cycle, I do think they can be a useful tool, which think they can be a useful tool, which think they can be a useful tool, which is why I take them. Okay, let's talk is why I take them. Okay, let's talk is why I take them. Okay, let's talk about burnout. about burnout. about burnout. A lot of people will say, "I'm burnt A lot of people will say, "I'm burnt A lot of people will say, "I'm burnt out. I'm just like exhausted." Or, "I'm out. I'm just like exhausted." Or, "I'm out. I'm just like exhausted." Or, "I'm wired and tired." Which is frankly the wired and tired." Which is frankly the wired and tired." Which is frankly the worst kind of burnout because it's the worst kind of burnout because it's the worst kind of burnout because it's the kind of thing where you're like still kind of thing where you're like still kind of thing where you're like still going, but you're exhausted. Burnout is going, but you're exhausted. Burnout is going, but you're exhausted. Burnout is a real thing. Okay, burnout reflects a real thing. Okay, burnout reflects a real thing. Okay, burnout reflects a number of different processes in the number of different processes in the number of different processes in the brain and body, but the one thing it brain and body, but the one thing it brain and body, but the one thing it doesn't reflect is that your adrenals doesn't reflect is that your adrenals doesn't reflect is that your adrenals are gone or that they can't secrete are gone or that they can't secrete are gone or that they can't secrete adrenaline or that they can't secrete adrenaline or that they can't secrete adrenaline or that they can't secrete cortisol. Yes, there are certain medical cortisol. Yes, there are certain medical cortisol. Yes, there are certain medical conditions like Cushings or Addison. conditions like Cushings or Addison. conditions like Cushings or Addison. Cushings is hyper elevated cortisol. Cushings is hyper elevated cortisol. Cushings is hyper elevated cortisol. Addisonens is basically adrenal Addisonens is basically adrenal Addisonens is basically adrenal insufficiency. Okay, it's an autoimmune insufficiency. Okay, it's an autoimmune insufficiency. Okay, it's an autoimmune condition where your adrenals literally condition where your adrenals literally condition where your adrenals literally can't release cortisol and adrenaline. can't release cortisol and adrenaline. can't release cortisol and adrenaline. But most people out there who are But most people out there who are But most people out there who are feeling burnt out are not dealing with feeling burnt out are not dealing with feeling burnt out are not dealing with Addison's. Okay? Most people out there Addison's. Okay? Most people out there Addison's. Okay? Most people out there who are feeling burnt out are not who are feeling burnt out are not who are feeling burnt out are not dealing with Cushings. If you think dealing with Cushings. If you think dealing with Cushings. If you think you're dealing with Cushings, if you're dealing with Cushings, if you're dealing with Cushings, if you're dealing with like really rounded face, dealing with like really rounded face, dealing with like really rounded face, accumulation of body fat around your accumulation of body fat around your accumulation of body fat around your midsection, you're feeling super midsection, you're feeling super midsection, you're feeling super stressed in the morning and other times stressed in the morning and other times stressed in the morning and other times of day. I mean, you really feel like of day. I mean, you really feel like of day. I mean, you really feel like you're suffering from what might be you're suffering from what might be you're suffering from what might be hyper elevated cortisol levels. Please hyper elevated cortisol levels. Please hyper elevated cortisol levels. Please see a doctor, ideally an see a doctor, ideally an see a doctor, ideally an endocrinologist. There are great endocrinologist. There are great endocrinologist. There are great treatments for this that involve treatments for this that involve treatments for this that involve suppressing cortisol using medication at suppressing cortisol using medication at suppressing cortisol using medication at certain times of day. There's a test certain times of day. There's a test certain times of day. There's a test called the dexamethasone suppression called the dexamethasone suppression called the dexamethasone suppression test where you take a drug that mimics test where you take a drug that mimics test where you take a drug that mimics cortisol late at night. You see if it cortisol late at night. You see if it cortisol late at night. You see if it suppresses your cortisol the next suppresses your cortisol the next suppresses your cortisol the next morning. There all sorts of things that morning. There all sorts of things that morning. There all sorts of things that you can do to assess whether or not you can do to assess whether or not you can do to assess whether or not you actually have Cushings or you actually have Cushings or you actually have Cushings or you actually have Addisonens and those need to be have Addisonens and those need to be have Addisonens and those need to be dealt with a medical doctor. dealt with a medical doctor. dealt with a medical doctor. However, most people out there who are However, most people out there who are However, most people out there who are struggling with burnout do not suffer struggling with burnout do not suffer struggling with burnout do not suffer from either of those conditions. So, from either of those conditions. So, from either of those conditions. So, does that mean burnout isn't real or does that mean burnout isn't real or does that mean burnout isn't real or that we can't deal with it? No. Burnout that we can't deal with it? No. Burnout that we can't deal with it? No. Burnout is very real. However, most people don't is very real. However, most people don't is very real. However, most people don't understand burnout or they try and go understand burnout or they try and go understand burnout or they try and go about treating burnout in exactly the about treating burnout in exactly the about treating burnout in exactly the wrong way. And here's the reason for wrong way. And here's the reason for wrong way. And here's the reason for that. There really two patterns of that. There really two patterns of that. There really two patterns of burnout. And this has been explored in burnout. And this has been explored in burnout. And this has been explored in the literature through the lens of the literature through the lens of the literature through the lens of trying to understand when cortisol is trying to understand when cortisol is trying to understand when cortisol is elevated and when it's lower across the elevated and when it's lower across the elevated and when it's lower across the 24-hour cycle in people that are saying, 24-hour cycle in people that are saying, 24-hour cycle in people that are saying, "I'm burnt out. I'm wired and tired. I'm "I'm burnt out. I'm wired and tired. I'm "I'm burnt out. I'm wired and tired. I'm suffering from brain fog. I'm getting suffering from brain fog. I'm getting suffering from brain fog. I'm getting sick all the time. I'm just exhausted. sick all the time. I'm just exhausted. sick all the time. I'm just exhausted. Or I just I feel like I'm just can't Or I just I feel like I'm just can't Or I just I feel like I'm just can't keep up with life. Now, there can be a keep up with life. Now, there can be a keep up with life. Now, there can be a lot of reasons for those statements, lot of reasons for those statements, lot of reasons for those statements, psychological and otherwise. It's never psychological and otherwise. It's never psychological and otherwise. It's never just physical or just psychological. Of just physical or just psychological. Of just physical or just psychological. Of course, the two things intersect. But course, the two things intersect. But course, the two things intersect. But here's the good news. Those two forms of here's the good news. Those two forms of here's the good news. Those two forms of burnout, you can figure out which one burnout, you can figure out which one burnout, you can figure out which one you have. And those two forms of burnout you have. And those two forms of burnout you have. And those two forms of burnout each have different approaches that they each have different approaches that they each have different approaches that they require in order to fix them. So, let's require in order to fix them. So, let's require in order to fix them. So, let's talk about the first pattern of burnout, talk about the first pattern of burnout, talk about the first pattern of burnout, which is when people are waking up which is when people are waking up which is when people are waking up feeling super stressed. They're waking feeling super stressed. They're waking feeling super stressed. They're waking up with anxiety, ideally after some up with anxiety, ideally after some up with anxiety, ideally after some sleep, but maybe it's after just, you sleep, but maybe it's after just, you sleep, but maybe it's after just, you know, 3, four hours of sleep, like they know, 3, four hours of sleep, like they know, 3, four hours of sleep, like they can't fall back asleep, and they're can't fall back asleep, and they're can't fall back asleep, and they're feeling just completely activated first feeling just completely activated first feeling just completely activated first thing in the morning, maybe far too thing in the morning, maybe far too thing in the morning, maybe far too early in the morning. And then maybe early in the morning. And then maybe early in the morning. And then maybe they maintain that level of stress and they maintain that level of stress and they maintain that level of stress and activation into the early afternoon. activation into the early afternoon. activation into the early afternoon. Maybe they don't, but more typically, Maybe they don't, but more typically, Maybe they don't, but more typically, they crash in the afternoon. they're they crash in the afternoon. they're they crash in the afternoon. they're just feeling exhausted by the afternoon just feeling exhausted by the afternoon just feeling exhausted by the afternoon and they're just staring at the computer and they're just staring at the computer and they're just staring at the computer screen or just feeling like they're in a screen or just feeling like they're in a screen or just feeling like they're in a fog. They're forgetting things. That's fog. They're forgetting things. That's fog. They're forgetting things. That's one very typical pattern of burnout. The one very typical pattern of burnout. The one very typical pattern of burnout. The other pattern of burnout is when people other pattern of burnout is when people other pattern of burnout is when people are feeling like they're waking up and are feeling like they're waking up and are feeling like they're waking up and they're just really sluggish. They don't they're just really sluggish. They don't they're just really sluggish. They don't have energy. They've got brain fog. have energy. They've got brain fog. have energy. They've got brain fog. They're drinking caffeine. They're drinking caffeine. They're drinking caffeine. They're hydrating. They're trying to do all the hydrating. They're trying to do all the hydrating. They're trying to do all the things and they're just like they don't things and they're just like they don't things and they're just like they don't even have the energy to do them and they even have the energy to do them and they even have the energy to do them and they just can't get into gear. They have no just can't get into gear. They have no just can't get into gear. They have no get up and go. But then when evening get up and go. But then when evening get up and go. But then when evening rolls around, they can't slow down. They rolls around, they can't slow down. They rolls around, they can't slow down. They can't calm their mind. They can't fall can't calm their mind. They can't fall can't calm their mind. They can't fall asleep. They're tired, but they're asleep. They're tired, but they're asleep. They're tired, but they're wired. Okay, as you can see, those are wired. Okay, as you can see, those are wired. Okay, as you can see, those are two very distinct patterns of stress, of two very distinct patterns of stress, of two very distinct patterns of stress, of burnout. And as you can imagine, they burnout. And as you can imagine, they burnout. And as you can imagine, they require perhaps the same steps or require perhaps the same steps or require perhaps the same steps or different steps, but certainly at different steps, but certainly at different steps, but certainly at different times in order to resolve that different times in order to resolve that different times in order to resolve that burnout, in order to fix it. You now burnout, in order to fix it. You now burnout, in order to fix it. You now know what those steps are. But first, know what those steps are. But first, know what those steps are. But first, you have to ask yourself if you're burnt you have to ask yourself if you're burnt you have to ask yourself if you're burnt out. Which pattern are you suffering out. Which pattern are you suffering out. Which pattern are you suffering from? Now, I know a number of you are from? Now, I know a number of you are from? Now, I know a number of you are going to shout out, "I'm suffering from going to shout out, "I'm suffering from going to shout out, "I'm suffering from both of them. I'm like exhausted all day both of them. I'm like exhausted all day both of them. I'm like exhausted all day and morning." Okay, we could easily and morning." Okay, we could easily and morning." Okay, we could easily create a third category of burnout create a third category of burnout create a third category of burnout whereby you're just exhausted all the whereby you're just exhausted all the whereby you're just exhausted all the time. Morning, day, and night. But if time. Morning, day, and night. But if time. Morning, day, and night. But if you're really exhausted at night, why you're really exhausted at night, why you're really exhausted at night, why aren't you falling asleep? Probably aren't you falling asleep? Probably aren't you falling asleep? Probably because your mind is racing and you're because your mind is racing and you're because your mind is racing and you're too stressed. You're falling asleep and too stressed. You're falling asleep and too stressed. You're falling asleep and then you're waking up after a couple of then you're waking up after a couple of then you're waking up after a couple of hours. So you'd fit probably more into hours. So you'd fit probably more into hours. So you'd fit probably more into the second pattern of burnout, late the second pattern of burnout, late the second pattern of burnout, late phase burnout as opposed to earlyphase phase burnout as opposed to earlyphase phase burnout as opposed to earlyphase burnout. So just to get clear on our burnout. So just to get clear on our burnout. So just to get clear on our terms, the first pattern of burnout is terms, the first pattern of burnout is terms, the first pattern of burnout is super stressed in the morning, exhausted super stressed in the morning, exhausted super stressed in the morning, exhausted in the afternoon, evening, and at night. in the afternoon, evening, and at night. in the afternoon, evening, and at night. Second pattern of burnout, stressed at Second pattern of burnout, stressed at Second pattern of burnout, stressed at night, exhausted in the morning. You are night, exhausted in the morning. You are night, exhausted in the morning. You are now armed with the various tools to be now armed with the various tools to be now armed with the various tools to be able to correct either pattern of able to correct either pattern of able to correct either pattern of burnout. If you're waking up with a ton burnout. If you're waking up with a ton burnout. If you're waking up with a ton of stress, maybe even a few hours before of stress, maybe even a few hours before of stress, maybe even a few hours before you should be waking up or want to wake you should be waking up or want to wake you should be waking up or want to wake up in order to get your full complement up in order to get your full complement up in order to get your full complement of sleep, you need to do something to of sleep, you need to do something to of sleep, you need to do something to try and bring down or to reduce the try and bring down or to reduce the try and bring down or to reduce the angle on that rising cortisol first angle on that rising cortisol first angle on that rising cortisol first thing in the morning because almost thing in the morning because almost thing in the morning because almost certainly your cortisol is just rising certainly your cortisol is just rising certainly your cortisol is just rising too fast. Remember, your cortisol is too fast. Remember, your cortisol is too fast. Remember, your cortisol is supposed to start rising a couple hours supposed to start rising a couple hours supposed to start rising a couple hours before you wake up. It's not supposed to before you wake up. It's not supposed to before you wake up. It's not supposed to be what we call a square wave function, be what we call a square wave function, be what we call a square wave function, like go from flat to vertical. Okay, like go from flat to vertical. Okay, like go from flat to vertical. Okay, here's what you should do. If you're here's what you should do. If you're here's what you should do. If you're waking up with a ton of stress, you're waking up with a ton of stress, you're waking up with a ton of stress, you're not sleeping enough. I highly recommend not sleeping enough. I highly recommend not sleeping enough. I highly recommend that you use a practice I've talked that you use a practice I've talked that you use a practice I've talked about before in this podcast, which is about before in this podcast, which is about before in this podcast, which is non-sleep deep rest, aka yoga nidra. non-sleep deep rest, aka yoga nidra. non-sleep deep rest, aka yoga nidra. Some people call it yoga nidra. I call Some people call it yoga nidra. I call Some people call it yoga nidra. I call it non-sleep deep rest. There are some it non-sleep deep rest. There are some it non-sleep deep rest. There are some differences between the two. Not trying differences between the two. Not trying differences between the two. Not trying to take anything away from the practice to take anything away from the practice to take anything away from the practice of yoga nidra, but basically non-sleep of yoga nidra, but basically non-sleep of yoga nidra, but basically non-sleep deep rest aka yoga nidra involves doing deep rest aka yoga nidra involves doing deep rest aka yoga nidra involves doing some long exhale breathing for reasons some long exhale breathing for reasons some long exhale breathing for reasons that you now know. Slows your heart rate that you now know. Slows your heart rate that you now know. Slows your heart rate down. It involves deliberately relaxing down. It involves deliberately relaxing down. It involves deliberately relaxing your body. your body. your body. It also involves you learning how to It also involves you learning how to It also involves you learning how to deliberately engage your parasympathetic deliberately engage your parasympathetic deliberately engage your parasympathetic nervous system. Now, some people will do nervous system. Now, some people will do nervous system. Now, some people will do NSDR or yoga nidra first thing in the NSDR or yoga nidra first thing in the NSDR or yoga nidra first thing in the morning when they wake up to avoid too morning when they wake up to avoid too morning when they wake up to avoid too much stress and they'll fall back much stress and they'll fall back much stress and they'll fall back asleep. NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. The asleep. NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. The asleep. NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. The idea with yoga nidra and NSDR is that idea with yoga nidra and NSDR is that idea with yoga nidra and NSDR is that you don't fall back asleep. That you don't fall back asleep. That you don't fall back asleep. That you stay awake, but you completely and stay awake, but you completely and stay awake, but you completely and progressively increase your relaxation progressively increase your relaxation progressively increase your relaxation in your body. However, if you fall back in your body. However, if you fall back in your body. However, if you fall back asleep, great. Just make sure you set an asleep, great. Just make sure you set an asleep, great. Just make sure you set an alarm if you're going to do NSDR, yoga alarm if you're going to do NSDR, yoga alarm if you're going to do NSDR, yoga nidra first thing in the morning so that nidra first thing in the morning so that nidra first thing in the morning so that you don't oversleep and, you know, miss you don't oversleep and, you know, miss you don't oversleep and, you know, miss a work appointment or something like a work appointment or something like a work appointment or something like that. But there are great data now that. But there are great data now that. But there are great data now showing that NSDR and yoga nidra done showing that NSDR and yoga nidra done showing that NSDR and yoga nidra done regularly for durations of anywhere from regularly for durations of anywhere from regularly for durations of anywhere from 10 minutes. Actually, the study I'm 10 minutes. Actually, the study I'm 10 minutes. Actually, the study I'm going to be referring to in a moment going to be referring to in a moment going to be referring to in a moment actually used 11 minutes. Okay, so actually used 11 minutes. Okay, so actually used 11 minutes. Okay, so anywhere from 11 minutes to 30 minutes anywhere from 11 minutes to 30 minutes anywhere from 11 minutes to 30 minutes can significantly reduce cortisol can significantly reduce cortisol can significantly reduce cortisol levels. So, this is good, right? Even levels. So, this is good, right? Even levels. So, this is good, right? Even though we've been talking this whole though we've been talking this whole though we've been talking this whole episode about you want your cortisol episode about you want your cortisol episode about you want your cortisol high in the morning, we're referring to high in the morning, we're referring to high in the morning, we're referring to a pattern of burnout where your cortisol a pattern of burnout where your cortisol a pattern of burnout where your cortisol is rising too fast in the morning. Doing is rising too fast in the morning. Doing is rising too fast in the morning. Doing NSTR can help adjust that slope so that NSTR can help adjust that slope so that NSTR can help adjust that slope so that it's not so steep. In fact, if you're it's not so steep. In fact, if you're it's not so steep. In fact, if you're somebody who wakes up and feels anxiety somebody who wakes up and feels anxiety somebody who wakes up and feels anxiety right away, even if you don't think you right away, even if you don't think you right away, even if you don't think you have this pattern of burnout, I highly have this pattern of burnout, I highly have this pattern of burnout, I highly recommend doing a 10-minute or even a 20 recommend doing a 10-minute or even a 20 recommend doing a 10-minute or even a 20 minute or 30 minute NSDR. It's available minute or 30 minute NSDR. It's available minute or 30 minute NSDR. It's available at completely zero cost. You don't have at completely zero cost. You don't have at completely zero cost. You don't have to sign up for anything. I'll provide to sign up for anything. I'll provide to sign up for anything. I'll provide links to this in the show note captions. links to this in the show note captions. links to this in the show note captions. There are several, some read by me. Uh There are several, some read by me. Uh There are several, some read by me. Uh these are in pure audio form or combined these are in pure audio form or combined these are in pure audio form or combined audio video form. You don't need to audio video form. You don't need to audio video form. You don't need to watch them, but we have them on YouTube. watch them, but we have them on YouTube. watch them, but we have them on YouTube. We have them on Spotify. We have them in We have them on Spotify. We have them in We have them on Spotify. We have them in Apple format. We have in a bunch of Apple format. We have in a bunch of Apple format. We have in a bunch of different formats. And I also provide different formats. And I also provide different formats. And I also provide links to some of the ones that are read links to some of the ones that are read links to some of the ones that are read by other people whose NSDRs are very by other people whose NSDRs are very by other people whose NSDRs are very effective and that I personally use such effective and that I personally use such effective and that I personally use such as Kelly Boy and others who have as Kelly Boy and others who have as Kelly Boy and others who have recorded NSTRs of different durations. recorded NSTRs of different durations. recorded NSTRs of different durations. It's an extremely powerful tool for It's an extremely powerful tool for It's an extremely powerful tool for reducing your cortisol levels. But in reducing your cortisol levels. But in reducing your cortisol levels. But in addition to that, it's a very powerful addition to that, it's a very powerful addition to that, it's a very powerful tool for you to be able to self-direct tool for you to be able to self-direct tool for you to be able to self-direct your own activation of that your own activation of that your own activation of that parasympathetic nervous system to parasympathetic nervous system to parasympathetic nervous system to self-direct your own relaxation at a self-direct your own relaxation at a self-direct your own relaxation at a time when your system is by default time when your system is by default time when your system is by default driving you in the exact opposite driving you in the exact opposite driving you in the exact opposite direction. So if you're somebody direction. So if you're somebody direction. So if you're somebody suffering from this first type of suffering from this first type of suffering from this first type of burnout, I highly recommend you start burnout, I highly recommend you start burnout, I highly recommend you start implementing an NSDR practice, implementing an NSDR practice, implementing an NSDR practice, especially if you wake up in the middle especially if you wake up in the middle especially if you wake up in the middle of the night or you wake up really early of the night or you wake up really early of the night or you wake up really early in the morning and you can't just in the morning and you can't just in the morning and you can't just naturally fall back asleep. Okay, so naturally fall back asleep. Okay, so naturally fall back asleep. Okay, so ideally you're doing NSDR right as you ideally you're doing NSDR right as you ideally you're doing NSDR right as you wake up in the morning. Ideally you do wake up in the morning. Ideally you do wake up in the morning. Ideally you do it for 30 minutes, but most people it for 30 minutes, but most people it for 30 minutes, but most people probably won't have the time for that. probably won't have the time for that. probably won't have the time for that. So maybe you do 20, maybe you do 10. So maybe you do 20, maybe you do 10. So maybe you do 20, maybe you do 10. Again, we have zero cost scripts for all Again, we have zero cost scripts for all Again, we have zero cost scripts for all of those 10, 20, and 30 minute long. You of those 10, 20, and 30 minute long. You of those 10, 20, and 30 minute long. You wake up, wake up, wake up, the first thing you should do is the first thing you should do is the first thing you should do is hydrate. Well, use the restroom if you hydrate. Well, use the restroom if you hydrate. Well, use the restroom if you need to, then hydrate. You might say, need to, then hydrate. You might say, need to, then hydrate. You might say, "Wait, hydration is going to raise my "Wait, hydration is going to raise my "Wait, hydration is going to raise my cortisol more." Trust me, hydrate. Also, cortisol more." Trust me, hydrate. Also, cortisol more." Trust me, hydrate. Also, get bright light in your eyes. This is get bright light in your eyes. This is get bright light in your eyes. This is going to help adjust the timing of your going to help adjust the timing of your going to help adjust the timing of your maximum cortisol peak. In circadian nerd maximum cortisol peak. In circadian nerd maximum cortisol peak. In circadian nerd speak, it's called the acrophase. speak, it's called the acrophase. speak, it's called the acrophase. Believe it or not, they call the peak of Believe it or not, they call the peak of Believe it or not, they call the peak of your of your uh cortisol peak on the your of your uh cortisol peak on the your of your uh cortisol peak on the 24-hour cycle the acrophase. They need 24-hour cycle the acrophase. They need 24-hour cycle the acrophase. They need to give it a name. So, your acryphase is to give it a name. So, your acryphase is to give it a name. So, your acryphase is going to be timed correctly to when going to be timed correctly to when going to be timed correctly to when you're waking up, not before waking up. you're waking up, not before waking up. you're waking up, not before waking up. Okay? So, we're doing one thing NSDR Okay? So, we're doing one thing NSDR Okay? So, we're doing one thing NSDR yoga nidra to try and keep your brain yoga nidra to try and keep your brain yoga nidra to try and keep your brain and body in a more sleep-like state. And and body in a more sleep-like state. And and body in a more sleep-like state. And now we're going to do another thing now we're going to do another thing now we're going to do another thing right after you wake up to try and make right after you wake up to try and make right after you wake up to try and make the peak in your cortisol, your the peak in your cortisol, your the peak in your cortisol, your acrophase after that. Okay? So, we're acrophase after that. Okay? So, we're acrophase after that. Okay? So, we're trying to shift that peak out a little trying to shift that peak out a little trying to shift that peak out a little bit by hydrating and by getting bright bit by hydrating and by getting bright bit by hydrating and by getting bright light in your eyes, ideally from light in your eyes, ideally from light in your eyes, ideally from sunlight. If not sunlight, 10,000 lux sunlight. If not sunlight, 10,000 lux sunlight. If not sunlight, 10,000 lux artificial light as we discussed artificial light as we discussed artificial light as we discussed earlier. Here's the thing that you don't earlier. Here's the thing that you don't earlier. Here's the thing that you don't want to do. You don't want to ingest want to do. You don't want to ingest want to do. You don't want to ingest caffeine right away. If you recall, the caffeine right away. If you recall, the caffeine right away. If you recall, the reason for suggesting that some people reason for suggesting that some people reason for suggesting that some people push their caffeine intake out 60 to 90 push their caffeine intake out 60 to 90 push their caffeine intake out 60 to 90 minutes after waking is because caffeine minutes after waking is because caffeine minutes after waking is because caffeine will extend the duration over which will extend the duration over which will extend the duration over which cortisol is available. cortisol is available. cortisol is available. And if you drink caffeine first thing in And if you drink caffeine first thing in And if you drink caffeine first thing in the morning, yes, that will happen, but the morning, yes, that will happen, but the morning, yes, that will happen, but the drop in cortisol that occurs late the drop in cortisol that occurs late the drop in cortisol that occurs late morning and early afternoon is going to morning and early afternoon is going to morning and early afternoon is going to be very, very sharp. And you want to be very, very sharp. And you want to be very, very sharp. And you want to make that a little bit flatter. Now, a make that a little bit flatter. Now, a make that a little bit flatter. Now, a little bit later, we're going to talk little bit later, we're going to talk little bit later, we're going to talk about how a flattening of the cortisol about how a flattening of the cortisol about how a flattening of the cortisol curve is a bad thing, but here we're curve is a bad thing, but here we're curve is a bad thing, but here we're just trying to make it a little bit just trying to make it a little bit just trying to make it a little bit flatter by shifting your caffeine intake flatter by shifting your caffeine intake flatter by shifting your caffeine intake out a little bit. Not only will this out a little bit. Not only will this out a little bit. Not only will this help you get through the afternoon with help you get through the afternoon with help you get through the afternoon with more energy, and by the way, ingesting more energy, and by the way, ingesting more energy, and by the way, ingesting it 60 to 90 minutes later than you it 60 to 90 minutes later than you it 60 to 90 minutes later than you normally would after waking is not going normally would after waking is not going normally would after waking is not going to disrupt your sleep at night, but it's to disrupt your sleep at night, but it's to disrupt your sleep at night, but it's going to make sure that you have enough going to make sure that you have enough going to make sure that you have enough energy to get through the afternoon. And energy to get through the afternoon. And energy to get through the afternoon. And it's also going to make sure that it's also going to make sure that it's also going to make sure that morning cortisol peak isn't too high and morning cortisol peak isn't too high and morning cortisol peak isn't too high and too long too early. Okay? is we're just too long too early. Okay? is we're just too long too early. Okay? is we're just trying to shift that peak out a little trying to shift that peak out a little trying to shift that peak out a little bit and then we're trying to make that bit and then we're trying to make that bit and then we're trying to make that drop in cortisol a little bit longer. drop in cortisol a little bit longer. drop in cortisol a little bit longer. This might seem like subtle details, but This might seem like subtle details, but This might seem like subtle details, but these subtle adjustments in these subtle adjustments in these subtle adjustments in these behaviors can have a significant impact behaviors can have a significant impact behaviors can have a significant impact on how much energy you feel and how on how much energy you feel and how on how much energy you feel and how distributed that energy is across the distributed that energy is across the distributed that energy is across the day in ways that are going to benefit day in ways that are going to benefit day in ways that are going to benefit you. Okay, so now let's talk about the you. Okay, so now let's talk about the you. Okay, so now let's talk about the second pattern of burnout. The second pattern of burnout. The second pattern of burnout. The second pattern of burnout is the one where pattern of burnout is the one where pattern of burnout is the one where people are waking up tired. They're people are waking up tired. They're people are waking up tired. They're dragging through the morning despite dragging through the morning despite dragging through the morning despite presumably drinking a lot of caffeine. presumably drinking a lot of caffeine. presumably drinking a lot of caffeine. They can't get into gear. They have They can't get into gear. They have They can't get into gear. They have brain fog in the afternoon. Or maybe brain fog in the afternoon. Or maybe brain fog in the afternoon. Or maybe they really start to feel like they're they really start to feel like they're they really start to feel like they're awake at two o'clock in the afternoon awake at two o'clock in the afternoon awake at two o'clock in the afternoon and then they have trouble falling and then they have trouble falling and then they have trouble falling asleep at night often from stress and asleep at night often from stress and asleep at night often from stress and exhaustion. So, it's not like they're exhaustion. So, it's not like they're exhaustion. So, it's not like they're hyperfunctional at night getting a ton hyperfunctional at night getting a ton hyperfunctional at night getting a ton done. That would be I should mention the done. That would be I should mention the done. That would be I should mention the kind of night owl pattern. I don't want kind of night owl pattern. I don't want kind of night owl pattern. I don't want to be disparaging of or discourage night to be disparaging of or discourage night to be disparaging of or discourage night owls. If you're naturally a night owl owls. If you're naturally a night owl owls. If you're naturally a night owl and that works for you, it works with and that works for you, it works with and that works for you, it works with your work, it works with your schooling, your work, it works with your schooling, your work, it works with your schooling, works with your relationships, great. works with your relationships, great. works with your relationships, great. Okay, I'm not a night owl, but some Okay, I'm not a night owl, but some Okay, I'm not a night owl, but some percentage of people are night owls. percentage of people are night owls. percentage of people are night owls. There's a chronotype, a genetic wiring There's a chronotype, a genetic wiring There's a chronotype, a genetic wiring that makes certain people night owls. that makes certain people night owls. that makes certain people night owls. But real classic night owls, when they But real classic night owls, when they But real classic night owls, when they follow a night owl schedule, their follow a night owl schedule, their follow a night owl schedule, their cortisol rhythm is exactly the same as cortisol rhythm is exactly the same as cortisol rhythm is exactly the same as everyone else's. It's just shifted a few everyone else's. It's just shifted a few everyone else's. It's just shifted a few hours later. Okay? So, it's not like the hours later. Okay? So, it's not like the hours later. Okay? So, it's not like the contour of their cortisol rhythm looks contour of their cortisol rhythm looks contour of their cortisol rhythm looks any different. It's just shifted later. any different. It's just shifted later. any different. It's just shifted later. And night owls typically, if their life And night owls typically, if their life And night owls typically, if their life allows for it, like being night owls. allows for it, like being night owls. allows for it, like being night owls. With type 2 burnout, I'm not talking With type 2 burnout, I'm not talking With type 2 burnout, I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about people about that. I'm talking about people about that. I'm talking about people that at one point in their life felt that at one point in their life felt that at one point in their life felt pretty good waking up at, you know, pretty good waking up at, you know, pretty good waking up at, you know, between 6:00 and 8:00 a.m. in the between 6:00 and 8:00 a.m. in the between 6:00 and 8:00 a.m. in the morning, which is when most people wake morning, which is when most people wake morning, which is when most people wake up in the morning. I'm talking about up in the morning. I'm talking about up in the morning. I'm talking about people who would like to go to sleep by people who would like to go to sleep by people who would like to go to sleep by 10 or 11:00 p.m., but they're not able 10 or 11:00 p.m., but they're not able 10 or 11:00 p.m., but they're not able to do that. I'm talking about people to do that. I'm talking about people to do that. I'm talking about people here again that have trouble getting here again that have trouble getting here again that have trouble getting into gear early in the day and then come into gear early in the day and then come into gear early in the day and then come nighttime their levels of energy and nighttime their levels of energy and nighttime their levels of energy and certain mental ruminations and you know certain mental ruminations and you know certain mental ruminations and you know just that their stress levels are just that their stress levels are just that their stress levels are just really high even if they're exhausted. really high even if they're exhausted. really high even if they're exhausted. If this is you, you really need to start If this is you, you really need to start If this is you, you really need to start thinking about the 6 hours before you thinking about the 6 hours before you thinking about the 6 hours before you would like to fall asleep and the two would like to fall asleep and the two would like to fall asleep and the two hours afterwards. How do you do that? hours afterwards. How do you do that? hours afterwards. How do you do that? Well, I already talked about all the Well, I already talked about all the Well, I already talked about all the things you should avoid doing in the things you should avoid doing in the things you should avoid doing in the evening. avoiding bright light, etc. By evening. avoiding bright light, etc. By evening. avoiding bright light, etc. By the way, if you are in the long days of the way, if you are in the long days of the way, if you are in the long days of summer and spring and the sun is going summer and spring and the sun is going summer and spring and the sun is going down at, you know, 7:30 or 8:30, that's down at, you know, 7:30 or 8:30, that's down at, you know, 7:30 or 8:30, that's fine. In fact, we now know that if you fine. In fact, we now know that if you fine. In fact, we now know that if you view sunlight late in the day, provided view sunlight late in the day, provided view sunlight late in the day, provided the sun is out, which is the only way the sun is out, which is the only way the sun is out, which is the only way you can view sunlight as far as I know. you can view sunlight as far as I know. you can view sunlight as far as I know. Viewing that sunlight will actually Viewing that sunlight will actually Viewing that sunlight will actually adjust the sensitivity of your retina a adjust the sensitivity of your retina a adjust the sensitivity of your retina a little bit such that bright light from little bit such that bright light from little bit such that bright light from artificial sources won't have quite as artificial sources won't have quite as artificial sources won't have quite as much of a detrimental effect at much of a detrimental effect at much of a detrimental effect at suppressing melatonin at night when suppressing melatonin at night when suppressing melatonin at night when you're indoors under artificial lights. you're indoors under artificial lights. you're indoors under artificial lights. You still want to dim them late at You still want to dim them late at You still want to dim them late at night, but by all means, if there's a night, but by all means, if there's a night, but by all means, if there's a beautiful sunset out, take a sunset beautiful sunset out, take a sunset beautiful sunset out, take a sunset walk. Walk in the direction of the sun. walk. Walk in the direction of the sun. walk. Walk in the direction of the sun. Look at the sunlight. Blink as needed to Look at the sunlight. Blink as needed to Look at the sunlight. Blink as needed to protect your eyes, but see those protect your eyes, but see those protect your eyes, but see those beautiful sunsets. You'll notice that beautiful sunsets. You'll notice that beautiful sunsets. You'll notice that throughout today's episode, I've not throughout today's episode, I've not throughout today's episode, I've not focused on specific clock times. I've focused on specific clock times. I've focused on specific clock times. I've given ranges. Most people wake up here. given ranges. Most people wake up here. given ranges. Most people wake up here. Most people go to sleep here. I've given Most people go to sleep here. I've given Most people go to sleep here. I've given ranges because, of course, day length ranges because, of course, day length ranges because, of course, day length changes across the year, especially if changes across the year, especially if changes across the year, especially if you're living closer to the poles. So, you're living closer to the poles. So, you're living closer to the poles. So, if you're somebody who's suffering from if you're somebody who's suffering from if you're somebody who's suffering from type 2 burnout and it's 7:30 at night type 2 burnout and it's 7:30 at night type 2 burnout and it's 7:30 at night and the sun's still out, by all means, and the sun's still out, by all means, and the sun's still out, by all means, go for a nice relaxing walk. That's go for a nice relaxing walk. That's go for a nice relaxing walk. That's going to be part of your regimen for going to be part of your regimen for going to be part of your regimen for bringing down your levels of autonomic bringing down your levels of autonomic bringing down your levels of autonomic activation, for reducing your cortisol. activation, for reducing your cortisol. activation, for reducing your cortisol. By all means, also avoid caffeine. By all means, also avoid caffeine. By all means, also avoid caffeine. By all means, also avoid stress. And when all means, also avoid stress. And when all means, also avoid stress. And when you get indoors, by all means, do you get indoors, by all means, do you get indoors, by all means, do everything you can to dim the lights, everything you can to dim the lights, everything you can to dim the lights, to bring your levels of stress down. to bring your levels of stress down. to bring your levels of stress down. Take five minutes. I know it sounds like Take five minutes. I know it sounds like Take five minutes. I know it sounds like a lot, but just five minutes and do a lot, but just five minutes and do a lot, but just five minutes and do a physiological sigh of the sort that I physiological sigh of the sort that I physiological sigh of the sort that I described before. Double inhale, long described before. Double inhale, long described before. Double inhale, long exhale, and just repeat that for about 3 exhale, and just repeat that for about 3 exhale, and just repeat that for about 3 to five minutes. I ran a clinical trial to five minutes. I ran a clinical trial to five minutes. I ran a clinical trial with my colleague David Spiegel at with my colleague David Spiegel at with my colleague David Spiegel at Stanford a few years ago where we had Stanford a few years ago where we had Stanford a few years ago where we had people do that. And what we found is it people do that. And what we found is it people do that. And what we found is it not only calms them in those five not only calms them in those five not only calms them in those five minutes, not only reduces heart rate, minutes, not only reduces heart rate, minutes, not only reduces heart rate, increases heart rate variability, which increases heart rate variability, which increases heart rate variability, which is which is a signature by the way of is which is a signature by the way of is which is a signature by the way of self- calming, self- calming, self- calming, it also improves sleep, it improve mood it also improves sleep, it improve mood it also improves sleep, it improve mood at times outside of that five minutes. at times outside of that five minutes. at times outside of that five minutes. It's a very powerful tool. And again, It's a very powerful tool. And again, It's a very powerful tool. And again, five minutes is barely anything. But if five minutes is barely anything. But if five minutes is barely anything. But if you take that time, you're going to you take that time, you're going to you take that time, you're going to benefit from that certainly in the time benefit from that certainly in the time benefit from that certainly in the time that you're doing it and in the hours that you're doing it and in the hours that you're doing it and in the hours after with the ease of being able to after with the ease of being able to after with the ease of being able to fall asleep, but also the next day. So fall asleep, but also the next day. So fall asleep, but also the next day. So much of recovering from burnout, much of recovering from burnout, much of recovering from burnout, especially type two burnout, is about especially type two burnout, is about especially type two burnout, is about getting your nighttime cortisol low so getting your nighttime cortisol low so getting your nighttime cortisol low so that your morning cortisol levels can be that your morning cortisol levels can be that your morning cortisol levels can be elevated again and that you can have elevated again and that you can have elevated again and that you can have that energy in the morning, which then that energy in the morning, which then that energy in the morning, which then sets in motion the proper overall sets in motion the proper overall sets in motion the proper overall cortisol rhythm. If you're starting to cortisol rhythm. If you're starting to cortisol rhythm. If you're starting to sense a repeating theme, indeed it's sense a repeating theme, indeed it's sense a repeating theme, indeed it's because your cortisol rhythm is because your cortisol rhythm is because your cortisol rhythm is repeating and you got that peak that repeating and you got that peak that repeating and you got that peak that ideally comes in the morning and then ideally comes in the morning and then ideally comes in the morning and then you have that trough, what in nerdsp you have that trough, what in nerdsp you have that trough, what in nerdsp speak we call the nadier, right? The speak we call the nadier, right? The speak we call the nadier, right? The peak is the acrophase. Scientists are I peak is the acrophase. Scientists are I peak is the acrophase. Scientists are I don't know I don't know if they're just don't know I don't know if they're just don't know I don't know if they're just making up names for fun or they just making up names for fun or they just making up names for fun or they just they need this peak and acryphase are they need this peak and acryphase are they need this peak and acryphase are the same thing. Nadier or trough in the same thing. Nadier or trough in the same thing. Nadier or trough in cortisol is coming late at night and as cortisol is coming late at night and as cortisol is coming late at night and as you fall asleep and into the early hours you fall asleep and into the early hours you fall asleep and into the early hours of sleep. Having that pattern and having of sleep. Having that pattern and having of sleep. Having that pattern and having those peaks and the trough align to the those peaks and the trough align to the those peaks and the trough align to the right time of your schedule for you, for right time of your schedule for you, for right time of your schedule for you, for what you need to do in life, for your what you need to do in life, for your what you need to do in life, for your kids, for your job, for school, for kids, for your job, for school, for kids, for your job, for school, for athletics, etc. is so critical and it's athletics, etc. is so critical and it's athletics, etc. is so critical and it's absolutely under your control. And I see absolutely under your control. And I see absolutely under your control. And I see so many areas of health and wellness, so many areas of health and wellness, so many areas of health and wellness, so many areas where people are trying to many areas where people are trying to many areas where people are trying to troubleshoot illness like they're troubleshoot illness like they're troubleshoot illness like they're getting sick all the time or they're getting sick all the time or they're getting sick all the time or they're dealing with an autoimmune issue or dealing with an autoimmune issue or dealing with an autoimmune issue or they're dealing with metabolic issues they're dealing with metabolic issues they're dealing with metabolic issues and things of that sort. And so many and things of that sort. And so many and things of that sort. And so many times it seems that what's happened is times it seems that what's happened is times it seems that what's happened is this cortisol curve has just shifted too this cortisol curve has just shifted too this cortisol curve has just shifted too late or it's being spiked in the late or it's being spiked in the late or it's being spiked in the afternoon or it's being spiked at night. afternoon or it's being spiked at night. afternoon or it's being spiked at night. And yes, we could talk about all the And yes, we could talk about all the And yes, we could talk about all the reasons why with modern electronics and reasons why with modern electronics and reasons why with modern electronics and technology, you know, we're biasing technology, you know, we're biasing technology, you know, we're biasing ourselves towards these patterns ourselves towards these patterns ourselves towards these patterns of late shifted cortisol and disrupted of late shifted cortisol and disrupted of late shifted cortisol and disrupted cortisol rhythms. But look, technology cortisol rhythms. But look, technology cortisol rhythms. But look, technology is not going anywhere. What is here to is not going anywhere. What is here to is not going anywhere. What is here to stay is your ability to engage with stay is your ability to engage with stay is your ability to engage with those technologies and to do the proper those technologies and to do the proper those technologies and to do the proper things like exercise and eating etc. and things like exercise and eating etc. and things like exercise and eating etc. and self- calming at the appropriate times self- calming at the appropriate times self- calming at the appropriate times of your schedule so that you can get of your schedule so that you can get of your schedule so that you can get your cortisol rhythms back in check. And your cortisol rhythms back in check. And your cortisol rhythms back in check. And I promise you, if you do that, you're I promise you, if you do that, you're I promise you, if you do that, you're going to see an outsized positive effect going to see an outsized positive effect going to see an outsized positive effect on everything. Mood, focus, alertness, on everything. Mood, focus, alertness, on everything. Mood, focus, alertness, sleep, which then of course feeds back sleep, which then of course feeds back sleep, which then of course feeds back on elevated mood, focus, alertness, and on elevated mood, focus, alertness, and on elevated mood, focus, alertness, and sleep. The early part of your day, the sleep. The early part of your day, the sleep. The early part of your day, the middle of your day, and the end of your middle of your day, and the end of your middle of your day, and the end of your day and night are linked. What are they day and night are linked. What are they day and night are linked. What are they linked by? Your cortisol rhythms. How do linked by? Your cortisol rhythms. How do linked by? Your cortisol rhythms. How do you control those cortisol rhythms? by you control those cortisol rhythms? by you control those cortisol rhythms? by grabbing a hold of the time of day in grabbing a hold of the time of day in grabbing a hold of the time of day in which they're most challenging and which they're most challenging and which they're most challenging and starting to do as many things as you starting to do as many things as you starting to do as many things as you possibly can to bring your cortisol up possibly can to bring your cortisol up possibly can to bring your cortisol up if that's what's needed early in the day if that's what's needed early in the day if that's what's needed early in the day or down, which is what's needed late in or down, which is what's needed late in or down, which is what's needed late in the day. Wherever your main pain point the day. Wherever your main pain point the day. Wherever your main pain point is along the 24hour day and night, is along the 24hour day and night, is along the 24hour day and night, that's where you should focus your that's where you should focus your that's where you should focus your efforts first. And from there, you can efforts first. And from there, you can efforts first. And from there, you can start making adjustments in the other start making adjustments in the other start making adjustments in the other protocols in order to get things exactly protocols in order to get things exactly protocols in order to get things exactly right for you. It's possible, but start right for you. It's possible, but start right for you. It's possible, but start where you're experiencing the most pain where you're experiencing the most pain where you're experiencing the most pain first. In fact, so much of what we see first. In fact, so much of what we see first. In fact, so much of what we see out there in the discussions around out there in the discussions around out there in the discussions around health and challenges with health, health and challenges with health, health and challenges with health, whether or not it's chronic stress or whether or not it's chronic stress or whether or not it's chronic stress or whether or not it's challenges as we age whether or not it's challenges as we age whether or not it's challenges as we age in getting great sleep and having in getting great sleep and having in getting great sleep and having energy. If you look at the literature, energy. If you look at the literature, energy. If you look at the literature, it almost always comes back to cortisol. it almost always comes back to cortisol. it almost always comes back to cortisol. Maybe not as the only problem, but as a Maybe not as the only problem, but as a Maybe not as the only problem, but as a key role in those problems and a key role in those problems and a key role in those problems and a key path to fix them. In fact, there's a path to fix them. In fact, there's a path to fix them. In fact, there's a beautiful paper that compared male and beautiful paper that compared male and beautiful paper that compared male and female differences in cortisol secretion female differences in cortisol secretion female differences in cortisol secretion patterns, and they look pretty much patterns, and they look pretty much patterns, and they look pretty much similar up until about age 40. Actually, similar up until about age 40. Actually, similar up until about age 40. Actually, what you find is that women have what you find is that women have what you find is that women have slightly lower basil levels of cortisol. slightly lower basil levels of cortisol. slightly lower basil levels of cortisol. If you look at any one time point along If you look at any one time point along If you look at any one time point along the 24-hour rhythm, up until about age the 24-hour rhythm, up until about age the 24-hour rhythm, up until about age 40, then what happens is as men and 40, then what happens is as men and 40, then what happens is as men and women get older from about 40 out to 70, women get older from about 40 out to 70, women get older from about 40 out to 70, they look across a pretty broad range of they look across a pretty broad range of they look across a pretty broad range of ages. What you find is that the morning ages. What you find is that the morning ages. What you find is that the morning peak in cortisol tends to come down a peak in cortisol tends to come down a peak in cortisol tends to come down a little bit. In fact, the acrophase that little bit. In fact, the acrophase that little bit. In fact, the acrophase that peak tends to be a bit more rounded as peak tends to be a bit more rounded as peak tends to be a bit more rounded as opposed to peaked, which means that the opposed to peaked, which means that the opposed to peaked, which means that the drop in cortisol in the early afternoon drop in cortisol in the early afternoon drop in cortisol in the early afternoon and evening is actually more gradual. and evening is actually more gradual. and evening is actually more gradual. It's flattening. And a flattening of the It's flattening. And a flattening of the It's flattening. And a flattening of the cortisol curve has been shown in other cortisol curve has been shown in other cortisol curve has been shown in other studies to actually predict lower studies to actually predict lower studies to actually predict lower lifespan, certainly in response to lifespan, certainly in response to lifespan, certainly in response to health challenges like cancer. And health challenges like cancer. And health challenges like cancer. And here's the good news. Practices which here's the good news. Practices which here's the good news. Practices which adjust stress down in the afternoon in adjust stress down in the afternoon in adjust stress down in the afternoon in those people combating cancer actually those people combating cancer actually those people combating cancer actually predicted survivability. In other words, predicted survivability. In other words, predicted survivability. In other words, the bigger the peak, the more rapid the bigger the peak, the more rapid the bigger the peak, the more rapid the decline in cortisol into the afternoon decline in cortisol into the afternoon decline in cortisol into the afternoon and the lower it stayed at night, the and the lower it stayed at night, the and the lower it stayed at night, the longer people lived and the more longer people lived and the more longer people lived and the more successful people were in overcoming successful people were in overcoming successful people were in overcoming diseases such as cancer. Now, I'm not diseases such as cancer. Now, I'm not diseases such as cancer. Now, I'm not saying that's the only thing that saying that's the only thing that saying that's the only thing that allowed them to do that, but it makes allowed them to do that, but it makes allowed them to do that, but it makes perfect sense based on everything we perfect sense based on everything we perfect sense based on everything we know about the interactions between know about the interactions between know about the interactions between cortisol and the immune system, between cortisol and the immune system, between cortisol and the immune system, between stress and survivability, between stress and survivability, between stress and survivability, between longevity and between the production of longevity and between the production of longevity and between the production of all sorts of things that relate to all sorts of things that relate to all sorts of things that relate to glucose metabolism, dopamine, etc. and glucose metabolism, dopamine, etc. and glucose metabolism, dopamine, etc. and so on. Another interesting point is that so on. Another interesting point is that so on. Another interesting point is that as women transition from pmenopause to as women transition from pmenopause to as women transition from pmenopause to menopause, so of course this is menopause, so of course this is menopause, so of course this is correlated with aging, but the exact age correlated with aging, but the exact age correlated with aging, but the exact age that it occurs differs between women, that it occurs differs between women, that it occurs differs between women, but it's roughly between the ages of but it's roughly between the ages of but it's roughly between the ages of late 30s to early 50s depending on the late 30s to early 50s depending on the late 30s to early 50s depending on the person. There's also a characteristic person. There's also a characteristic person. There's also a characteristic flattening out of the cortisol rhythm flattening out of the cortisol rhythm flattening out of the cortisol rhythm into the afternoon. That's the way it's into the afternoon. That's the way it's into the afternoon. That's the way it's described in the literature across all described in the literature across all described in the literature across all these different situations, menopause, these different situations, menopause, these different situations, menopause, aging, when people are combating a aging, when people are combating a aging, when people are combating a chronic illness and so forth, is this chronic illness and so forth, is this chronic illness and so forth, is this flattening of the afternoon cortisol flattening of the afternoon cortisol flattening of the afternoon cortisol curve. What this speaks to again is the curve. What this speaks to again is the curve. What this speaks to again is the critical importance of high morning critical importance of high morning critical importance of high morning cortisol. You want to emphasize that. cortisol. You want to emphasize that. cortisol. You want to emphasize that. Yes, you want to get enough sleep, but Yes, you want to get enough sleep, but Yes, you want to get enough sleep, but you want high morning cortisol. You want you want high morning cortisol. You want you want high morning cortisol. You want to get out and into your day. If that to get out and into your day. If that to get out and into your day. If that day for you starts at 4:00 a.m., okay. day for you starts at 4:00 a.m., okay. day for you starts at 4:00 a.m., okay. If it starts at 5, 6, 7, 8 a.m., okay. If it starts at 5, 6, 7, 8 a.m., okay. If it starts at 5, 6, 7, 8 a.m., okay. We're not talking about the exact time We're not talking about the exact time We're not talking about the exact time you wake up, but you want to get enough you wake up, but you want to get enough you wake up, but you want to get enough sleep prior to that. For most people, sleep prior to that. For most people, sleep prior to that. For most people, it's going to be 6 to 8 hours. There are it's going to be 6 to 8 hours. There are it's going to be 6 to 8 hours. There are you rare ones out there that can get by you rare ones out there that can get by you rare ones out there that can get by on 4 to 5 hours, but the data really on 4 to 5 hours, but the data really on 4 to 5 hours, but the data really point to the fact that most people point to the fact that most people point to the fact that most people should get 6 to 8 hours, maybe nine if should get 6 to 8 hours, maybe nine if should get 6 to 8 hours, maybe nine if or maybe more if you're a kid and you're or maybe more if you're a kid and you're or maybe more if you're a kid and you're developing or you're combating a, you developing or you're combating a, you developing or you're combating a, you know, an illness or something, but 6 to know, an illness or something, but 6 to know, an illness or something, but 6 to 8 hours. When you wake up, spike that 8 hours. When you wake up, spike that 8 hours. When you wake up, spike that cortisol using the tools we described. cortisol using the tools we described. cortisol using the tools we described. Then make sure that cortisol doesn't Then make sure that cortisol doesn't Then make sure that cortisol doesn't come down far too fast, right? You don't come down far too fast, right? You don't come down far too fast, right? You don't want a vertical drop in it. This isn't want a vertical drop in it. This isn't want a vertical drop in it. This isn't like a roller coaster at one of these like a roller coaster at one of these like a roller coaster at one of these theme parks. There's like basically a theme parks. There's like basically a theme parks. There's like basically a vertical drop. You want a relatively vertical drop. You want a relatively vertical drop. You want a relatively steep drop and you want that cortisol steep drop and you want that cortisol steep drop and you want that cortisol coming down into the coming down into the coming down into the afternoon such that by late afternoon such that by late afternoon such that by late afternoon and evening it's down and then you want and evening it's down and then you want and evening it's down and then you want to keep it down. You want to do things to keep it down. You want to do things to keep it down. You want to do things to stay calm. It doesn't mean that you to stay calm. It doesn't mean that you to stay calm. It doesn't mean that you can't go out and have a good time. can't go out and have a good time. can't go out and have a good time. Doesn't mean that you can't have a Doesn't mean that you can't have a Doesn't mean that you can't have a dinner party and engage in that. You can dinner party and engage in that. You can dinner party and engage in that. You can do those things, but those aren't do those things, but those aren't do those things, but those aren't stressful things. Keep your stress stressful things. Keep your stress stressful things. Keep your stress levels down. Keep your cortisol levels down. Keep your cortisol levels down. Keep your cortisol levels down. Certainly as you transition into down. Certainly as you transition into down. Certainly as you transition into sleep, if you can master this pattern sleep, if you can master this pattern sleep, if you can master this pattern for just 3 to four days, you're going to for just 3 to four days, you're going to for just 3 to four days, you're going to notice a significant improvement in your notice a significant improvement in your notice a significant improvement in your overall well-being. Every metric of overall well-being. Every metric of overall well-being. Every metric of well-being, energy, focus, etc., sleep well-being, energy, focus, etc., sleep well-being, energy, focus, etc., sleep quality, and on and on. And in fact, we quality, and on and on. And in fact, we quality, and on and on. And in fact, we didn't go into it today, but there is a didn't go into it today, but there is a didn't go into it today, but there is a vast literature that shows that if you vast literature that shows that if you vast literature that shows that if you get your cortisol rhythm right, it get your cortisol rhythm right, it get your cortisol rhythm right, it improves your cognition. There's also a improves your cognition. There's also a improves your cognition. There's also a vast literature showing that if your vast literature showing that if your vast literature showing that if your cortisol is disrupted in a way that your cortisol is disrupted in a way that your cortisol is disrupted in a way that your cortisol is too high in the afternoon, cortisol is too high in the afternoon, cortisol is too high in the afternoon, your cognition suffers. There's actually your cognition suffers. There's actually your cognition suffers. There's actually a known reason for this. I can't help a known reason for this. I can't help a known reason for this. I can't help but sneak this in, which is that your but sneak this in, which is that your but sneak this in, which is that your hippocampus, this brain area that's hippocampus, this brain area that's hippocampus, this brain area that's involved in learning and memory is involved in learning and memory is involved in learning and memory is chocka block full of cortisol receptors. chocka block full of cortisol receptors. chocka block full of cortisol receptors. And what happens is if your cortisol is And what happens is if your cortisol is And what happens is if your cortisol is elevated at the wrong times for too elevated at the wrong times for too elevated at the wrong times for too long, you actually get degeneration of long, you actually get degeneration of long, you actually get degeneration of these neurons in the hippocampus. It's a these neurons in the hippocampus. It's a these neurons in the hippocampus. It's a bad situation for two reasons. One, bad situation for two reasons. One, bad situation for two reasons. One, cognition and memory suffer. The other cognition and memory suffer. The other cognition and memory suffer. The other reason is that the hippocampus itself is reason is that the hippocampus itself is reason is that the hippocampus itself is involved in contextual control over the involved in contextual control over the involved in contextual control over the cortisol cycle. Meaning, the hippocampus cortisol cycle. Meaning, the hippocampus cortisol cycle. Meaning, the hippocampus is vital for you to be able to interpret is vital for you to be able to interpret is vital for you to be able to interpret when something is merely arousing, when something is merely arousing, when something is merely arousing, exciting versus stressful. And so, as exciting versus stressful. And so, as exciting versus stressful. And so, as that structure degenerates, you can't that structure degenerates, you can't that structure degenerates, you can't remember as many things, which itself is remember as many things, which itself is remember as many things, which itself is stressful, but also your ability to stressful, but also your ability to stressful, but also your ability to regulate stress is reduced. There are regulate stress is reduced. There are regulate stress is reduced. There are literally hundreds of studies on this literally hundreds of studies on this literally hundreds of studies on this from animals and in humans. So getting from animals and in humans. So getting from animals and in humans. So getting your cortisol rhythm correct and your cortisol rhythm correct and your cortisol rhythm correct and controlling it is going to serve you controlling it is going to serve you controlling it is going to serve you immensely well. Having the cortisol immensely well. Having the cortisol immensely well. Having the cortisol pattern of high in the morning, low in pattern of high in the morning, low in pattern of high in the morning, low in the afternoon and at night is the afternoon and at night is the afternoon and at night is the cortisol pattern you want. Which means cortisol pattern you want. Which means cortisol pattern you want. Which means that everything that we've talked about that everything that we've talked about that everything that we've talked about today in terms of protocols, whether or today in terms of protocols, whether or today in terms of protocols, whether or not they are behavioral, involving not they are behavioral, involving not they are behavioral, involving exercise, whether or not they're exercise, whether or not they're exercise, whether or not they're involving nutrition, whether or not involving nutrition, whether or not involving nutrition, whether or not they're involving supplementation. they're involving supplementation. they're involving supplementation. Although, I should say for Although, I should say for Although, I should say for supplementation, I recommend that kids supplementation, I recommend that kids supplementation, I recommend that kids not use supplements to control cortisol. not use supplements to control cortisol. not use supplements to control cortisol. I should say if you're 18 or younger, I should say if you're 18 or younger, I should say if you're 18 or younger, you should be really cautious about you should be really cautious about you should be really cautious about using supplements of any kind. There are using supplements of any kind. There are using supplements of any kind. There are a few like creatine, which may be okay, a few like creatine, which may be okay, a few like creatine, which may be okay, or some whey protein if your parents or some whey protein if your parents or some whey protein if your parents decide it's okay. Talk to your parents, decide it's okay. Talk to your parents, decide it's okay. Talk to your parents, kids. But certainly if you're 18 or kids. But certainly if you're 18 or kids. But certainly if you're 18 or older, all the things that we've talked older, all the things that we've talked older, all the things that we've talked about today are applicable for getting about today are applicable for getting about today are applicable for getting your cortisol rhythm right. Thank you your cortisol rhythm right. Thank you your cortisol rhythm right. Thank you for joining for today's discussion about for joining for today's discussion about for joining for today's discussion about cortisol, how to regulate it for sake of cortisol, how to regulate it for sake of cortisol, how to regulate it for sake of overcoming burnout, and just generally overcoming burnout, and just generally overcoming burnout, and just generally for improving your health and navigating for improving your health and navigating for improving your health and navigating life more effectively by controlling life more effectively by controlling life more effectively by controlling your cortisol rhythms. If you're your cortisol rhythms. If you're your cortisol rhythms. If you're learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review, and leave us up to a five-star review, and leave us up to a five-star review, and you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about cortisol. today's discussion all about cortisol. today's discussion all about cortisol. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]