Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are talking about time Today we are talking about time Today we are talking about time perception. Our perception of time is perhaps the Our perception of time is perhaps the Our perception of time is perhaps the most important factor in how we gauge most important factor in how we gauge most important factor in how we gauge our life. That is, whether or not we our life. That is, whether or not we our life. That is, whether or not we think we are being successful, whether think we are being successful, whether think we are being successful, whether or not we are failing, whether or not we or not we are failing, whether or not we or not we are failing, whether or not we live in fear, whether or not we live in live in fear, whether or not we live in live in fear, whether or not we live in relation to things in a way that's relation to things in a way that's relation to things in a way that's positive. And the reason for that is positive. And the reason for that is positive. And the reason for that is that our perception of time is directly that our perception of time is directly that our perception of time is directly linked to the neurochemical states that linked to the neurochemical states that linked to the neurochemical states that control mood, stress, happiness, control mood, stress, happiness, control mood, stress, happiness, excitement, and of course, it frames the excitement, and of course, it frames the excitement, and of course, it frames the way in which we evaluate our past. So, way in which we evaluate our past. So, way in which we evaluate our past. So, whether or not we think of our past as whether or not we think of our past as whether or not we think of our past as successful or unsuccessful, successful or unsuccessful, successful or unsuccessful, it frames our present, whether or not we it frames our present, whether or not we it frames our present, whether or not we think we are on track or off track, and think we are on track or off track, and think we are on track or off track, and it frames our sense of the future, it frames our sense of the future, it frames our sense of the future, whether or not we think we have a bright whether or not we think we have a bright whether or not we think we have a bright future, a dim future, or whether or not future, a dim future, or whether or not future, a dim future, or whether or not the future is very uncertain or not. the future is very uncertain or not. the future is very uncertain or not. Today we are going to talk about the Today we are going to talk about the Today we are going to talk about the science of time perception and we are science of time perception and we are science of time perception and we are going to talk about tools and protocols going to talk about tools and protocols going to talk about tools and protocols that you can use that can enhance your that you can use that can enhance your that you can use that can enhance your ability to dilate and contract time. ability to dilate and contract time. ability to dilate and contract time. What do we mean by dilate and contract What do we mean by dilate and contract What do we mean by dilate and contract time? We can control the speed at which we We can control the speed at which we We can control the speed at which we experience life. We can slow things down experience life. We can slow things down experience life. We can slow things down or we can speed our experience of life or we can speed our experience of life or we can speed our experience of life up and we can do that in a very direct up and we can do that in a very direct up and we can do that in a very direct and dynamic way. It's actually not that and dynamic way. It's actually not that and dynamic way. It's actually not that hard once you understand how time hard once you understand how time hard once you understand how time perception works. So, that's where we're perception works. So, that's where we're perception works. So, that's where we're headed. I think you're going to come headed. I think you're going to come headed. I think you're going to come away from today's episode with a lot of away from today's episode with a lot of away from today's episode with a lot of new knowledge and certainly with many new knowledge and certainly with many new knowledge and certainly with many tools that you can try in your daily tools that you can try in your daily tools that you can try in your daily life, whether or not that's work, sport, life, whether or not that's work, sport, life, whether or not that's work, sport, relational, emotional, and so on. Before relational, emotional, and so on. Before relational, emotional, and so on. Before we begin our discussion about time we begin our discussion about time we begin our discussion about time perception, I'd like to answer some perception, I'd like to answer some perception, I'd like to answer some questions that I received related to the questions that I received related to the questions that I received related to the episode on fasting and time-restricted episode on fasting and time-restricted episode on fasting and time-restricted feeding. If you haven't seen that episode, this If you haven't seen that episode, this If you haven't seen that episode, this information should still be of use to information should still be of use to information should still be of use to you. Time-restricted feeding involves eating Time-restricted feeding involves eating Time-restricted feeding involves eating for a particular period of time in each for a particular period of time in each for a particular period of time in each 24-hour cycle that's fairly regular. So, 24-hour cycle that's fairly regular. So, 24-hour cycle that's fairly regular. So, this would be an 8-hour, most often, or this would be an 8-hour, most often, or this would be an 8-hour, most often, or a 10-hour block. Some people do short a 10-hour block. Some people do short a 10-hour block. Some people do short shorter feeding windows. shorter feeding windows. shorter feeding windows. But, regardless, that feeding window is But, regardless, that feeding window is But, regardless, that feeding window is supposed to fall at more or less the supposed to fall at more or less the supposed to fall at more or less the same period within each 24-hour day. same period within each 24-hour day. same period within each 24-hour day. This has a number of positive effects on This has a number of positive effects on This has a number of positive effects on gene expression that regulate a number gene expression that regulate a number gene expression that regulate a number of positive effects on the different of positive effects on the different of positive effects on the different tissues of the body. And for some tissues of the body. And for some tissues of the body. And for some people, not all, but for some people, not all, but for some people, not all, but for some people, makes weight loss easier because of the makes weight loss easier because of the makes weight loss easier because of the way that they are not eating for large way that they are not eating for large way that they are not eating for large periods of each 24-hour cycle. periods of each 24-hour cycle. periods of each 24-hour cycle. In any event, one of the major questions In any event, one of the major questions In any event, one of the major questions I got after that episode was, "Do I got after that episode was, "Do I got after that episode was, "Do supplements break a fast?" And during supplements break a fast?" And during supplements break a fast?" And during that episode, I talked about what breaks that episode, I talked about what breaks that episode, I talked about what breaks a fast is highly contextual. It a fast is highly contextual. It a fast is highly contextual. It basically boils down to whether or not basically boils down to whether or not basically boils down to whether or not something you ingest, whether it be something you ingest, whether it be something you ingest, whether it be liquid or food, increases your resting liquid or food, increases your resting liquid or food, increases your resting blood glucose, how much it increases blood glucose, how much it increases blood glucose, how much it increases that resting blood glucose, and how long that resting blood glucose, and how long that resting blood glucose, and how long that increase lasts. that increase lasts. that increase lasts. So, you can check out the episode for So, you can check out the episode for So, you can check out the episode for more about what breaks a fast. But, to more about what breaks a fast. But, to more about what breaks a fast. But, to address this issue about supplements and address this issue about supplements and address this issue about supplements and whether or not supplements in particular whether or not supplements in particular whether or not supplements in particular break a fast, many of the questions were break a fast, many of the questions were break a fast, many of the questions were about Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens about Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens about Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a sponsor of this podcast. It is also is a sponsor of this podcast. It is also is a sponsor of this podcast. It is also a terrific supplement that I'd been a terrific supplement that I'd been a terrific supplement that I'd been taking for more than a decade before taking for more than a decade before taking for more than a decade before this podcast launched. And many people this podcast launched. And many people this podcast launched. And many people have been using and continue to use have been using and continue to use have been using and continue to use Athletic Greens. Does Athletic Greens Athletic Greens. Does Athletic Greens Athletic Greens. Does Athletic Greens break a fast? Well, that will somewhat break a fast? Well, that will somewhat break a fast? Well, that will somewhat depend on whether or not your resting depend on whether or not your resting depend on whether or not your resting blood glucose tends to run high or low. blood glucose tends to run high or low. blood glucose tends to run high or low. But, for most people, including me, But, for most people, including me, But, for most people, including me, because I've measured it, ingesting because I've measured it, ingesting because I've measured it, ingesting Athletic Greens does not break a fast. Athletic Greens does not break a fast. Athletic Greens does not break a fast. And if it happens to break a fast, it And if it happens to break a fast, it And if it happens to break a fast, it would be a very transient break in fast. would be a very transient break in fast. would be a very transient break in fast. So, without knowing your resting blood So, without knowing your resting blood So, without knowing your resting blood glucose levels on an individual basis, glucose levels on an individual basis, glucose levels on an individual basis, there's no way I can say for sure that there's no way I can say for sure that there's no way I can say for sure that it doesn't break a fast. But, chances it doesn't break a fast. But, chances it doesn't break a fast. But, chances are it does not because it doesn't are it does not because it doesn't are it does not because it doesn't contain much carbohydrate or sugar and contain much carbohydrate or sugar and contain much carbohydrate or sugar and it doesn't tend to therefore pull you it doesn't tend to therefore pull you it doesn't tend to therefore pull you out of the molecular milieu associated out of the molecular milieu associated out of the molecular milieu associated with low blood glucose states. with low blood glucose states. with low blood glucose states. The other question I get is whether or The other question I get is whether or The other question I get is whether or not things like fish oil break a fast not things like fish oil break a fast not things like fish oil break a fast and once again and once again and once again this will be contextual but because fish this will be contextual but because fish this will be contextual but because fish oil is a fat essential it mainly if oil is a fat essential it mainly if oil is a fat essential it mainly if essential fatty acids in particular EPA essential fatty acids in particular EPA essential fatty acids in particular EPA and DHA and DHA and DHA those don't tend to raise blood glucose those don't tend to raise blood glucose those don't tend to raise blood glucose very much. In my case having measured very much. In my case having measured very much. In my case having measured using a continuous glucose monitor my using a continuous glucose monitor my using a continuous glucose monitor my resting blood glucose fish oil does not resting blood glucose fish oil does not resting blood glucose fish oil does not in any way change my resting blood in any way change my resting blood in any way change my resting blood glucose. Chances are it won't do that for most Chances are it won't do that for most Chances are it won't do that for most people as well. So does fish oil break a people as well. So does fish oil break a people as well. So does fish oil break a fast? Chances are it does not. fast? Chances are it does not. fast? Chances are it does not. And of course people wanted to know And of course people wanted to know And of course people wanted to know about pill type supplements, you know, about pill type supplements, you know, about pill type supplements, you know, caffeine and things that raise dopamine caffeine and things that raise dopamine caffeine and things that raise dopamine and their vitamins and minerals. In and their vitamins and minerals. In and their vitamins and minerals. In general if something doesn't contain general if something doesn't contain general if something doesn't contain sugar or much carbohydrate of any kind sugar or much carbohydrate of any kind sugar or much carbohydrate of any kind it's not going to raise blood glucose it's not going to raise blood glucose it's not going to raise blood glucose very much. Now of course protein can very much. Now of course protein can very much. Now of course protein can raise blood glucose and fat can too as raise blood glucose and fat can too as raise blood glucose and fat can too as well although to a lesser extent. So well although to a lesser extent. So well although to a lesser extent. So again this is all contextual but at again this is all contextual but at again this is all contextual but at least by the logic that I just spelled least by the logic that I just spelled least by the logic that I just spelled out athletic greens fish oil and most out athletic greens fish oil and most out athletic greens fish oil and most forms of supplements provided they don't forms of supplements provided they don't forms of supplements provided they don't have any sugar or protein content should have any sugar or protein content should have any sugar or protein content should not quote and quote break a fast. not quote and quote break a fast. not quote and quote break a fast. Before we begin I'd like to emphasize Before we begin I'd like to emphasize Before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost of consumer effort to bring zero cost of consumer effort to bring zero cost of consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme I'd like to keeping with that theme I'd like to keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Our first sponsor is Roka. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest that are of the absolute highest that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working quality. I've spent a lifetime working quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system and one of the key on the visual system and one of the key on the visual system and one of the key things about our visual system is that things about our visual system is that things about our visual system is that it's designed so that when you move into it's designed so that when you move into it's designed so that when you move into areas where it's sunny or where there areas where it's sunny or where there areas where it's sunny or where there are shadows you can still see things are shadows you can still see things are shadows you can still see things with crystal clarity. Many sunglasses with crystal clarity. Many sunglasses with crystal clarity. Many sunglasses out there have the problem that you have out there have the problem that you have out there have the problem that you have to keep taking them off and putting them to keep taking them off and putting them to keep taking them off and putting them back on depending on the overall back on depending on the overall back on depending on the overall so-called ambient environment that so-called ambient environment that so-called ambient environment that you're in. Roka sunglasses have solved you're in. Roka sunglasses have solved you're in. Roka sunglasses have solved this problem. And their eyeglasses also this problem. And their eyeglasses also this problem. And their eyeglasses also have superb clarity regardless of have superb clarity regardless of have superb clarity regardless of overall ambient lighting as we say. In overall ambient lighting as we say. In overall ambient lighting as we say. In other words, you see everything very other words, you see everything very other words, you see everything very clearly no matter where you are. clearly no matter where you are. clearly no matter where you are. They also come in a number of different They also come in a number of different They also come in a number of different styles. The aesthetics are really styles. The aesthetics are really styles. The aesthetics are really terrific. So unlike a lot of performance terrific. So unlike a lot of performance terrific. So unlike a lot of performance glasses out there that make people look glasses out there that make people look glasses out there that make people look like cyborgs, you can wear them like cyborgs, you can wear them like cyborgs, you can wear them anywhere. You can wear them to dinner, anywhere. You can wear them to dinner, anywhere. You can wear them to dinner, you can wear them at school or work or you can wear them at school or work or you can wear them at school or work or in social engagements, and you can wear in social engagements, and you can wear in social engagements, and you can wear them running and cycling and out doing them running and cycling and out doing them running and cycling and out doing your various activities. If you'd like your various activities. If you'd like your various activities. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to roka, to try Roka glasses, you can go to roka, to try Roka glasses, you can go to roka, that's r o k a.com and enter the code that's r o k a.com and enter the code that's r o k a.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first Huberman to save 20% off your first Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I started using Athletic Greens way back I started using Athletic Greens way back I started using Athletic Greens way back in 2012, and so I'm delighted that in 2012, and so I'm delighted that in 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The they're sponsoring the podcast. The they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason that I started using Athletic reason that I started using Athletic reason that I started using Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Greens and the reason I still take Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice every day Athletic Greens once or twice every day Athletic Greens once or twice every day is that it covers all of my foundational is that it covers all of my foundational is that it covers all of my foundational needs for vitamins, minerals, and needs for vitamins, minerals, and needs for vitamins, minerals, and probiotics. In fact, when people ask me probiotics. In fact, when people ask me probiotics. In fact, when people ask me what supplements they should take, what supplements they should take, what supplements they should take, if I were going to recommend just one if I were going to recommend just one if I were going to recommend just one supplement, it would be Athletic Greens supplement, it would be Athletic Greens supplement, it would be Athletic Greens because of the enormous number of because of the enormous number of because of the enormous number of biological factors that it impacts in a biological factors that it impacts in a biological factors that it impacts in a positive way. positive way. positive way. As as I mentioned, vitamins and As as I mentioned, vitamins and As as I mentioned, vitamins and minerals, the probiotics are really minerals, the probiotics are really minerals, the probiotics are really important for the gut microbiome and gut important for the gut microbiome and gut important for the gut microbiome and gut health, which is important for the health, which is important for the health, which is important for the immune system, immune system, immune system, and for brain health, and for mood, and for brain health, and for mood, and for brain health, and for mood, and a number of other important factors a number of other important factors a number of other important factors including hormones and so on. If you'd including hormones and so on. If you'd including hormones and so on. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go like to try Athletic Greens, you can go like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to athleticgreens.com/huberman to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim their special offer. They'll to claim their special offer. They'll to claim their special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which give you five free travel packs, which give you five free travel packs, which make it really easy to mix up Athletic make it really easy to mix up Athletic make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road or in Greens while you're on the road or in Greens while you're on the road or in the car, and they'll give you a year the car, and they'll give you a year the car, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 and supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 and supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 and K2 have been shown to be really K2 have been shown to be really K2 have been shown to be really important for a number of important for a number of important for a number of important aspects of your immediate and long-term aspects of your immediate and long-term aspects of your immediate and long-term health, including blood lipid profiles health, including blood lipid profiles health, including blood lipid profiles and a number of other things. Again, go and a number of other things. Again, go and a number of other things. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to athleticgreens.com/huberman to athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the athletic greens, the five to get the athletic greens, the five to get the athletic greens, the five free travel packs, and the year supply free travel packs, and the year supply free travel packs, and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. of vitamin D3 K2. of vitamin D3 K2. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. help you reach your health goals. help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple regular blood work done for the simple regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that reason that many of the factors that reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term impact your immediate and long-term impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a health can only be analyzed from a health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And it's for that quality blood test. And it's for that quality blood test. And it's for that reason that I get my blood work done reason that I get my blood work done reason that I get my blood work done once every 4 to 6 months. Might seem once every 4 to 6 months. Might seem once every 4 to 6 months. Might seem like a lot, but it has been vital in like a lot, but it has been vital in like a lot, but it has been vital in order to keep my health where I want it order to keep my health where I want it order to keep my health where I want it and to ensure that my health trajectory and to ensure that my health trajectory and to ensure that my health trajectory is heading in the direction that I'd is heading in the direction that I'd is heading in the direction that I'd like it to go with each passing year. like it to go with each passing year. like it to go with each passing year. The other thing about InsideTracker is The other thing about InsideTracker is The other thing about InsideTracker is they have DNA test which can tell you they have DNA test which can tell you they have DNA test which can tell you about the specific makeup of your genes about the specific makeup of your genes about the specific makeup of your genes that can impact your particular that can impact your particular that can impact your particular nutrition, lifestyle, and nutrition, lifestyle, and nutrition, lifestyle, and supplementation regimes that can also supplementation regimes that can also supplementation regimes that can also help you steer your immediate and help you steer your immediate and help you steer your immediate and long-term health in the direction that long-term health in the direction that long-term health in the direction that you want to go. you want to go. you want to go. They make the whole thing very, very They make the whole thing very, very They make the whole thing very, very easy. You can have the blood test taken easy. You can have the blood test taken easy. You can have the blood test taken at home or you can go to a local clinic. at home or you can go to a local clinic. at home or you can go to a local clinic. Then the results come back and the Then the results come back and the Then the results come back and the wonderful thing is the platform, the wonderful thing is the platform, the wonderful thing is the platform, the dashboard that they use, walks you dashboard that they use, walks you dashboard that they use, walks you through your data and points to specific through your data and points to specific through your data and points to specific things related to nutrition. Maybe you things related to nutrition. Maybe you things related to nutrition. Maybe you should be eating more of certain things, should be eating more of certain things, should be eating more of certain things, eating less of others, supplementing in eating less of others, supplementing in eating less of others, supplementing in certain ways or not, and lifestyle certain ways or not, and lifestyle certain ways or not, and lifestyle factors like exercise in order to bring factors like exercise in order to bring factors like exercise in order to bring the numbers into the ranges that are the numbers into the ranges that are the numbers into the ranges that are right for your immediate and long-term right for your immediate and long-term right for your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman can visit insidetracker.com/huberman can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at plans. Just use the code Huberman at plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. So, let's talk about time perception. So, let's talk about time perception. So, let's talk about time perception. And the most fundamental aspect of time And the most fundamental aspect of time And the most fundamental aspect of time perception is something called perception is something called perception is something called entrainment. Entrainment is the way in entrainment. Entrainment is the way in entrainment. Entrainment is the way in which your internal processes, your which your internal processes, your which your internal processes, your biology and your psychology, are linked biology and your psychology, are linked biology and your psychology, are linked to some external thing. to some external thing. to some external thing. And the most basic form of entrainment And the most basic form of entrainment And the most basic form of entrainment that we are all a slave to, all year that we are all a slave to, all year that we are all a slave to, all year round, for our entire life, are round, for our entire life, are round, for our entire life, are so-called circannual rhythms. so-called circannual rhythms. so-called circannual rhythms. We have neurons, nerve cells, in our We have neurons, nerve cells, in our We have neurons, nerve cells, in our eye, in our brain, eye, in our brain, eye, in our brain, and in our body, that are marking off and in our body, that are marking off and in our body, that are marking off the passage of time throughout the year. the passage of time throughout the year. the passage of time throughout the year. Literally, a calendar system in your Literally, a calendar system in your Literally, a calendar system in your brain and body. And the way this works brain and body. And the way this works brain and body. And the way this works is beautifully simple. is beautifully simple. is beautifully simple. Light, seen by your eyes, Light, seen by your eyes, Light, seen by your eyes, inhibits, meaning it reduces the amount inhibits, meaning it reduces the amount inhibits, meaning it reduces the amount of a hormone released in your brain of a hormone released in your brain of a hormone released in your brain called melatonin. called melatonin. called melatonin. Melatonin has two major functions. One Melatonin has two major functions. One Melatonin has two major functions. One function is to make you sleepy at night, function is to make you sleepy at night, function is to make you sleepy at night, and the other is to regulate some of the and the other is to regulate some of the and the other is to regulate some of the other hormones of the body, in other hormones of the body, in other hormones of the body, in particular testosterone and estrogen. particular testosterone and estrogen. particular testosterone and estrogen. When we view light, we reduce the amount When we view light, we reduce the amount When we view light, we reduce the amount of melatonin released. In fact, if you of melatonin released. In fact, if you of melatonin released. In fact, if you wake up in the middle of the night when wake up in the middle of the night when wake up in the middle of the night when melatonin typically is pretty high in melatonin typically is pretty high in melatonin typically is pretty high in your brain and body, and you flip on a your brain and body, and you flip on a your brain and body, and you flip on a bright light in the bathroom, your bright light in the bathroom, your bright light in the bathroom, your melatonin levels crash down to almost melatonin levels crash down to almost melatonin levels crash down to almost zero, and stay there. zero, and stay there. zero, and stay there. Light is a very powerful modulator of Light is a very powerful modulator of Light is a very powerful modulator of melatonin, and light inhibits melatonin. melatonin, and light inhibits melatonin. melatonin, and light inhibits melatonin. Throughout the year, depending on where Throughout the year, depending on where Throughout the year, depending on where you live, day length varies. And as a you live, day length varies. And as a you live, day length varies. And as a consequence, the amount of light from consequence, the amount of light from consequence, the amount of light from the sun that is available to you varies. the sun that is available to you varies. the sun that is available to you varies. So, when days are long, So, when days are long, So, when days are long, the amount of melatonin in your brain the amount of melatonin in your brain the amount of melatonin in your brain and body that's released tends to be and body that's released tends to be and body that's released tends to be less. There's less of it, and it's released There's less of it, and it's released There's less of it, and it's released for shorter amounts of time, okay? for shorter amounts of time, okay? for shorter amounts of time, okay? Because light inhibits melatonin. When Because light inhibits melatonin. When Because light inhibits melatonin. When days are very short, the amount of days are very short, the amount of days are very short, the amount of melatonin that's released, and the melatonin that's released, and the melatonin that's released, and the duration that melatonin exists in duration that melatonin exists in duration that melatonin exists in your brain and body, tends to be much your brain and body, tends to be much your brain and body, tends to be much longer. So, melatonin correlates with longer. So, melatonin correlates with longer. So, melatonin correlates with day length. day length. day length. And if we are viewing more light, we And if we are viewing more light, we And if we are viewing more light, we have less melatonin. We view less light, have less melatonin. We view less light, have less melatonin. We view less light, we have more melatonin. You see different amounts of light each You see different amounts of light each You see different amounts of light each day, but we have a process in our brain day, but we have a process in our brain day, but we have a process in our brain and body that averages the amount of and body that averages the amount of and body that averages the amount of light that you're seeing both from light that you're seeing both from light that you're seeing both from artificial sources and from sunlight and artificial sources and from sunlight and artificial sources and from sunlight and measures that off. And it's so measures that off. And it's so measures that off. And it's so exquisitely precise exquisitely precise exquisitely precise that for a given say 8-hour day in the for a given say 8-hour day in the for a given say 8-hour day in the spring, because spring in the northern spring, because spring in the northern spring, because spring in the northern hemisphere or elsewhere, you know, days hemisphere or elsewhere, you know, days hemisphere or elsewhere, you know, days are getting longer, are getting longer, are getting longer, that means that the amount of melatonin that means that the amount of melatonin that means that the amount of melatonin is getting progressively less and less, is getting progressively less and less, is getting progressively less and less, and that signal is conveyed to all the and that signal is conveyed to all the and that signal is conveyed to all the systems of your brain and body. And this systems of your brain and body. And this systems of your brain and body. And this is why most people, not all, but most is why most people, not all, but most is why most people, not all, but most people feel like they have more energy people feel like they have more energy people feel like they have more energy in the spring. in the spring. in the spring. Conversely, when you have an 8-hour day Conversely, when you have an 8-hour day Conversely, when you have an 8-hour day in the winter, in the winter, in the winter, the amount of melatonin that corresponds the amount of melatonin that corresponds the amount of melatonin that corresponds to that 8-hour day to that 8-hour day to that 8-hour day is getting progressively greater and is getting progressively greater and is getting progressively greater and greater because why? Days are getting greater because why? Days are getting greater because why? Days are getting shorter, so melatonin is increasing from shorter, so melatonin is increasing from shorter, so melatonin is increasing from day to day to day. day to day to day. day to day to day. Every cell and system of your body pays Every cell and system of your body pays Every cell and system of your body pays attention to this, and as a consequence, attention to this, and as a consequence, attention to this, and as a consequence, most people, not all, but most people most people, not all, but most people most people, not all, but most people feel they have a little less or feel they have a little less or feel they have a little less or sometimes a lot less energy and a sometimes a lot less energy and a sometimes a lot less energy and a slightly lower mood in the winter slightly lower mood in the winter slightly lower mood in the winter months. Now, there are exceptions to months. Now, there are exceptions to months. Now, there are exceptions to this, of course, this, of course, this, of course, but the melatonin signal is the way in but the melatonin signal is the way in but the melatonin signal is the way in which your internal state, your mood, which your internal state, your mood, which your internal state, your mood, your sense of energy, even your sense of energy, even your sense of energy, even your appetite, is entrained, is matched to appetite, is entrained, is matched to appetite, is entrained, is matched to some external event. In this case, the some external event. In this case, the some external event. In this case, the event is the rotation of the Earth event is the rotation of the Earth event is the rotation of the Earth around the Sun. around the Sun. around the Sun. There are other forms of entrainment, There are other forms of entrainment, There are other forms of entrainment, meaning the matching of your brain and meaning the matching of your brain and meaning the matching of your brain and body to things that are happening in body to things that are happening in body to things that are happening in your external environment. One your external environment. One your external environment. One particularly interesting example of this particularly interesting example of this particularly interesting example of this was published last year by Perica et al. was published last year by Perica et al. was published last year by Perica et al. in Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, in Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, in Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, showing that across excellent journal, showing that across excellent journal, showing that across the calendar year the amount of the calendar year the amount of the calendar year the amount of testosterone and estrogen that human testosterone and estrogen that human testosterone and estrogen that human beings make varies such that in longer beings make varies such that in longer beings make varies such that in longer days they tend to make more testosterone days they tend to make more testosterone days they tend to make more testosterone and estrogen than in shorter days. And and estrogen than in shorter days. And and estrogen than in shorter days. And this was correlated with things like this was correlated with things like this was correlated with things like desire to seek out romantic partners or desire to seek out romantic partners or desire to seek out romantic partners or have a romantic interactions with their have a romantic interactions with their have a romantic interactions with their existing partners even aggression existing partners even aggression existing partners even aggression although violent aggression but sense of kind of violent aggression but sense of kind of violent aggression but sense of kind of willingness to argue and to get into willingness to argue and to get into willingness to argue and to get into kind of combative states and overall kind of combative states and overall kind of combative states and overall energy and mood. This is something that energy and mood. This is something that energy and mood. This is something that had been hypothesized for a long time had been hypothesized for a long time had been hypothesized for a long time but it had never really been cleanly but it had never really been cleanly but it had never really been cleanly demonstrated. And what they showed was demonstrated. And what they showed was demonstrated. And what they showed was that it's actually the skin that's that it's actually the skin that's that it's actually the skin that's taking information about the amount of taking information about the amount of taking information about the amount of light and converting it into these light and converting it into these light and converting it into these increases in testosterone and estrogen. increases in testosterone and estrogen. increases in testosterone and estrogen. Light exposure to the skin turns out about 2 exposure to the skin turns out about 2 exposure to the skin turns out about 2 hours a day. This was sunlight in this hours a day. This was sunlight in this hours a day. This was sunlight in this case to the upper body. These people case to the upper body. These people case to the upper body. These people weren't naked they were wearing clothes weren't naked they were wearing clothes weren't naked they were wearing clothes but their arms were exposed their upper but their arms were exposed their upper but their arms were exposed their upper back and neck and face were exposed back and neck and face were exposed back and neck and face were exposed they were not wearing hats they were not wearing hats they were not wearing hats resulted in resulted in resulted in large increases significant increases in large increases significant increases in large increases significant increases in testosterone and estrogen. Now you could testosterone and estrogen. Now you could testosterone and estrogen. Now you could probably export a tool from that if you probably export a tool from that if you probably export a tool from that if you liked that's not really what this liked that's not really what this liked that's not really what this podcast is about but it's very clear podcast is about but it's very clear podcast is about but it's very clear that because the skin is acting as an that because the skin is acting as an that because the skin is acting as an endocrine organ excuse me as kind endocrine organ excuse me as kind endocrine organ excuse me as kind of a hormone influencing organ of a hormone influencing organ of a hormone influencing organ that getting light on the skin not just that getting light on the skin not just that getting light on the skin not just to the eyes can influence our sense of to the eyes can influence our sense of to the eyes can influence our sense of well-being by these hormone pathways and well-being by these hormone pathways and well-being by these hormone pathways and the threshold there again seemed to be the threshold there again seemed to be the threshold there again seemed to be about 2 hours a day it doesn't have to about 2 hours a day it doesn't have to about 2 hours a day it doesn't have to be very bright outside there can be very bright outside there can be very bright outside there can be cloud cover and so on. Many people will cloud cover and so on. Many people will cloud cover and so on. Many people will probably ask probably ask probably ask will sunscreen inhibit this effect and will sunscreen inhibit this effect and will sunscreen inhibit this effect and it doesn't appear that it does obviously it doesn't appear that it does obviously it doesn't appear that it does obviously prioritize skin health and avoiding prioritize skin health and avoiding prioritize skin health and avoiding skin cancer skin cancer skin cancer sunscreen is kind of a controversial sunscreen is kind of a controversial sunscreen is kind of a controversial topic nowadays I maybe the topic nowadays I maybe the topic nowadays I maybe the topic for another podcast episode at topic for another podcast episode at topic for another podcast episode at some point but nonetheless what the some point but nonetheless what the some point but nonetheless what the Parikh et al study shows and that's most Parikh et al study shows and that's most Parikh et al study shows and that's most relevant to today's podcast is that we relevant to today's podcast is that we relevant to today's podcast is that we are entrained. We are matched to the are entrained. We are matched to the are entrained. We are matched to the external light-dark cycle, and as the external light-dark cycle, and as the external light-dark cycle, and as the day length changes, our hormones change. day length changes, our hormones change. day length changes, our hormones change. And we can override that with exposure And we can override that with exposure And we can override that with exposure uh to bright lights. You know, people go uh to bright lights. You know, people go uh to bright lights. You know, people go sit on tanning beds. Uh sit on tanning beds. Uh sit on tanning beds. Uh it's not a practice I particularly uh it's not a practice I particularly uh it's not a practice I particularly uh myself um engage in, but you know, there myself um engage in, but you know, there myself um engage in, but you know, there are a number of different ways that are a number of different ways that are a number of different ways that people can override these processes. people can override these processes. people can override these processes. But, the point is very simple. The point But, the point is very simple. The point But, the point is very simple. The point is that is that is that our perception of time is both our perception of time is both our perception of time is both conscious, you know, it's uh waiting, watching the you know, it's uh waiting, watching the you know, it's uh waiting, watching the clock tick down, and there are these clock tick down, and there are these clock tick down, and there are these slower, what we call oscillatory, slower, what we call oscillatory, slower, what we call oscillatory, meaning up and down repeatedly, slower meaning up and down repeatedly, slower meaning up and down repeatedly, slower oscillatory events related to day length oscillatory events related to day length oscillatory events related to day length that are influencing our hormones, like that are influencing our hormones, like that are influencing our hormones, like melatonin, testosterone, and estrogen, melatonin, testosterone, and estrogen, melatonin, testosterone, and estrogen, and therefore our mood, our outlook, and therefore our mood, our outlook, and therefore our mood, our outlook, and even our behavior. The next level of even our behavior. The next level of even our behavior. The next level of time, or bin of time, as we say, time, or bin of time, as we say, time, or bin of time, as we say, that we are all entrained or matched to that we are all entrained or matched to that we are all entrained or matched to is the so-called circadian time cycle, is the so-called circadian time cycle, is the so-called circadian time cycle, which is 24-hour rhythm. which is 24-hour rhythm. which is 24-hour rhythm. This is perhaps the most powerful rhythm This is perhaps the most powerful rhythm This is perhaps the most powerful rhythm that we all contain and that none of us that we all contain and that none of us that we all contain and that none of us can escape from. can escape from. can escape from. We all have this circadian clock that We all have this circadian clock that We all have this circadian clock that resides over the roof of our mouth. The resides over the roof of our mouth. The resides over the roof of our mouth. The cells in that circadian clock fire, cells in that circadian clock fire, cells in that circadian clock fire, meaning they release chemicals into our meaning they release chemicals into our meaning they release chemicals into our brain and body brain and body brain and body on a very regular rhythm. So, across the on a very regular rhythm. So, across the on a very regular rhythm. So, across the 24-hour cycle, 24-hour cycle, 24-hour cycle, they will be very active at some periods they will be very active at some periods they will be very active at some periods and less active at others. and less active at others. and less active at others. Not surprisingly, there are periods of Not surprisingly, there are periods of Not surprisingly, there are periods of every 24-hour cycle when we are very every 24-hour cycle when we are very every 24-hour cycle when we are very active and we tend to be alert, and active and we tend to be alert, and active and we tend to be alert, and others when we are asleep. others when we are asleep. others when we are asleep. Now, I've talked a lot about circadian Now, I've talked a lot about circadian Now, I've talked a lot about circadian rhythms and sleep on this podcast rhythms and sleep on this podcast rhythms and sleep on this podcast previously, and so I don't want to previously, and so I don't want to previously, and so I don't want to repeat too much of that information in repeat too much of that information in repeat too much of that information in detail, but I'm just going to give a detail, but I'm just going to give a detail, but I'm just going to give a summary of how circadian entrainment summary of how circadian entrainment summary of how circadian entrainment works, because I haven't really covered works, because I haven't really covered works, because I haven't really covered that in the context of time perception. in the context of time perception. in the context of time perception. We have this circadian clock. It We have this circadian clock. It We have this circadian clock. It oscillates. It goes up and down once oscillates. It goes up and down once oscillates. It goes up and down once every 24 hours and then repeats. Every every 24 hours and then repeats. Every every 24 hours and then repeats. Every cell of our body has a 24-hour cell of our body has a 24-hour cell of our body has a 24-hour oscillation in the expression of various oscillation in the expression of various oscillation in the expression of various genes. How that works is actually really genes. How that works is actually really genes. How that works is actually really simple, elegant, and interesting. simple, elegant, and interesting. simple, elegant, and interesting. DNA, genes, make RNA. RNA is converted DNA, genes, make RNA. RNA is converted DNA, genes, make RNA. RNA is converted into proteins. into proteins. into proteins. Every cell in our body has this Every cell in our body has this Every cell in our body has this beautiful 24-hour timer where a gene is beautiful 24-hour timer where a gene is beautiful 24-hour timer where a gene is expressed. And the important thing to expressed. And the important thing to expressed. And the important thing to understand about a given gene in this understand about a given gene in this understand about a given gene in this context is that gene is inhibited, context is that gene is inhibited, context is that gene is inhibited, meaning it's reduced, by a particular meaning it's reduced, by a particular meaning it's reduced, by a particular protein, by a little biological molecule protein, by a little biological molecule protein, by a little biological molecule in that cell. So, the gene gets in that cell. So, the gene gets in that cell. So, the gene gets expressed when there's very little of expressed when there's very little of expressed when there's very little of that other molecule around. DNA is then that other molecule around. DNA is then that other molecule around. DNA is then becomes RNA. RNA is translated into a becomes RNA. RNA is translated into a becomes RNA. RNA is translated into a protein and that protein goes way, way protein and that protein goes way, way protein and that protein goes way, way up and the gene shuts down. up and the gene shuts down. up and the gene shuts down. But as that protein gets used up and its But as that protein gets used up and its But as that protein gets used up and its levels eventually drop low, levels eventually drop low, levels eventually drop low, low to zero, the gene cycle kicks low, low to zero, the gene cycle kicks low, low to zero, the gene cycle kicks in again and the gene gets expressed, in again and the gene gets expressed, in again and the gene gets expressed, the RNA gets expressed in the protein the RNA gets expressed in the protein the RNA gets expressed in the protein again. This all happens on a 24-hour cycle. So, This all happens on a 24-hour cycle. So, This all happens on a 24-hour cycle. So, it's a little built-in timer in each and it's a little built-in timer in each and it's a little built-in timer in each and every one of our cells. And I didn't every one of our cells. And I didn't every one of our cells. And I didn't list off the genes, but for the list off the genes, but for the list off the genes, but for the aficionados out there, they go by names aficionados out there, they go by names aficionados out there, they go by names like per for period, bmal, clock, and like per for period, bmal, clock, and like per for period, bmal, clock, and all these different things. We call them all these different things. We call them all these different things. We call them the clock genes. And those clock genes the clock genes. And those clock genes the clock genes. And those clock genes regulate a number of different regulate a number of different regulate a number of different functions. So, every cell in our body functions. So, every cell in our body functions. So, every cell in our body has a 24-hour cycle of gene and protein has a 24-hour cycle of gene and protein has a 24-hour cycle of gene and protein expression. And the Earth rotates once expression. And the Earth rotates once expression. And the Earth rotates once every 24 hours and the processes that every 24 hours and the processes that every 24 hours and the processes that are happening in every cell of our body are happening in every cell of our body are happening in every cell of our body are linked. They are entrained, as we are linked. They are entrained, as we are linked. They are entrained, as we say, to the outside light-dark cycle say, to the outside light-dark cycle say, to the outside light-dark cycle because morning sunlight, morning sunlight, morning sunlight, evening sunlight, evening sunlight, evening sunlight, and the lack of light and the lack of light and the lack of light in the middle of the night make sure in the middle of the night make sure in the middle of the night make sure that the that the that the changes, these oscillations that are changes, these oscillations that are changes, these oscillations that are occurring within the cells of our brain occurring within the cells of our brain occurring within the cells of our brain and body, are matched to the outside and body, are matched to the outside and body, are matched to the outside light-dark cycle. I don't want to go light-dark cycle. I don't want to go light-dark cycle. I don't want to go into all the details of how that into all the details of how that into all the details of how that happens, but there's some very simple happens, but there's some very simple happens, but there's some very simple tools that one can use to ensure that tools that one can use to ensure that tools that one can use to ensure that you're entrainment you're entrainment you're entrainment your circadian entrainment is precise. your circadian entrainment is precise. your circadian entrainment is precise. And I cannot emphasize enough how And I cannot emphasize enough how And I cannot emphasize enough how important it is that your circadian important it is that your circadian important it is that your circadian entrainment be precise. entrainment be precise. entrainment be precise. Why? Because disruptions in circadian Why? Because disruptions in circadian Why? Because disruptions in circadian entrainment cause huge health problems. entrainment cause huge health problems. entrainment cause huge health problems. They increase cancer risk. They increase They increase cancer risk. They increase They increase cancer risk. They increase obesity. They increase mental health obesity. They increase mental health obesity. They increase mental health issues. They decrease wound healing. issues. They decrease wound healing. issues. They decrease wound healing. They decrease physical and mental They decrease physical and mental They decrease physical and mental performance. They disrupt hormones. You performance. They disrupt hormones. You performance. They disrupt hormones. You want your cells to be linked to the want your cells to be linked to the want your cells to be linked to the circadian cycle that's outside you. And circadian cycle that's outside you. And circadian cycle that's outside you. And the circadian cycle outside you mainly the circadian cycle outside you mainly the circadian cycle outside you mainly consists of when there's sunlight and consists of when there's sunlight and consists of when there's sunlight and when there is not. And that's why the when there is not. And that's why the when there is not. And that's why the simple protocols to fall out of this simple protocols to fall out of this simple protocols to fall out of this whole discussion about circadian whole discussion about circadian whole discussion about circadian entrainment are the following. View 10 entrainment are the following. View 10 entrainment are the following. View 10 to 30 minutes of bright light, ideally to 30 minutes of bright light, ideally to 30 minutes of bright light, ideally sunlight, within an hour of waking, sunlight, within an hour of waking, sunlight, within an hour of waking, assuming that you're waking early in the assuming that you're waking early in the assuming that you're waking early in the day, especially. You wake up early in day, especially. You wake up early in day, especially. You wake up early in the day, get outside, see sunlight. Do the day, get outside, see sunlight. Do the day, get outside, see sunlight. Do that again in the afternoon that again in the afternoon that again in the afternoon or around evening, 10 to 30 minutes, or around evening, 10 to 30 minutes, or around evening, 10 to 30 minutes, depending on how bright it is outside. depending on how bright it is outside. depending on how bright it is outside. Artificial lights throughout the day or Artificial lights throughout the day or Artificial lights throughout the day or if you want to be awake and you wake up if you want to be awake and you wake up if you want to be awake and you wake up early and there's no sunlight outside, early and there's no sunlight outside, early and there's no sunlight outside, you can of course turn on artificial you can of course turn on artificial you can of course turn on artificial lights if you want to be awake. But lights if you want to be awake. But lights if you want to be awake. But basically, you want as much bright basically, you want as much bright basically, you want as much bright light, ideally from sunlight, in coming light, ideally from sunlight, in coming light, ideally from sunlight, in coming in through your eyes throughout the day. in through your eyes throughout the day. in through your eyes throughout the day. And then, in the evening, you want as And then, in the evening, you want as And then, in the evening, you want as little bright light coming in through little bright light coming in through little bright light coming in through your eyes. I've said this over and over your eyes. I've said this over and over your eyes. I've said this over and over and over again on this podcast. There's and over again on this podcast. There's and over again on this podcast. There's always a lot of negotiations, but I want always a lot of negotiations, but I want always a lot of negotiations, but I want to make a few things clear. Try not to make a few things clear. Try not to make a few things clear. Try not to wear sunglasses if you can do it safely. wear sunglasses if you can do it safely. wear sunglasses if you can do it safely. Fine to wear eyeglasses or contacts. Fine to wear eyeglasses or contacts. Fine to wear eyeglasses or contacts. That's not going to be a problem. That's not going to be a problem. That's not going to be a problem. The light viewing that you do and the The light viewing that you do and the The light viewing that you do and the avoidance of light at night set the avoidance of light at night set the avoidance of light at night set the fundamental layer of your time perception. layer of your time perception. layer of your time perception. One of the best ways to disrupt your One of the best ways to disrupt your One of the best ways to disrupt your perception of time in the ways that perception of time in the ways that perception of time in the ways that we're going to talk about in the we're going to talk about in the we're going to talk about in the subsequent portions of the podcast is to subsequent portions of the podcast is to subsequent portions of the podcast is to disrupt your circadian clock, and that disrupt your circadian clock, and that disrupt your circadian clock, and that is not a good thing for a number of is not a good thing for a number of is not a good thing for a number of different reasons. different reasons. different reasons. There are other ways to so-called There are other ways to so-called There are other ways to so-called entrain your circadian clock. One of the entrain your circadian clock. One of the entrain your circadian clock. One of the best ways to do that is to engage in best ways to do that is to engage in best ways to do that is to engage in physical activity at fairly regular physical activity at fairly regular physical activity at fairly regular times of day. You don't have to do it times of day. You don't have to do it times of day. You don't have to do it every day, but if you're going to every day, but if you're going to every day, but if you're going to exercise, try and exercise at a fairly exercise, try and exercise at a fairly exercise, try and exercise at a fairly consistent time of day. Probably better consistent time of day. Probably better consistent time of day. Probably better to exercise than to not exercise, even to exercise than to not exercise, even to exercise than to not exercise, even if you have to move that time of day. if you have to move that time of day. if you have to move that time of day. But, light activity, and we'll talk But, light activity, and we'll talk But, light activity, and we'll talk about the third in a minute, food, are about the third in a minute, food, are about the third in a minute, food, are the major ways that you entrain your the major ways that you entrain your the major ways that you entrain your internal perception of time to the internal perception of time to the internal perception of time to the external events external events external events of the of the world, meaning that the of the of the world, meaning that the of the of the world, meaning that the turning of the earth, and therefore turning of the earth, and therefore turning of the earth, and therefore the exposure to sunlight or not. So, the exposure to sunlight or not. So, the exposure to sunlight or not. So, in addition to the sunlight viewing in addition to the sunlight viewing in addition to the sunlight viewing in the morning and throughout the day, and the morning and throughout the day, and the morning and throughout the day, and avoiding bright light at night of any avoiding bright light at night of any avoiding bright light at night of any kind, not just blue light, kind, not just blue light, kind, not just blue light, trying to get your activity, your trying to get your activity, your trying to get your activity, your exercise at fairly regular, exercise at fairly regular, exercise at fairly regular, within plus or minus 2 hours within plus or minus 2 hours within plus or minus 2 hours from each day to the next is going to from each day to the next is going to from each day to the next is going to have a very positive effect on so-called have a very positive effect on so-called have a very positive effect on so-called circadian entrainment, and also eating circadian entrainment, and also eating circadian entrainment, and also eating at fairly regular times. However, at fairly regular times. However, at fairly regular times. However, this is exciting. The data mainly point this is exciting. The data mainly point this is exciting. The data mainly point to the fact that you need to eat within to the fact that you need to eat within to the fact that you need to eat within more or less the same time window each more or less the same time window each more or less the same time window each day, not that you always need to eat day, not that you always need to eat day, not that you always need to eat your meals at exactly the same time. So, your meals at exactly the same time. So, your meals at exactly the same time. So, you don't necessarily have to eat uh you don't necessarily have to eat uh you don't necessarily have to eat uh lunch at noon and a snack at 4:00 and lunch at noon and a snack at 4:00 and lunch at noon and a snack at 4:00 and dinner at 8:00 in order to keep your dinner at 8:00 in order to keep your dinner at 8:00 in order to keep your circadian entrainment aligned or uh circadian entrainment aligned or uh circadian entrainment aligned or uh sharp. You could, for instance, have a small You could, for instance, have a small You could, for instance, have a small snack at noon, and then eat at 2:00, and snack at noon, and then eat at 2:00, and snack at noon, and then eat at 2:00, and then have dinner at 6:00, and then a then have dinner at 6:00, and then a then have dinner at 6:00, and then a small snack at 8:00. It doesn't so much small snack at 8:00. It doesn't so much small snack at 8:00. It doesn't so much matter when the exact meals fall, so matter when the exact meals fall, so matter when the exact meals fall, so much as that they fall more or less much as that they fall more or less much as that they fall more or less within a consistent period or phase of within a consistent period or phase of within a consistent period or phase of each 24-hour cycle. What happens when this circadian clock What happens when this circadian clock What happens when this circadian clock starts getting disrupted? I mean, this starts getting disrupted? I mean, this starts getting disrupted? I mean, this is a after all an episode about time is a after all an episode about time is a after all an episode about time perception. It's not an episode about perception. It's not an episode about perception. It's not an episode about circadian rhythms and entrainment. Well, circadian rhythms and entrainment. Well, circadian rhythms and entrainment. Well, there's a classic study by Aschoff done there's a classic study by Aschoff done there's a classic study by Aschoff done in 1985 in 1985 in 1985 that's now been repeated many times that's now been repeated many times that's now been repeated many times where they had people go into where they had people go into where they had people go into environments where they didn't have environments where they didn't have environments where they didn't have clocks and they didn't have windows and clocks and they didn't have windows and clocks and they didn't have windows and they didn't have watches and they were they didn't have watches and they were they didn't have watches and they were sometimes even in constant dark or sometimes even in constant dark or sometimes even in constant dark or constant light. And they evaluated how constant light. And they evaluated how constant light. And they evaluated how well people perceive well people perceive well people perceive the passage of time on shorter time the passage of time on shorter time the passage of time on shorter time scales. And what they found was really scales. And what they found was really scales. And what they found was really interesting. What they found is that interesting. What they found is that interesting. What they found is that people underestimate how long they were people underestimate how long they were people underestimate how long they were in these isolated environments. So, in these isolated environments. So, in these isolated environments. So, after 42 days or so, after 42 days or so, after 42 days or so, they'd ask people, "How long do you they'd ask people, "How long do you they'd ask people, "How long do you think you've been in here?" And people think you've been in here?" And people think you've been in here?" And people would say, "28 days." Or "36 days." They would say, "28 days." Or "36 days." They would say, "28 days." Or "36 days." They generally underestimated how long they generally underestimated how long they generally underestimated how long they had been in this very odd environment had been in this very odd environment had been in this very odd environment with no clocks or watches or exposure to with no clocks or watches or exposure to with no clocks or watches or exposure to sunlight or regular rhythms of sunlight or regular rhythms of sunlight or regular rhythms of artificial light. artificial light. artificial light. In addition, In addition, In addition, they found that their perception of they found that their perception of they found that their perception of shorter time intervals was also really shorter time intervals was also really shorter time intervals was also really disrupted. So, if they asked them to disrupted. So, if they asked them to disrupted. So, if they asked them to measure off 2 minutes, they Normally, measure off 2 minutes, they Normally, measure off 2 minutes, they Normally, people are pretty good at measuring off people are pretty good at measuring off people are pretty good at measuring off 2 minutes. People will come within, you 2 minutes. People will come within, you 2 minutes. People will come within, you know, 5 to 15 seconds at most. If you know, 5 to 15 seconds at most. If you know, 5 to 15 seconds at most. If you kind of had to sit there and just, wait, kind of had to sit there and just, wait, kind of had to sit there and just, wait, you have a pretty good idea of when 2 you have a pretty good idea of when 2 you have a pretty good idea of when 2 minutes is up. You say, "2 minutes is minutes is up. You say, "2 minutes is minutes is up. You say, "2 minutes is up." Well, when people's circadian up." Well, when people's circadian up." Well, when people's circadian clocks or circadian entrainment, I clocks or circadian entrainment, I clocks or circadian entrainment, I should say, was disrupted, their should say, was disrupted, their should say, was disrupted, their perception of time measurement on perception of time measurement on perception of time measurement on shorter time scales of minutes or even shorter time scales of minutes or even shorter time scales of minutes or even seconds was greatly disrupted. And as seconds was greatly disrupted. And as seconds was greatly disrupted. And as we'll see in a couple of minutes, that we'll see in a couple of minutes, that we'll see in a couple of minutes, that actually causes great problems for how actually causes great problems for how actually causes great problems for how you contend with work, how you contend you contend with work, how you contend you contend with work, how you contend with challenges of different kinds. You with challenges of different kinds. You with challenges of different kinds. You want your circadian entrainment to be want your circadian entrainment to be want your circadian entrainment to be pretty locked in or pretty entrained to pretty locked in or pretty entrained to pretty locked in or pretty entrained to the outside light-dark cycle so that the outside light-dark cycle so that the outside light-dark cycle so that your perception of time on shorter time your perception of time on shorter time your perception of time on shorter time intervals can be precise because the intervals can be precise because the intervals can be precise because the ability to perceive time accurately for ability to perceive time accurately for ability to perceive time accurately for the given task or given thing that the given task or given thing that the given task or given thing that you're involved in turns out to be one you're involved in turns out to be one you're involved in turns out to be one of the most fundamental ways that of the most fundamental ways that of the most fundamental ways that predicts how well or poorly you perform predicts how well or poorly you perform predicts how well or poorly you perform that thing or task. So, we've talked that thing or task. So, we've talked that thing or task. So, we've talked about circannual entrainment, the about circannual entrainment, the about circannual entrainment, the matching of the cells and tissues and matching of the cells and tissues and matching of the cells and tissues and organs of our body to the 365-day organs of our body to the 365-day organs of our body to the 365-day journey that the Earth takes around the journey that the Earth takes around the journey that the Earth takes around the Sun each year, Sun each year, Sun each year, and we talked about circadian and we talked about circadian and we talked about circadian entrainment, the way that the 24-hour entrainment, the way that the 24-hour entrainment, the way that the 24-hour genetic and protein clocks of each and genetic and protein clocks of each and genetic and protein clocks of each and every one of our cells is matched to the every one of our cells is matched to the every one of our cells is matched to the rotation of the Earth on its axis, and rotation of the Earth on its axis, and rotation of the Earth on its axis, and the exposure or lack of exposure to the exposure or lack of exposure to the exposure or lack of exposure to the Sun because of that rotation on its Sun because of that rotation on its Sun because of that rotation on its axis. Next, I'd like to talk about so-called Next, I'd like to talk about so-called Next, I'd like to talk about so-called ultradian entrainment. Ultradian rhythms ultradian entrainment. Ultradian rhythms ultradian entrainment. Ultradian rhythms are rhythms of about 90 minutes or so, are rhythms of about 90 minutes or so, are rhythms of about 90 minutes or so, and all of our existence is broken up and all of our existence is broken up and all of our existence is broken up into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. When you go to sleep at night, whether When you go to sleep at night, whether When you go to sleep at night, whether or not you sleep 6 hours or 4 hours or 8 or not you sleep 6 hours or 4 hours or 8 or not you sleep 6 hours or 4 hours or 8 hours or 10 hours, hours or 10 hours, hours or 10 hours, that entire period of sleep is broken up that entire period of sleep is broken up that entire period of sleep is broken up into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. Early in the night, you tend to have Early in the night, you tend to have Early in the night, you tend to have more slow-wave sleep. Later in the more slow-wave sleep. Later in the more slow-wave sleep. Later in the night, you tend to have more REM sleep. night, you tend to have more REM sleep. night, you tend to have more REM sleep. But, nonetheless, your sleep is broken But, nonetheless, your sleep is broken But, nonetheless, your sleep is broken up into these 90-minute cycles. However, up into these 90-minute cycles. However, up into these 90-minute cycles. However, when you wake up in the morning, when you wake up in the morning, when you wake up in the morning, many of the things that you do are many of the things that you do are many of the things that you do are governed by these ultradian rhythms. governed by these ultradian rhythms. governed by these ultradian rhythms. For instance, if you were to work, For instance, if you were to work, For instance, if you were to work, meaning do math or try and learn a meaning do math or try and learn a meaning do math or try and learn a language or do physical work of any kind language or do physical work of any kind language or do physical work of any kind or work out, or work out, or work out, the 90-minute time block seems to be the 90-minute time block seems to be the 90-minute time block seems to be the one in which the brain can enter a state one in which the brain can enter a state one in which the brain can enter a state of focus and alertness and do hard work of focus and alertness and do hard work of focus and alertness and do hard work and focus focus, and then and focus focus, and then and focus focus, and then at about 90 minutes, there's a at about 90 minutes, there's a at about 90 minutes, there's a significant drop in your ability to significant drop in your ability to significant drop in your ability to engage in this mental or physical work. engage in this mental or physical work. engage in this mental or physical work. Now, everybody Now, everybody Now, everybody from, you know, the self-help literature from, you know, the self-help literature from, you know, the self-help literature to the business literature to the pop to the business literature to the pop to the business literature to the pop psychology literature has tried to psychology literature has tried to psychology literature has tried to leverage these ultradian cycles by leverage these ultradian cycles by leverage these ultradian cycles by saying, "If you're going to do something saying, "If you're going to do something saying, "If you're going to do something hard and you want to focus on it, limit hard and you want to focus on it, limit hard and you want to focus on it, limit it to 90 minutes or less. And I am one it to 90 minutes or less. And I am one it to 90 minutes or less. And I am one of those people who's also joined that of those people who's also joined that of those people who's also joined that conversation and indeed I use 90-minute conversation and indeed I use 90-minute conversation and indeed I use 90-minute work cycles and I think they are work cycles and I think they are work cycles and I think they are extremely powerful. One should never extremely powerful. One should never extremely powerful. One should never expect that you're going to drop expect that you're going to drop expect that you're going to drop immediately into a state of high focus immediately into a state of high focus immediately into a state of high focus at the beginning and then remain there at the beginning and then remain there at the beginning and then remain there for 90-minutes. We all, you know, for 90-minutes. We all, you know, for 90-minutes. We all, you know, struggle to varying degrees to achieve struggle to varying degrees to achieve struggle to varying degrees to achieve focus and motivation and drive within focus and motivation and drive within focus and motivation and drive within those 90-minute cycles, but it is true those 90-minute cycles, but it is true those 90-minute cycles, but it is true meaning there is ample literature to meaning there is ample literature to meaning there is ample literature to support the idea support the idea support the idea that after about 90-minutes that after about 90-minutes that after about 90-minutes we tend to go into a state of less we tend to go into a state of less we tend to go into a state of less ability to focus. So, while this isn't ability to focus. So, while this isn't ability to focus. So, while this isn't time perception per se, it is again an time perception per se, it is again an time perception per se, it is again an example of entrainment. What are we example of entrainment. What are we example of entrainment. What are we entraining to, right? What just because entraining to, right? What just because entraining to, right? What just because we can focus for 90-minutes and then not we can focus for 90-minutes and then not we can focus for 90-minutes and then not so well at 100-minutes or 120-minutes so well at 100-minutes or 120-minutes so well at 100-minutes or 120-minutes what are we entraining to? Well, what are we entraining to? Well, what are we entraining to? Well, what you're entraining to is the release of you're entraining to is the release of you're entraining to is the release of particular neurochemicals. particular neurochemicals. particular neurochemicals. In this case, acetylcholine and dopamine In this case, acetylcholine and dopamine In this case, acetylcholine and dopamine that allow your brain to focus for that allow your brain to focus for that allow your brain to focus for particular periods of time, 90-minutes particular periods of time, 90-minutes particular periods of time, 90-minutes or so. And or so. And or so. And after about 90-minutes or so, the amount after about 90-minutes or so, the amount after about 90-minutes or so, the amount of those chemicals that can be released of those chemicals that can be released of those chemicals that can be released tends to drop very low, which is why tends to drop very low, which is why tends to drop very low, which is why your ability to focus becomes your ability to focus becomes your ability to focus becomes diminished. If one would like to explore more about If one would like to explore more about If one would like to explore more about the kind of backbone and basis of the kind of backbone and basis of the kind of backbone and basis of these ultradian rhythms, it goes by a these ultradian rhythms, it goes by a these ultradian rhythms, it goes by a different name. This was originally different name. This was originally different name. This was originally called the basic rest activity cycle. called the basic rest activity cycle. called the basic rest activity cycle. This was proposed many years ago by This was proposed many years ago by This was proposed many years ago by Nathaniel Kleitman. Nathaniel Kleitman. Nathaniel Kleitman. It was established to be true within It was established to be true within It was established to be true within sleep states as I mentioned before. Then sleep states as I mentioned before. Then sleep states as I mentioned before. Then it was debated for a long time whether it was debated for a long time whether it was debated for a long time whether or not these 90-minute cycles also or not these 90-minute cycles also or not these 90-minute cycles also control our ability to focus and perform control our ability to focus and perform control our ability to focus and perform work in wakeful states and it turns out work in wakeful states and it turns out work in wakeful states and it turns out that they do. Now, there's a lot of that they do. Now, there's a lot of that they do. Now, there's a lot of literature to support that. I always get literature to support that. I always get literature to support that. I always get the question, how do you know when the question, how do you know when the question, how do you know when the 90-minute cycle begins? In other words, 90-minute cycle begins? In other words, 90-minute cycle begins? In other words, let's say you wake up at 8:00 a.m. and let's say you wake up at 8:00 a.m. and let's say you wake up at 8:00 a.m. and you just finished a 90-minute sleep you just finished a 90-minute sleep you just finished a 90-minute sleep cycle, does that mean that your cycle, does that mean that your cycle, does that mean that your next 90-minute cycle where you could do next 90-minute cycle where you could do next 90-minute cycle where you could do work begins right at 8:01? No. work begins right at 8:01? No. work begins right at 8:01? No. The interesting thing about these basic The interesting thing about these basic The interesting thing about these basic rest activity cycles, these ultradian rest activity cycles, these ultradian rest activity cycles, these ultradian rhythms, is that you can initiate them rhythms, is that you can initiate them rhythms, is that you can initiate them whenever you want. This is not like a whenever you want. This is not like a whenever you want. This is not like a circadian rhythm, which is a hardwired circadian rhythm, which is a hardwired circadian rhythm, which is a hardwired unerring signal of 24 hours. unerring signal of 24 hours. unerring signal of 24 hours. The ultradian rhythms that occur during The ultradian rhythms that occur during The ultradian rhythms that occur during sleep are hardwired unerring. You don't get the hardwired unerring. You don't get the hardwired unerring. You don't get the option of making your sleep cycles at option of making your sleep cycles at option of making your sleep cycles at 120 minutes or 5 minutes. You don't get 120 minutes or 5 minutes. You don't get 120 minutes or 5 minutes. You don't get that option. that option. that option. But, if you decide that you want to But, if you decide that you want to But, if you decide that you want to apply ultradian rhythms to work and apply ultradian rhythms to work and apply ultradian rhythms to work and performance, you can set a clock and performance, you can set a clock and performance, you can set a clock and decide, "Okay, now the focus begins. Now decide, "Okay, now the focus begins. Now decide, "Okay, now the focus begins. Now the work begins, and this 90-minute the work begins, and this 90-minute the work begins, and this 90-minute cycle is the period in which I'm going cycle is the period in which I'm going cycle is the period in which I'm going to do work." And I actually do this. I, to do work." And I actually do this. I, to do work." And I actually do this. I, you know, mid-morning and sometimes you know, mid-morning and sometimes you know, mid-morning and sometimes twice a day, I do a 90-minute cycle twice a day, I do a 90-minute cycle twice a day, I do a 90-minute cycle where I limit where I limit where I limit all distraction as much as possible, put all distraction as much as possible, put all distraction as much as possible, put away my phone, often turn off the away my phone, often turn off the away my phone, often turn off the internet as well. I talked about this in internet as well. I talked about this in internet as well. I talked about this in an episode on opt- and kind of an episode on opt- and kind of an episode on opt- and kind of an optimal work day, at least for me, just optimal work day, at least for me, just optimal work day, at least for me, just to give an example of how this might to give an example of how this might to give an example of how this might work. But, I want to emphasize again work. But, I want to emphasize again work. But, I want to emphasize again that these ultradian rhythms are ones that these ultradian rhythms are ones that these ultradian rhythms are ones that you set. So, you decide I'm going that you set. So, you decide I'm going that you set. So, you decide I'm going to work for 90 minutes. What you can't to work for 90 minutes. What you can't to work for 90 minutes. What you can't negotiate, however, is that at about 100 negotiate, however, is that at about 100 negotiate, however, is that at about 100 minutes or 120 minutes, no matter who minutes or 120 minutes, no matter who minutes or 120 minutes, no matter who you are, you are going to see a you are, you are going to see a you are, you are going to see a diminishment in performance. You're not diminishment in performance. You're not diminishment in performance. You're not going to focus as well. And that's again going to focus as well. And that's again going to focus as well. And that's again because of the way that these 90-minute because of the way that these 90-minute because of the way that these 90-minute cycles are linked to the ability of the cycles are linked to the ability of the cycles are linked to the ability of the neurons that release acetylcholine and neurons that release acetylcholine and neurons that release acetylcholine and dopamine and to some extent dopamine and to some extent dopamine and to some extent norepinephrine, the things that give us norepinephrine, the things that give us norepinephrine, the things that give us narrow focus, motivation, and drive, the narrow focus, motivation, and drive, the narrow focus, motivation, and drive, the way that these 90-minute cycles are way that these 90-minute cycles are way that these 90-minute cycles are involved in those circuits. involved in those circuits. involved in those circuits. After about 90 minutes, those circuits After about 90 minutes, those circuits After about 90 minutes, those circuits are far less willing to engage, and are far less willing to engage, and are far less willing to engage, and therefore it's much harder to continue therefore it's much harder to continue therefore it's much harder to continue to focus to a high degree. to focus to a high degree. to focus to a high degree. Some people like to do multiple Some people like to do multiple Some people like to do multiple 90-minute cycles per day of focus. In 90-minute cycles per day of focus. In 90-minute cycles per day of focus. In that case, you need to separate them that case, you need to separate them that case, you need to separate them out. You can't do one 90-minute cycle, out. You can't do one 90-minute cycle, out. You can't do one 90-minute cycle, then go right into another 90-minute then go right into another 90-minute then go right into another 90-minute cycle, then another 90-minute cycle. You cycle, then another 90-minute cycle. You cycle, then another 90-minute cycle. You can't cheat these uh circuits related to can't cheat these uh circuits related to can't cheat these uh circuits related to acetylcholine and dopamine and acetylcholine and dopamine and acetylcholine and dopamine and norepinephrine, unfortunately. I suggest norepinephrine, unfortunately. I suggest norepinephrine, unfortunately. I suggest that people do no more than three, and that people do no more than three, and that people do no more than three, and ideally it would be two or just one of ideally it would be two or just one of ideally it would be two or just one of these 90-minute cycles. Why do I say these 90-minute cycles. Why do I say these 90-minute cycles. Why do I say ideally? Well, they are very taxing. You ideally? Well, they are very taxing. You ideally? Well, they are very taxing. You are in a very narrow tunnel of focus. are in a very narrow tunnel of focus. are in a very narrow tunnel of focus. So, for me, I can do one mid-morning, So, for me, I can do one mid-morning, So, for me, I can do one mid-morning, and I can probably do another one in the and I can probably do another one in the and I can probably do another one in the afternoon. This is not the kind of work afternoon. This is not the kind of work afternoon. This is not the kind of work that's like checking email or text that's like checking email or text that's like checking email or text messaging or social media. This is very messaging or social media. This is very messaging or social media. This is very focused, hard work, working on hard focused, hard work, working on hard focused, hard work, working on hard problems of various kinds, and this will problems of various kinds, and this will problems of various kinds, and this will be different for everybody. So, I be different for everybody. So, I be different for everybody. So, I recommend that they be spaced by at recommend that they be spaced by at recommend that they be spaced by at least two to four hours, and most people least two to four hours, and most people least two to four hours, and most people probably won't be able to handle more probably won't be able to handle more probably won't be able to handle more than two per day. There are probably than two per day. There are probably than two per day. There are probably some mutants out there that could do some mutants out there that could do some mutants out there that could do three or four, but that's exceedingly three or four, but that's exceedingly three or four, but that's exceedingly rare. I think even one a day is going to rare. I think even one a day is going to rare. I think even one a day is going to feel like a significant mental feel like a significant mental feel like a significant mental investment, and afterwards you're going investment, and afterwards you're going investment, and afterwards you're going to feel pretty taxed. So, now we've to feel pretty taxed. So, now we've to feel pretty taxed. So, now we've talked about circannual, circadian, and talked about circannual, circadian, and talked about circannual, circadian, and ultradian rhythms. ultradian rhythms. ultradian rhythms. But, we haven't really talked about time But, we haven't really talked about time But, we haven't really talked about time perception per se. We've mainly talked perception per se. We've mainly talked perception per se. We've mainly talked about the subconscious, slow oscillatory about the subconscious, slow oscillatory about the subconscious, slow oscillatory ways in which we are entrained or ways in which we are entrained or ways in which we are entrained or matched to the year or to the day, and matched to the year or to the day, and matched to the year or to the day, and these ultradian cycles that we can these ultradian cycles that we can these ultradian cycles that we can impose on our work, and that we can impose on our work, and that we can impose on our work, and that we can leverage toward more focus if we like. leverage toward more focus if we like. leverage toward more focus if we like. But, what about the actual perception of But, what about the actual perception of But, what about the actual perception of time? What actually controls how fast or time? What actually controls how fast or time? What actually controls how fast or how slowly we perceive time going by? how slowly we perceive time going by? how slowly we perceive time going by? There are basically three forms of time There are basically three forms of time There are basically three forms of time perception that we should all be aware perception that we should all be aware perception that we should all be aware of. One is our perception of the passage of One is our perception of the passage of One is our perception of the passage of time in the present, how quickly or time in the present, how quickly or time in the present, how quickly or slowly things seem to be happening for slowly things seem to be happening for slowly things seem to be happening for us. This is kind of like an interval timer, This is kind of like an interval timer, This is kind of like an interval timer, ticking off time. Tick tick ticking off time. Tick tick ticking off time. Tick tick tick. It's either fine-slicing, tick tick. It's either fine-slicing, tick tick. It's either fine-slicing, like that, or tick. like that, or tick. like that, or tick. Tick. We have interval timers. I'll Tick. We have interval timers. I'll Tick. We have interval timers. I'll discuss the basis of those interval discuss the basis of those interval discuss the basis of those interval timers. We also engage in what's called timers. We also engage in what's called timers. We also engage in what's called prospective timing, which is like a prospective timing, which is like a prospective timing, which is like a stopwatch, measuring off things as they stopwatch, measuring off things as they stopwatch, measuring off things as they go forward. That might sound a little go forward. That might sound a little go forward. That might sound a little bit like what I just described, but it's bit like what I just described, but it's bit like what I just described, but it's actually uh a little bit different. For actually uh a little bit different. For actually uh a little bit different. For instance, if I told you to start measuring off a if I told you to start measuring off a if I told you to start measuring off a 2-minute time interval into the future, 2-minute time interval into the future, 2-minute time interval into the future, you could do that pretty well. you could do that pretty well. you could do that pretty well. But if I told you had to measure a But if I told you had to measure a But if I told you had to measure a 5-minute time interval into the future, 5-minute time interval into the future, 5-minute time interval into the future, and you couldn't use any clocks or and you couldn't use any clocks or and you couldn't use any clocks or watches or your phone or anything like watches or your phone or anything like watches or your phone or anything like that, you would have to set the tick that, you would have to set the tick that, you would have to set the tick marks. You would have to decide how many marks. You would have to decide how many marks. You would have to decide how many times you were going to count off during times you were going to count off during times you were going to count off during that 5-minute time block. that 5-minute time block. that 5-minute time block. There's also retrospective time, which There's also retrospective time, which There's also retrospective time, which is how you measure off time in the past. how you measure off time in the past. how you measure off time in the past. So, if I say, you know, last week I know So, if I say, you know, last week I know So, if I say, you know, last week I know you went to the park, you did some you went to the park, you did some you went to the park, you did some things with friends, you know, you went things with friends, you know, you went things with friends, you know, you went out in the evening. Um how long was it out in the evening. Um how long was it out in the evening. Um how long was it between lunch and when you went to between lunch and when you went to between lunch and when you went to dinner with friends? You probably think, dinner with friends? You probably think, dinner with friends? You probably think, "Okay, well, I remember I went to dinner "Okay, well, I remember I went to dinner "Okay, well, I remember I went to dinner at 7:00, and we had lunch right around at 7:00, and we had lunch right around at 7:00, and we had lunch right around 2:00." You're using memory to 2:00." You're using memory to 2:00." You're using memory to reconstruct certain sets of events in the past and certain sets of events in the past and certain sets of events in the past and get a sense of their relative get a sense of their relative get a sense of their relative positioning within time. Okay? So, we positioning within time. Okay? So, we positioning within time. Okay? So, we have retrospective, current time have retrospective, current time have retrospective, current time interval measurement, and then interval measurement, and then interval measurement, and then prospective time measurement into the prospective time measurement into the prospective time measurement into the future. The beauty of time perception in the The beauty of time perception in the The beauty of time perception in the human nervous system is that it boils human nervous system is that it boils human nervous system is that it boils down to a couple of simple molecules down to a couple of simple molecules down to a couple of simple molecules that govern whether or not we are that govern whether or not we are that govern whether or not we are fine-slicing time or whether or not we fine-slicing time or whether or not we fine-slicing time or whether or not we are batching time in larger bins. are batching time in larger bins. are batching time in larger bins. Those molecules go by names that maybe Those molecules go by names that maybe Those molecules go by names that maybe you've heard, things like dopamine and you've heard, things like dopamine and you've heard, things like dopamine and norepinephrine, neuromodulators called norepinephrine, neuromodulators called norepinephrine, neuromodulators called neuromodulators because they modulate, neuromodulators because they modulate, neuromodulators because they modulate, they change the way that other neural they change the way that other neural they change the way that other neural circuits work. circuits work. circuits work. Also, things like serotonin. Also, things like serotonin. Also, things like serotonin. Serotonin is released from a different Serotonin is released from a different Serotonin is released from a different site in the brain than dopamine and site in the brain than dopamine and site in the brain than dopamine and norepinephrine is, and has a different norepinephrine is, and has a different norepinephrine is, and has a different effect on time perception. effect on time perception. effect on time perception. So, just to give you an example of how So, just to give you an example of how So, just to give you an example of how things like dopamine and serotonin can things like dopamine and serotonin can things like dopamine and serotonin can modulate our perception of time. modulate our perception of time. modulate our perception of time. I want to I want to I want to focus on a little bit of literature that focus on a little bit of literature that focus on a little bit of literature that now has been done fortunately in animals now has been done fortunately in animals now has been done fortunately in animals and humans and which essentially shows and humans and which essentially shows and humans and which essentially shows that the more dopamine that's released that the more dopamine that's released that the more dopamine that's released into our brain, into our brain, into our brain, the more we tend to overestimate the more we tend to overestimate the more we tend to overestimate the amount of time that is just passed. Let amount of time that is just passed. Let amount of time that is just passed. Let me repeat that. The more dopamine me repeat that. The more dopamine me repeat that. The more dopamine that is released into our brain, the that is released into our brain, the that is released into our brain, the more we tend to overestimate how much more we tend to overestimate how much more we tend to overestimate how much time has passed. These experiments are time has passed. These experiments are time has passed. These experiments are very straight straightforward, excuse very straight straightforward, excuse very straight straightforward, excuse me, and they're very objective, which is me, and they're very objective, which is me, and they're very objective, which is really nice, which is really nice, which is really nice, which is you can give people or an animal a drug you can give people or an animal a drug you can give people or an animal a drug that increases the amount of dopamine that increases the amount of dopamine that increases the amount of dopamine and then ask them to measure off without and then ask them to measure off without and then ask them to measure off without any measurement device like a watch or a any measurement device like a watch or a any measurement device like a watch or a clock when 1 minute has passed. when 1 minute has passed. when 1 minute has passed. As dopamine levels arise in the brain, As dopamine levels arise in the brain, As dopamine levels arise in the brain, people tend to think that the minute is people tend to think that the minute is people tend to think that the minute is up before a minute. So, they will at the before a minute. So, they will at the before a minute. So, they will at the 38-second mark, they'll say, "Okay, I 38-second mark, they'll say, "Okay, I 38-second mark, they'll say, "Okay, I think a minute is up." So, they've think a minute is up." So, they've think a minute is up." So, they've overestimated how much time has passed, overestimated how much time has passed, overestimated how much time has passed, okay? The higher the level of the dopamine, The higher the level of the dopamine, The higher the level of the dopamine, the more people tend to overestimate. the more people tend to overestimate. the more people tend to overestimate. Now, it's also true Now, it's also true Now, it's also true that norepinephrine, also called that norepinephrine, also called that norepinephrine, also called noradrenaline, plays a role and its role noradrenaline, plays a role and its role noradrenaline, plays a role and its role is very similar to that of dopamine. And is very similar to that of dopamine. And is very similar to that of dopamine. And that's because norepinephrine and that's because norepinephrine and that's because norepinephrine and dopamine are close cousins. As some of dopamine are close cousins. As some of dopamine are close cousins. As some of you may recall, you may recall, you may recall, that they are actually manufactured from that they are actually manufactured from that they are actually manufactured from one another, okay? So, dopamine can one another, okay? So, dopamine can one another, okay? So, dopamine can actually make epinephrine and actually make epinephrine and actually make epinephrine and norepinephrine. Biochemically, it's they norepinephrine. Biochemically, it's they norepinephrine. Biochemically, it's they there's a cascade in which dopamine can there's a cascade in which dopamine can there's a cascade in which dopamine can be made into norepinephrine and be made into norepinephrine and be made into norepinephrine and epinephrine, which is remarkable. epinephrine, which is remarkable. epinephrine, which is remarkable. How does having elevated levels of How does having elevated levels of How does having elevated levels of dopamine and norepinephrine cause one to dopamine and norepinephrine cause one to dopamine and norepinephrine cause one to overestimate how much time has passed? overestimate how much time has passed? overestimate how much time has passed? Well, it does it because of the way that Well, it does it because of the way that Well, it does it because of the way that it causes fine slicing of your time it causes fine slicing of your time it causes fine slicing of your time bins. So, fine slicing of time bins is like So, fine slicing of time bins is like So, fine slicing of time bins is like increasing the frame rate on your increasing the frame rate on your increasing the frame rate on your camera, Right? Slow motion Right? Slow motion Right? Slow motion is achieved in movies and elsewhere by is achieved in movies and elsewhere by is achieved in movies and elsewhere by increasing the frame rate. So, if you increasing the frame rate. So, if you increasing the frame rate. So, if you take a movie at 30 frames per second take a movie at 30 frames per second take a movie at 30 frames per second and watch it, it will appear to have a and watch it, it will appear to have a and watch it, it will appear to have a certain speed, right? Cuz those are just certain speed, right? Cuz those are just certain speed, right? Cuz those are just snapshots, 30 frames per second. snapshots, 30 frames per second. snapshots, 30 frames per second. In contrast, if you took that same movie In contrast, if you took that same movie In contrast, if you took that same movie at 4,000 frames per second, you are fine at 4,000 frames per second, you are fine at 4,000 frames per second, you are fine slicing and you're going to see every slicing and you're going to see every slicing and you're going to see every little detail and as you play each one little detail and as you play each one little detail and as you play each one of those frames, it's going to look like of those frames, it's going to look like of those frames, it's going to look like it moved slower. Okay? Whatever So, the it moved slower. Okay? Whatever So, the it moved slower. Okay? Whatever So, the kind of jump shot in basketball that's kind of jump shot in basketball that's kind of jump shot in basketball that's done slowly, any slow motion is the done slowly, any slow motion is the done slowly, any slow motion is the consequence of higher frame rate. consequence of higher frame rate. consequence of higher frame rate. So, dopamine and norepinephrine increase So, dopamine and norepinephrine increase So, dopamine and norepinephrine increase frame rate. frame rate. frame rate. And as a consequence, they tend to lead us as a consequence, they tend to lead us as a consequence, they tend to lead us to overestimate the amount of time to overestimate the amount of time to overestimate the amount of time that's passed. that's passed. that's passed. Conversely, the neuromodulator serotonin Conversely, the neuromodulator serotonin Conversely, the neuromodulator serotonin causes people to underestimate the causes people to underestimate the causes people to underestimate the amount of time that's passed. So, amount of time that's passed. So, amount of time that's passed. So, they've done these experiments. They they've done these experiments. They they've done these experiments. They actually have done these experiments actually have done these experiments actually have done these experiments using in humans with drugs that increase using in humans with drugs that increase using in humans with drugs that increase serotonin. They've also done them with serotonin. They've also done them with serotonin. They've also done them with cannabis, which increases serotonin cannabis, which increases serotonin cannabis, which increases serotonin among other things, including the among other things, including the among other things, including the cannabinoid receptor cannabinoid receptor cannabinoid receptor activation. And when people have elevated levels of 5-HT when people have elevated levels of 5-HT when people have elevated levels of 5-HT or whether or not they've ingested or whether or not they've ingested or whether or not they've ingested cannabis, they tend to underestimate how cannabis, they tend to underestimate how cannabis, they tend to underestimate how much time has passed. You do the much time has passed. You do the much time has passed. You do the equivalent experiment. You tell people equivalent experiment. You tell people equivalent experiment. You tell people that they have to guess or tell you when that they have to guess or tell you when that they have to guess or tell you when 5 minutes, for instance, has passed. 5 minutes, for instance, has passed. 5 minutes, for instance, has passed. Just use 5 minutes as example this time. Just use 5 minutes as example this time. Just use 5 minutes as example this time. And generally, they will miss the And generally, they will miss the And generally, they will miss the 5-minute mark. They will think Yeah, 5-minute mark. They will think Yeah, 5-minute mark. They will think Yeah, they'll let 6 minutes pass and they'll let 6 minutes pass and they'll let 6 minutes pass and they'll think it was 5 minutes. Well, they've think it was 5 minutes. Well, they've think it was 5 minutes. Well, they've underestimated how much time has passed. underestimated how much time has passed. underestimated how much time has passed. And that's because serotonin And that's because serotonin And that's because serotonin and some of the related molecules in the and some of the related molecules in the and some of the related molecules in the brain tend to lead to brain tend to lead to brain tend to lead to slower frame rates, right? They take the slower frame rates, right? They take the slower frame rates, right? They take the frame rate from in the example I used frame rate from in the example I used frame rate from in the example I used before, from 4,000 frames per second before, from 4,000 frames per second before, from 4,000 frames per second down to say 20 frames per second. down to say 20 frames per second. down to say 20 frames per second. So, this is very interesting. So, this is very interesting. So, this is very interesting. It's interesting in terms of how It's interesting in terms of how It's interesting in terms of how pharmacology can be used to adjust time pharmacology can be used to adjust time pharmacology can be used to adjust time perception, but it's also interesting in perception, but it's also interesting in perception, but it's also interesting in the context of that circadian rhythm. the context of that circadian rhythm. the context of that circadian rhythm. There's some emerging evidence that There's some emerging evidence that There's some emerging evidence that throughout the 24-hour cycle, there are throughout the 24-hour cycle, there are throughout the 24-hour cycle, there are robust changes in the amount of robust changes in the amount of robust changes in the amount of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin that are present in the brain, and that are present in the brain, and that are present in the brain, and bloodstream, and body, depending on bloodstream, and body, depending on bloodstream, and body, depending on time of day within the circadian cycle. time of day within the circadian cycle. time of day within the circadian cycle. Now, I'm not talking about during sleep. Now, I'm not talking about during sleep. Now, I'm not talking about during sleep. During sleep, there are definitely During sleep, there are definitely During sleep, there are definitely variations in things like dopamine, variations in things like dopamine, variations in things like dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. I talked norepinephrine, and serotonin. I talked norepinephrine, and serotonin. I talked about that in the episodes on sleep. about that in the episodes on sleep. about that in the episodes on sleep. Here, I'm just talking about the role of Here, I'm just talking about the role of Here, I'm just talking about the role of these molecules in time perception these molecules in time perception these molecules in time perception during wakefulness. So, during wakefulness. So, during wakefulness. So, much of the evidence points to the fact much of the evidence points to the fact much of the evidence points to the fact that in the first half of the day, that in the first half of the day, that in the first half of the day, approximate first half of the day, approximate first half of the day, approximate first half of the day, dopamine and norepinephrine are elevated dopamine and norepinephrine are elevated dopamine and norepinephrine are elevated in the brain, body, and bloodstream in the brain, body, and bloodstream in the brain, body, and bloodstream much more than is serotonin. And that in much more than is serotonin. And that in much more than is serotonin. And that in the second half of the day, and in the second half of the day, and in the second half of the day, and in particular towards evening and night particular towards evening and night particular towards evening and night time, serotonin levels are going up. time, serotonin levels are going up. time, serotonin levels are going up. I think that's fairly well established I think that's fairly well established I think that's fairly well established now. What that means, based on what we now. What that means, based on what we now. What that means, based on what we just discussed about the role of just discussed about the role of just discussed about the role of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin in setting the frame rate of time in setting the frame rate of time in setting the frame rate of time perception, is that our perception of perception, is that our perception of perception, is that our perception of the passage of time will be very the passage of time will be very the passage of time will be very different in the early part of the day different in the early part of the day different in the early part of the day and in the latter half of the day. And and in the latter half of the day. And and in the latter half of the day. And there's starting to be some evidence to there's starting to be some evidence to there's starting to be some evidence to support this, that early in the day, support this, that early in the day, support this, that early in the day, people tend to overestimate how much people tend to overestimate how much people tend to overestimate how much time has passed, and later in the day, time has passed, and later in the day, time has passed, and later in the day, they tend to underestimate how much time they tend to underestimate how much time they tend to underestimate how much time has passed. And this is independent of has passed. And this is independent of has passed. And this is independent of taking any kind of substance that would taking any kind of substance that would taking any kind of substance that would increase or decrease dopamine or increase or decrease dopamine or increase or decrease dopamine or serotonin. Now, this is important in terms of how Now, this is important in terms of how Now, this is important in terms of how one thinks about structuring their day, one thinks about structuring their day, one thinks about structuring their day, because I know many people are thinking because I know many people are thinking because I know many people are thinking about the various tasks that they need about the various tasks that they need about the various tasks that they need to do throughout their day. to do throughout their day. to do throughout their day. Many, or I should say all of the Many, or I should say all of the Many, or I should say all of the literature, at least that I can find, on literature, at least that I can find, on literature, at least that I can find, on productivity and things of that sort, productivity and things of that sort, productivity and things of that sort, point to the idea that we should be point to the idea that we should be point to the idea that we should be doing the hardest task, the thing that doing the hardest task, the thing that doing the hardest task, the thing that we want to do the least or the most we want to do the least or the most we want to do the least or the most important task early in the day as a important task early in the day as a important task early in the day as a kind of a psychological tool for getting kind of a psychological tool for getting kind of a psychological tool for getting it done and feeling as if we it done and feeling as if we it done and feeling as if we accomplished something. And I think accomplished something. And I think accomplished something. And I think that's an excellent protocol, frankly. that's an excellent protocol, frankly. that's an excellent protocol, frankly. But I'm not sure it's an excellent But I'm not sure it's an excellent But I'm not sure it's an excellent protocol because of the way that we protocol because of the way that we protocol because of the way that we sense accomplishment. sense accomplishment. sense accomplishment. Or at least it's not only an excellent Or at least it's not only an excellent Or at least it's not only an excellent protocol because of the way that we protocol because of the way that we protocol because of the way that we sense accomplishment. Another reason to sense accomplishment. Another reason to sense accomplishment. Another reason to move something that's very hard into the move something that's very hard into the move something that's very hard into the early part of the day early part of the day early part of the day is that is that is that if indeed the dopaminergic and if indeed the dopaminergic and if indeed the dopaminergic and noradrenergic circuits are more active noradrenergic circuits are more active noradrenergic circuits are more active at that time, at that time, at that time, we are actually in a better position we are actually in a better position we are actually in a better position cognitively to parse that hard problem cognitively to parse that hard problem cognitively to parse that hard problem because of the way that we are able to because of the way that we are able to because of the way that we are able to fine slice fine slice fine slice our perception of time and fine slice our perception of time and fine slice our perception of time and fine slice all the perceptual events outside us. all the perceptual events outside us. all the perceptual events outside us. So, what I'm really saying is that early So, what I'm really saying is that early So, what I'm really saying is that early in the day you are a much more high in the day you are a much more high in the day you are a much more high resolution camera, resolution camera, resolution camera, so to speak, than you are later in the so to speak, than you are later in the so to speak, than you are later in the day. Now, different types of tasks and day. Now, different types of tasks and day. Now, different types of tasks and different types of things require different types of things require different types of things require different frame rates or different ways different frame rates or different ways different frame rates or different ways of perceiving time. And indeed this also of perceiving time. And indeed this also of perceiving time. And indeed this also lends itself to a tool whereby lends itself to a tool whereby lends itself to a tool whereby for activities that involve more kind of for activities that involve more kind of for activities that involve more kind of creative thinking that aren't as creative thinking that aren't as creative thinking that aren't as constrained by particular answers or constrained by particular answers or constrained by particular answers or outcomes and in which we need to kind of outcomes and in which we need to kind of outcomes and in which we need to kind of blend different aspects of our memory, blend different aspects of our memory, blend different aspects of our memory, different aspects of task utilization, different aspects of task utilization, different aspects of task utilization, in other words, for creative works, for in other words, for creative works, for in other words, for creative works, for brainstorming, for things that are a bit brainstorming, for things that are a bit brainstorming, for things that are a bit more fluid, so to speak, the more fluid, so to speak, the more fluid, so to speak, the more serotonergic second half of the day serotonergic second half of the day serotonergic second half of the day and because of the way the serotonergic and because of the way the serotonergic and because of the way the serotonergic second half of the day lends itself to second half of the day lends itself to second half of the day lends itself to our time perception, may actually be our time perception, may actually be our time perception, may actually be more beneficial for those sorts of more beneficial for those sorts of more beneficial for those sorts of tasks. And I'll put a reference to a tasks. And I'll put a reference to a tasks. And I'll put a reference to a couple of the studies that point to this couple of the studies that point to this couple of the studies that point to this idea that in these higher dopaminergic idea that in these higher dopaminergic idea that in these higher dopaminergic states we are better at doing certain states we are better at doing certain states we are better at doing certain sorts of tasks and in these more sorts of tasks and in these more sorts of tasks and in these more serotonergic states we're better at serotonergic states we're better at serotonergic states we're better at doing other sorts of tasks, and how the doing other sorts of tasks, and how the doing other sorts of tasks, and how the dopamine tends to be earlier in the day dopamine tends to be earlier in the day dopamine tends to be earlier in the day and the serotonin later in the day, so and the serotonin later in the day, so and the serotonin later in the day, so to speak. These are broad I'm painting to speak. These are broad I'm painting to speak. These are broad I'm painting with broad strokes here, but I think with broad strokes here, but I think with broad strokes here, but I think these lend themselves to some really these lend themselves to some really these lend themselves to some really excellent tools cuz I think we all excellent tools cuz I think we all excellent tools cuz I think we all understand the value of doing something understand the value of doing something understand the value of doing something that's hard or challenging early in the that's hard or challenging early in the that's hard or challenging early in the day, but we should ask ourselves harder day, but we should ask ourselves harder day, but we should ask ourselves harder challenging how. What does that task challenging how. What does that task challenging how. What does that task actually really require in terms of time actually really require in terms of time actually really require in terms of time perception? Some people might appreciate perception? Some people might appreciate perception? Some people might appreciate some examples of how this might work. some examples of how this might work. some examples of how this might work. Basically, what I'm saying is if you are Basically, what I'm saying is if you are Basically, what I'm saying is if you are doing work that involves adhering to doing work that involves adhering to doing work that involves adhering to some rigid rules, so math or a recipe or some rigid rules, so math or a recipe or some rigid rules, so math or a recipe or execution of musical scales or physical execution of musical scales or physical execution of musical scales or physical skills or skills or skills or uh accounting or something that requires uh accounting or something that requires uh accounting or something that requires a lot of precision where there's a right a lot of precision where there's a right a lot of precision where there's a right and wrong answer and it's hard, and wrong answer and it's hard, and wrong answer and it's hard, I would suggest that you do that in the I would suggest that you do that in the I would suggest that you do that in the early part of the day because of the way early part of the day because of the way early part of the day because of the way that dopamine and norepinephrine that dopamine and norepinephrine that dopamine and norepinephrine impact time perception. You are impact time perception. You are impact time perception. You are literally better at slicing up time. You literally better at slicing up time. You literally better at slicing up time. You are a higher resolution brain during are a higher resolution brain during are a higher resolution brain during those times, and so that's going to lend those times, and so that's going to lend those times, and so that's going to lend itself better to itself better to itself better to events and demands that require high events and demands that require high events and demands that require high resolution. Whereas in the afternoon, resolution. Whereas in the afternoon, resolution. Whereas in the afternoon, in this more of what I'm calling in this more of what I'm calling in this more of what I'm calling serotonergic state, that's when you're serotonergic state, that's when you're serotonergic state, that's when you're going to be better at brainstorming and going to be better at brainstorming and going to be better at brainstorming and creative works where there's some creative works where there's some creative works where there's some flexibility in terms of how you're flexibility in terms of how you're flexibility in terms of how you're batching time and perceiving time, and batching time and perceiving time, and batching time and perceiving time, and there isn't so much rigid oversight of a there isn't so much rigid oversight of a there isn't so much rigid oversight of a right or wrong answer. And as an aside right or wrong answer. And as an aside right or wrong answer. And as an aside to support what I said, but also to take to support what I said, but also to take to support what I said, but also to take us back to this critical role of the us back to this critical role of the us back to this critical role of the circadian rhythm, circadian rhythm, circadian rhythm, there is a lot of evidence that when there is a lot of evidence that when there is a lot of evidence that when one's sleep is disrupted, when sleep is one's sleep is disrupted, when sleep is one's sleep is disrupted, when sleep is either too short or is fragmented or is either too short or is fragmented or is either too short or is fragmented or is not of high enough quality for enough not of high enough quality for enough not of high enough quality for enough days, one of the first things to happen days, one of the first things to happen days, one of the first things to happen is that there is a dysregulation is that there is a dysregulation is that there is a dysregulation of these dopaminergic, noradrenergic, of these dopaminergic, noradrenergic, of these dopaminergic, noradrenergic, chick, and serotonergic states chick, and serotonergic states chick, and serotonergic states throughout the day. They get kind of throughout the day. They get kind of throughout the day. They get kind of um mishmashed up. Um it's not that um mishmashed up. Um it's not that um mishmashed up. Um it's not that they're a total mess, but they aren't as they're a total mess, but they aren't as they're a total mess, but they aren't as cleanly defined. And I think this is one cleanly defined. And I think this is one cleanly defined. And I think this is one of the reasons why when we haven't slept of the reasons why when we haven't slept of the reasons why when we haven't slept well or we haven't slept enough, we tend well or we haven't slept enough, we tend well or we haven't slept enough, we tend to feel a little off, like we can't to feel a little off, like we can't to feel a little off, like we can't concentrate. Part of that lack of concentrate. Part of that lack of concentrate. Part of that lack of concentration is due to other things, concentration is due to other things, concentration is due to other things, but part of that concentration could be but part of that concentration could be but part of that concentration could be due to the fact that our sense of the due to the fact that our sense of the due to the fact that our sense of the passage of time is disrupted. So, there passage of time is disrupted. So, there passage of time is disrupted. So, there seems to be some value in keeping the seems to be some value in keeping the seems to be some value in keeping the dopaminergic noradrenergic state kind of dopaminergic noradrenergic state kind of dopaminergic noradrenergic state kind of limited to the early part of the day and limited to the early part of the day and limited to the early part of the day and the serotonergic state, as we're calling the serotonergic state, as we're calling the serotonergic state, as we're calling it, kind of pushed towards the second it, kind of pushed towards the second it, kind of pushed towards the second half of the day. Now, there is a version half of the day. Now, there is a version half of the day. Now, there is a version of how dopamine and norepinephrine can of how dopamine and norepinephrine can of how dopamine and norepinephrine can impact our perception of the passage of impact our perception of the passage of impact our perception of the passage of time in ways that can be very disruptive time in ways that can be very disruptive time in ways that can be very disruptive or even maladaptive. And the best or even maladaptive. And the best or even maladaptive. And the best example that I'm aware of is trauma. example that I'm aware of is trauma. example that I'm aware of is trauma. Many people who have been in car Many people who have been in car Many people who have been in car accidents or who have experienced some accidents or who have experienced some accidents or who have experienced some other form of major trauma other form of major trauma other form of major trauma do what's called overclocking. do what's called overclocking. do what's called overclocking. Overclocking is when levels of dopamine and is when levels of dopamine and is when levels of dopamine and norepinephrine increase so much during a norepinephrine increase so much during a norepinephrine increase so much during a particular event, particular event, particular event, our level of alertness is increased so our level of alertness is increased so our level of alertness is increased so much during a given event, much during a given event, much during a given event, that we fine-slice, in other words, the that we fine-slice, in other words, the that we fine-slice, in other words, the frame rate is increased so much so that frame rate is increased so much so that frame rate is increased so much so that we perceive things as happening in we perceive things as happening in we perceive things as happening in ultra-slow motion. ultra-slow motion. ultra-slow motion. Now, that might not seem like a bad thing that might not seem like a bad thing that might not seem like a bad thing overall, but the problem with overall, but the problem with overall, but the problem with overclocking is the way in which that overclocking is the way in which that overclocking is the way in which that information gets stamped down into the information gets stamped down into the information gets stamped down into the memory system. So, the memory system, memory system. So, the memory system, memory system. So, the memory system, which involves areas of the brain like which involves areas of the brain like which involves areas of the brain like the hippocampus, but also the neocortex, the hippocampus, but also the neocortex, the hippocampus, but also the neocortex, is basically a space-time recorder. What is basically a space-time recorder. What is basically a space-time recorder. What do I mean by space-time recorder? Well, do I mean by space-time recorder? Well, do I mean by space-time recorder? Well, your nervous system, of course, is your nervous system, of course, is your nervous system, of course, is housed in the, uh, darkness of your housed in the, uh, darkness of your housed in the, uh, darkness of your skull. It doesn't have a whole lot of skull. It doesn't have a whole lot of skull. It doesn't have a whole lot of information about the outside world information about the outside world information about the outside world except light coming in through the eyes except light coming in through the eyes except light coming in through the eyes and whatever happens to hit our ears and whatever happens to hit our ears and whatever happens to hit our ears and, uh, in terms of sound waves and and, uh, in terms of sound waves and and, uh, in terms of sound waves and skin and so forth. So, it has to skin and so forth. So, it has to skin and so forth. So, it has to take all those neural signals and it has take all those neural signals and it has take all those neural signals and it has to create a record of what happened. to create a record of what happened. to create a record of what happened. Now, it doesn't create a record of Now, it doesn't create a record of Now, it doesn't create a record of everything that happened, but car everything that happened, but car everything that happened, but car accidents and trauma and things of that accidents and trauma and things of that accidents and trauma and things of that sort often times are stamped down into sort often times are stamped down into sort often times are stamped down into our record of what happened. our record of what happened. our record of what happened. And what gets stamped down, what we And what gets stamped down, what we And what gets stamped down, what we actually mean by the phrase stamped actually mean by the phrase stamped actually mean by the phrase stamped down, is that the precise firing of the down, is that the precise firing of the down, is that the precise firing of the sequence of neurons that sequence of neurons that sequence of neurons that reflected some event. So, let's say I'm reflected some event. So, let's say I'm reflected some event. So, let's say I'm in a car accident, certain neurons are in a car accident, certain neurons are in a car accident, certain neurons are firing because of the flipping of the firing because of the flipping of the firing because of the flipping of the car or there's screams or there's blood car or there's screams or there's blood car or there's screams or there's blood or, you know, things of that sort. or, you know, things of that sort. or, you know, things of that sort. All of that neural activity All of that neural activity All of that neural activity gets repeated in the hippocampus repeated in the hippocampus repeated in the hippocampus and then the sequence of the firing of and then the sequence of the firing of and then the sequence of the firing of those neurons is also remembered. So, those neurons is also remembered. So, those neurons is also remembered. So, it's not just that neuron 1 2 3 4 fired it's not just that neuron 1 2 3 4 fired it's not just that neuron 1 2 3 4 fired in that sequence, it's also that neuron in that sequence, it's also that neuron in that sequence, it's also that neuron 1 2 3 4 fired at a particular rate. So, 1 2 3 4 fired at a particular rate. So, 1 2 3 4 fired at a particular rate. So, it would be 1 2 3 4 during the actual it would be 1 2 3 4 during the actual it would be 1 2 3 4 during the actual event and then the memory is stored as event and then the memory is stored as event and then the memory is stored as firing of those neurons as 1 2 3 4, firing of those neurons as 1 2 3 4, firing of those neurons as 1 2 3 4, right? If it If during the event it was right? If it If during the event it was right? If it If during the event it was 1 2 3 4 at that rate, the storage of the 1 2 3 4 at that rate, the storage of the 1 2 3 4 at that rate, the storage of the memory is not going to be 1 memory is not going to be 1 memory is not going to be 1 2 3 4, okay? In other words, there's 2 3 4, okay? In other words, there's 2 3 4, okay? In other words, there's both a space code, as we say, meaning both a space code, as we say, meaning both a space code, as we say, meaning the particular neurons that fire is the particular neurons that fire is the particular neurons that fire is important, and there's a rate code, how important, and there's a rate code, how important, and there's a rate code, how quickly those neurons fire or the quickly those neurons fire or the quickly those neurons fire or the relative firing, the timing of the relative firing, the timing of the relative firing, the timing of the firing of those neurons is also part of firing of those neurons is also part of firing of those neurons is also part of the memory. This affords our memory the memory. This affords our memory the memory. This affords our memory system tremendous flexibility. What it system tremendous flexibility. What it system tremendous flexibility. What it means is that you can take the same set means is that you can take the same set means is that you can take the same set of neurons in the hippocampus and stamp of neurons in the hippocampus and stamp of neurons in the hippocampus and stamp down many, many more memories because down many, many more memories because down many, many more memories because all you have to do is use all you have to do is use all you have to do is use a match of the different rates of the a match of the different rates of the a match of the different rates of the different neurons that were firing in different neurons that were firing in different neurons that were firing in order to set that code, right? You don't order to set that code, right? You don't order to set that code, right? You don't Otherwise, if you needed a different set Otherwise, if you needed a different set Otherwise, if you needed a different set of neurons for every memory, you need an of neurons for every memory, you need an of neurons for every memory, you need an enormous hippocampus, you need an enormous hippocampus, you need an enormous hippocampus, you need an enormous head. So, I think I think you enormous head. So, I think I think you enormous head. So, I think I think you get the basic idea. Overclocking is a get the basic idea. Overclocking is a get the basic idea. Overclocking is a case in which the The rate is so high case in which the The rate is so high case in which the The rate is so high that a memory gets stamped down and that a memory gets stamped down and that a memory gets stamped down and people have a very hard time shaking people have a very hard time shaking people have a very hard time shaking that memory and the emotions associated that memory and the emotions associated that memory and the emotions associated with that memory. And it's not the topic with that memory. And it's not the topic with that memory. And it's not the topic of today's conversation, but we will of today's conversation, but we will of today's conversation, but we will cover trauma in a future episode in cover trauma in a future episode in cover trauma in a future episode in detail, but many of the treatments for detail, but many of the treatments for detail, but many of the treatments for trauma EMDR, nowadays there's a lot of EMDR, nowadays there's a lot of EMDR, nowadays there's a lot of excitement also about ketamine excitement also about ketamine excitement also about ketamine therapies, uh exposure therapies, um you therapies, uh exposure therapies, um you therapies, uh exposure therapies, um you know, like cognitive behavioral know, like cognitive behavioral know, like cognitive behavioral therapies, involve not just trying to therapies, involve not just trying to therapies, involve not just trying to reduce the amount of emotion associated reduce the amount of emotion associated reduce the amount of emotion associated with a memory, but also a deliberate with a memory, but also a deliberate with a memory, but also a deliberate speeding up or slowing down of that speeding up or slowing down of that speeding up or slowing down of that memory. In other words, trying to allow memory. In other words, trying to allow memory. In other words, trying to allow the person who experienced the trauma to the person who experienced the trauma to the person who experienced the trauma to take control of the rate of the take control of the rate of the take control of the rate of the experience in their memory, not just experience in their memory, not just experience in their memory, not just whether or not the memory happened at whether or not the memory happened at whether or not the memory happened at all. In fact, all. In fact, all. In fact, you know, one of the first things that you know, one of the first things that you know, one of the first things that trauma victims learn is that they aren't trauma victims learn is that they aren't trauma victims learn is that they aren't going to forget what happened. What's going to forget what happened. What's going to forget what happened. What's eventually going to happen, ideally with eventually going to happen, ideally with eventually going to happen, ideally with good treatment, is that the emotional good treatment, is that the emotional good treatment, is that the emotional weight of the experience will eventually weight of the experience will eventually weight of the experience will eventually be divorced from the memory of the be divorced from the memory of the be divorced from the memory of the experience. And that's done again by experience. And that's done again by experience. And that's done again by trying to reduce the amount of emotional trying to reduce the amount of emotional trying to reduce the amount of emotional activation during the recall of that activation during the recall of that activation during the recall of that experience. And one of the best ways to experience. And one of the best ways to experience. And one of the best ways to do that is to alter the rate of the do that is to alter the rate of the do that is to alter the rate of the memory playback. In other words, taking memory playback. In other words, taking memory playback. In other words, taking that firing of neurons that might have that firing of neurons that might have that firing of neurons that might have been 1 2 3 4, again, it would be much been 1 2 3 4, again, it would be much been 1 2 3 4, again, it would be much more complicated, but 1 2 3 4 for the more complicated, but 1 2 3 4 for the more complicated, but 1 2 3 4 for the car crash, and getting the memory to car crash, and getting the memory to car crash, and getting the memory to play back at a rate of 1 2 3 4 or even play back at a rate of 1 2 3 4 or even play back at a rate of 1 2 3 4 or even 1 2 3 4, 1 2 3 4, 1 2 3 4, 1 2 3 4. In other words, 1 2 3 4. In other words, 1 2 3 4. In other words, allowing the person or instructing the allowing the person or instructing the allowing the person or instructing the person to take control of the rate of person to take control of the rate of person to take control of the rate of the playback. And in that way, there the playback. And in that way, there the playback. And in that way, there seems to be still yet unknown mechanism seems to be still yet unknown mechanism seems to be still yet unknown mechanism by which people can by which people can by which people can uncouple some of the emotional weight uncouple some of the emotional weight uncouple some of the emotional weight that's associated with that memory. So, that's associated with that memory. So, that's associated with that memory. So, overclocking is a kind of extreme overclocking is a kind of extreme overclocking is a kind of extreme example of where the dopaminergic and example of where the dopaminergic and example of where the dopaminergic and the noradrenergic system is ramped up so the noradrenergic system is ramped up so the noradrenergic system is ramped up so high that people have this unfortunately high that people have this unfortunately high that people have this unfortunately what seems like indelible mark in their what seems like indelible mark in their what seems like indelible mark in their brain of a particular event, but again brain of a particular event, but again brain of a particular event, but again trauma treatment is designed to uncouple trauma treatment is designed to uncouple trauma treatment is designed to uncouple the emotional load of that event. Some the emotional load of that event. Some the emotional load of that event. Some of you are probably saying why dopamine of you are probably saying why dopamine of you are probably saying why dopamine during trauma? I thought dopamine was during trauma? I thought dopamine was during trauma? I thought dopamine was the feel-good molecule. Well, uh the feel-good molecule. Well, uh the feel-good molecule. Well, uh in reality dopamine is not necessarily a in reality dopamine is not necessarily a in reality dopamine is not necessarily a molecule of reward. It's a molecule of molecule of reward. It's a molecule of molecule of reward. It's a molecule of motivation, pursuit, and drive. And motivation, pursuit, and drive. And motivation, pursuit, and drive. And because of the close relationship because of the close relationship because of the close relationship between dopamine and norepinephrine, between dopamine and norepinephrine, between dopamine and norepinephrine, oftentimes they are co-released. So, oftentimes they are co-released. So, oftentimes they are co-released. So, whether or not dopamine is released whether or not dopamine is released whether or not dopamine is released during car crashes or other forms of during car crashes or other forms of during car crashes or other forms of trauma, we don't know. But what we do trauma, we don't know. But what we do trauma, we don't know. But what we do know is that both the dopamine system know is that both the dopamine system know is that both the dopamine system and the noradrenergic system, when we and the noradrenergic system, when we and the noradrenergic system, when we say noradrenergic we mean say noradrenergic we mean say noradrenergic we mean norepinephrine, those systems are norepinephrine, those systems are norepinephrine, those systems are greatly increased anytime there's a greatly increased anytime there's a greatly increased anytime there's a heightened state of arousal. And arousal heightened state of arousal. And arousal heightened state of arousal. And arousal can have negative valence like a meaning can have negative valence like a meaning can have negative valence like a meaning associated with an event that we really associated with an event that we really associated with an event that we really hate, that we would prefer not to be hate, that we would prefer not to be hate, that we would prefer not to be involved in, or it can have positive involved in, or it can have positive involved in, or it can have positive valence. But dopamine and norepinephrine valence. But dopamine and norepinephrine valence. But dopamine and norepinephrine are kind of the are kind of the are kind of the common hallmark of all things of common hallmark of all things of common hallmark of all things of elevated arousal. And so that's why we elevated arousal. And so that's why we elevated arousal. And so that's why we see evidence for dopamine being see evidence for dopamine being see evidence for dopamine being associated with these changes in time associated with these changes in time associated with these changes in time perception both for positive events and perception both for positive events and perception both for positive events and for negative events. There's a very for negative events. There's a very for negative events. There's a very interesting relationship between interesting relationship between interesting relationship between arousal, dopamine, time perception, and arousal, dopamine, time perception, and arousal, dopamine, time perception, and blinking. And uh this is all supported blinking. And uh this is all supported blinking. And uh this is all supported by a really interesting paper. First by a really interesting paper. First by a really interesting paper. First author Terhune is the last name, t e r h author Terhune is the last name, t e r h author Terhune is the last name, t e r h u n e, it's published in Current u n e, it's published in Current u n e, it's published in Current Biology, Cell Press journal, excellent Biology, Cell Press journal, excellent Biology, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. The title of the paper is Time journal. The title of the paper is Time journal. The title of the paper is Time Dilates after spontaneous blinking. So Dilates after spontaneous blinking. So Dilates after spontaneous blinking. So heightened states of arousal are heightened states of arousal are heightened states of arousal are associated with heightened levels of associated with heightened levels of associated with heightened levels of dopamine. You now know that dopamine dopamine. You now know that dopamine dopamine. You now know that dopamine leads to a kind of fine slicing of time. leads to a kind of fine slicing of time. leads to a kind of fine slicing of time. And one of the ways that we fine slice And one of the ways that we fine slice And one of the ways that we fine slice time is by blinking. time is by blinking. time is by blinking. You know, we think of blinking as just a You know, we think of blinking as just a You know, we think of blinking as just a thing to like lubricate our eyes or to thing to like lubricate our eyes or to thing to like lubricate our eyes or to limit the amount of light coming into limit the amount of light coming into limit the amount of light coming into our eyes, but it's a shutter on our eyes, but it's a shutter on our eyes, but it's a shutter on our experience. So much of the information experience. So much of the information experience. So much of the information that coming into the brain through our that coming into the brain through our that coming into the brain through our eyes impacts our attention. I've said it eyes impacts our attention. I've said it eyes impacts our attention. I've said it before on this podcast that cognitive before on this podcast that cognitive before on this podcast that cognitive attention follows visual attention, at attention follows visual attention, at attention follows visual attention, at least for sighted individuals. least for sighted individuals. least for sighted individuals. Well, it turns out that dopamine Well, it turns out that dopamine Well, it turns out that dopamine and increases in dopamine are associated and increases in dopamine are associated and increases in dopamine are associated with increases in spontaneous blink with increases in spontaneous blink with increases in spontaneous blink rate. So, the more aroused we are, the rate. So, the more aroused we are, the rate. So, the more aroused we are, the more awake we are, more awake we are, more awake we are, there are a number of effects, pupils there are a number of effects, pupils there are a number of effects, pupils dilate, heart rate increases, etc., but dilate, heart rate increases, etc., but dilate, heart rate increases, etc., but also blink rate increases. And every also blink rate increases. And every also blink rate increases. And every time we blink, this study cleanly shows, time we blink, this study cleanly shows, time we blink, this study cleanly shows, we shift our perception of time, leading we shift our perception of time, leading we shift our perception of time, leading to, as I mentioned before, to, as I mentioned before, to, as I mentioned before, overestimations of time. overestimations of time. overestimations of time. So, it seems as though in some way blink So, it seems as though in some way blink So, it seems as though in some way blink rate is actually related to frame rate. rate is actually related to frame rate. rate is actually related to frame rate. And so, this is very, very interesting. And so, this is very, very interesting. And so, this is very, very interesting. And the way that you could think about And the way that you could think about And the way that you could think about leveraging this would be leveraging this would be leveraging this would be if you wanted to actually slow down your if you wanted to actually slow down your if you wanted to actually slow down your perception of time, you would blink perception of time, you would blink perception of time, you would blink less. And if you want to speed up your less. And if you want to speed up your less. And if you want to speed up your perception of time, you would blink perception of time, you would blink perception of time, you would blink more. Now, you'd have to think of a more. Now, you'd have to think of a more. Now, you'd have to think of a scenario in which that would be useful scenario in which that would be useful scenario in which that would be useful to you. to you. to you. Uh obviously, if you're going to blink, Uh obviously, if you're going to blink, Uh obviously, if you're going to blink, you're going to miss things as well. you're going to miss things as well. you're going to miss things as well. But, I think it's a very interesting But, I think it's a very interesting But, I think it's a very interesting parameter of our visual attention as it parameter of our visual attention as it parameter of our visual attention as it relates to time perception because what relates to time perception because what relates to time perception because what it really speaks to is that these it really speaks to is that these it really speaks to is that these neuromodulators like dopamine or neuromodulators like dopamine or neuromodulators like dopamine or serotonin that adjust frame rate, serotonin that adjust frame rate, serotonin that adjust frame rate, they're not doing it through some they're not doing it through some they're not doing it through some magical mechanism. there's no single magical mechanism. there's no single magical mechanism. there's no single brain area that we can say controls time brain area that we can say controls time brain area that we can say controls time perception. I haven't said today, oh, perception. I haven't said today, oh, perception. I haven't said today, oh, you know, it's the striatum. Well, it you know, it's the striatum. Well, it you know, it's the striatum. Well, it involves the striatum, but I'm not going involves the striatum, but I'm not going involves the striatum, but I'm not going to say, for instance, oh, it's the to say, for instance, oh, it's the to say, for instance, oh, it's the cerebellum. The cerebellum is definitely cerebellum. The cerebellum is definitely cerebellum. The cerebellum is definitely involved in involved in involved in timing of movement, something for a timing of movement, something for a timing of movement, something for a future podcast. future podcast. future podcast. Time perception is what we call a Time perception is what we call a Time perception is what we call a distributed phenomenon. It it's a distributed phenomenon. It it's a distributed phenomenon. It it's a network of areas in the brain working network of areas in the brain working network of areas in the brain working together. But, dopamine in the way together. But, dopamine in the way together. But, dopamine in the way that it relates to that it relates to that it relates to the shuttering of your eyes seems to be the shuttering of your eyes seems to be the shuttering of your eyes seems to be controlling the frame rate on your controlling the frame rate on your controlling the frame rate on your experience. Numerous times on this experience. Numerous times on this experience. Numerous times on this podcast, I've talked about cold podcast, I've talked about cold podcast, I've talked about cold exposure. And nowadays, there's a lot of exposure. And nowadays, there's a lot of exposure. And nowadays, there's a lot of interest in things like cold showers, interest in things like cold showers, interest in things like cold showers, ice baths, submersion in cold water ice baths, submersion in cold water ice baths, submersion in cold water tanks, and you know, lakes and oceans tanks, and you know, lakes and oceans tanks, and you know, lakes and oceans and things of that sort. There are a lot and things of that sort. There are a lot and things of that sort. There are a lot of different positive effects of cold of different positive effects of cold of different positive effects of cold exposure. Provided it's done properly, exposure. Provided it's done properly, exposure. Provided it's done properly, it can lead to increases in metabolism, it can lead to increases in metabolism, it can lead to increases in metabolism, brown fat stores, which are the good fat brown fat stores, which are the good fat brown fat stores, which are the good fat stores that you want. They're sort of stores that you want. They're sort of stores that you want. They're sort of like a furnace to the heat that allow like a furnace to the heat that allow like a furnace to the heat that allow you to heat yourself up, stay warm in you to heat yourself up, stay warm in you to heat yourself up, stay warm in cold environments, cold environments, cold environments, to reduce inflammation, to increase to reduce inflammation, to increase to reduce inflammation, to increase resilience, and so forth. resilience, and so forth. resilience, and so forth. There's a study published in the There's a study published in the There's a study published in the European Journal of Physiology showing European Journal of Physiology showing European Journal of Physiology showing that cold exposure can increase our that cold exposure can increase our that cold exposure can increase our baseline levels of dopamine robustly, baseline levels of dopamine robustly, baseline levels of dopamine robustly, 2.5x, and it's a long-lasting increase 2.5x, and it's a long-lasting increase 2.5x, and it's a long-lasting increase in dopamine, and it appears to be a in dopamine, and it appears to be a in dopamine, and it appears to be a healthy one, meaning it doesn't seem to healthy one, meaning it doesn't seem to healthy one, meaning it doesn't seem to be addictive. I'm sure there are some be addictive. I'm sure there are some be addictive. I'm sure there are some people out there addicted to ice baths, people out there addicted to ice baths, people out there addicted to ice baths, but you know, when you think about the but you know, when you think about the but you know, when you think about the range of dopamine-inducing behaviors range of dopamine-inducing behaviors range of dopamine-inducing behaviors that are addictive, that seems to be that are addictive, that seems to be that are addictive, that seems to be more on the health-promoting side. more on the health-promoting side. more on the health-promoting side. What's interesting is that because cold What's interesting is that because cold What's interesting is that because cold water exposure increases dopamine, it water exposure increases dopamine, it water exposure increases dopamine, it will also change your perception of will also change your perception of will also change your perception of time. And if you've ever done one of time. And if you've ever done one of time. And if you've ever done one of these cold water exposures, you've these cold water exposures, you've these cold water exposures, you've experienced this. You've experienced this. You've experienced this. You've experienced getting in and feeling like, "Wow, getting in and feeling like, "Wow, getting in and feeling like, "Wow, making it 3 minutes is a really, really making it 3 minutes is a really, really making it 3 minutes is a really, really long time." And you are fine-slicing long time." And you are fine-slicing long time." And you are fine-slicing time. Your frame rate is going up. Part time. Your frame rate is going up. Part time. Your frame rate is going up. Part of that, just at a kind of that, just at a kind of that, just at a kind of a coarse level, is you're thinking, a coarse level, is you're thinking, a coarse level, is you're thinking, "This is painful. I don't like this. I "This is painful. I don't like this. I "This is painful. I don't like this. I want to get out." Right? But part of it want to get out." Right? But part of it want to get out." Right? But part of it is also that your dopamine levels are is also that your dopamine levels are is also that your dopamine levels are going up very quickly, and therefore going up very quickly, and therefore going up very quickly, and therefore your perception of that discomfort is your perception of that discomfort is your perception of that discomfort is also being fine-sliced. And so, you also being fine-sliced. And so, you also being fine-sliced. And so, you could leverage a tool, for instance, could leverage a tool, for instance, could leverage a tool, for instance, where you try and entrain your thinking where you try and entrain your thinking where you try and entrain your thinking into something other than your immediate into something other than your immediate into something other than your immediate experience. Right? This is a kind of a experience. Right? This is a kind of a experience. Right? This is a kind of a controversy, if you will, in the cold controversy, if you will, in the cold controversy, if you will, in the cold exposure world. The question is, do you exposure world. The question is, do you exposure world. The question is, do you try and lean into the experience and try and lean into the experience and try and lean into the experience and really feel it, or do you try and really feel it, or do you try and really feel it, or do you try and distract yourself? You know, sing a distract yourself? You know, sing a distract yourself? You know, sing a song, or count off, you know, song, or count off, you know, song, or count off, you know, from 1 to 100. from 1 to 100. from 1 to 100. Just know that whatever tactic you use Just know that whatever tactic you use Just know that whatever tactic you use to get through the cold exposure, that to get through the cold exposure, that to get through the cold exposure, that the dopamine level that's now increased the dopamine level that's now increased the dopamine level that's now increased in your system, is going to cause you to in your system, is going to cause you to in your system, is going to cause you to fine slice or experience that at slow fine slice or experience that at slow fine slice or experience that at slow motion. So, a minute is going to seem motion. So, a minute is going to seem motion. So, a minute is going to seem like a lot longer than a minute like a lot longer than a minute like a lot longer than a minute in reality. So, you could, for instance, in reality. So, you could, for instance, in reality. So, you could, for instance, decide to pay attention to some external decide to pay attention to some external decide to pay attention to some external cue. Maybe it's a uh a metronome that cue. Maybe it's a uh a metronome that cue. Maybe it's a uh a metronome that ticks once every 10 seconds. You could ticks once every 10 seconds. You could ticks once every 10 seconds. You could decide to think about something else. decide to think about something else. decide to think about something else. You could decide to sing a song in your You could decide to sing a song in your You could decide to sing a song in your head or sing a song out loud. All of head or sing a song out loud. All of head or sing a song out loud. All of that will divorce you from the sensation that will divorce you from the sensation that will divorce you from the sensation that you're experiencing somewhat, but that you're experiencing somewhat, but that you're experiencing somewhat, but more so, it will divorce you from the more so, it will divorce you from the more so, it will divorce you from the perception of your experience as perception of your experience as perception of your experience as governed by that dopamine increase in governed by that dopamine increase in governed by that dopamine increase in frame rate. If that isn't clear, just frame rate. If that isn't clear, just frame rate. If that isn't clear, just know this. When you're in the ice bath, know this. When you're in the ice bath, know this. When you're in the ice bath, your dopamine levels are high. When your dopamine levels are high. When your dopamine levels are high. When your dopamine levels are high, your dopamine levels are high, your dopamine levels are high, your experience of the discomfort of that ice experience of the discomfort of that ice experience of the discomfort of that ice bath is at higher resolution. Now, up bath is at higher resolution. Now, up bath is at higher resolution. Now, up until now, I've been talking about how until now, I've been talking about how until now, I've been talking about how dopamine and, to some extent, serotonin dopamine and, to some extent, serotonin dopamine and, to some extent, serotonin can differentially impact your can differentially impact your can differentially impact your perception of how fast or how slowly perception of how fast or how slowly perception of how fast or how slowly things are happening in the moment. things are happening in the moment. things are happening in the moment. But, remember, we have prospective time, But, remember, we have prospective time, But, remember, we have prospective time, we have our experience of time in the we have our experience of time in the we have our experience of time in the moment, and we have retrospective time. moment, and we have retrospective time. moment, and we have retrospective time. And, there are beautiful studies that And, there are beautiful studies that And, there are beautiful studies that have showed that the dopaminergic state have showed that the dopaminergic state have showed that the dopaminergic state changes the way not just that we changes the way not just that we changes the way not just that we experience things now, but that experience things now, but that experience things now, but that it changes the way in which we remember it changes the way in which we remember it changes the way in which we remember things in the past and the rate at which things in the past and the rate at which things in the past and the rate at which those things occurred. And, those are in those things occurred. And, those are in those things occurred. And, those are in opposite direction. So, to make this opposite direction. So, to make this opposite direction. So, to make this very simple, very simple, very simple, if something that you experience is fun if something that you experience is fun if something that you experience is fun or varied, meaning it has a lot of or varied, meaning it has a lot of or varied, meaning it has a lot of different components in it, different components in it, different components in it, and is in other words, is associated and is in other words, is associated and is in other words, is associated with an increase in dopamine in your with an increase in dopamine in your with an increase in dopamine in your brain, you will experiencing experience that as you will experiencing experience that as you will experiencing experience that as going by very fast. Now, this is going by very fast. Now, this is going by very fast. Now, this is different than the ice bath, which I different than the ice bath, which I different than the ice bath, which I just said you experience as going by just said you experience as going by just said you experience as going by very slowly. But here I'm talking about very slowly. But here I'm talking about very slowly. But here I'm talking about something that's fun and varied that you something that's fun and varied that you something that's fun and varied that you really like. And you feel like it goes really like. And you feel like it goes really like. And you feel like it goes by very, very fast. Imagine an amazing by very, very fast. Imagine an amazing by very, very fast. Imagine an amazing day for a kid at an amusement park. They day for a kid at an amusement park. They day for a kid at an amusement park. They can do a ton of things. It's all new. can do a ton of things. It's all new. can do a ton of things. It's all new. They're very excited. And they'll feel They're very excited. And they'll feel They're very excited. And they'll feel like it goes by very fast. like it goes by very fast. like it goes by very fast. But later, But later, But later, they will remember that experience as they will remember that experience as they will remember that experience as being very long. That it was a long day being very long. That it was a long day being very long. That it was a long day full of many, many events. And so full of many, many events. And so full of many, many events. And so there's this paradoxical relationship there's this paradoxical relationship there's this paradoxical relationship between how we perceive fun, exciting, between how we perceive fun, exciting, between how we perceive fun, exciting, varied events in the present and how we varied events in the present and how we varied events in the present and how we remember them in the past. remember them in the past. remember them in the past. For those of you who have gone on For those of you who have gone on For those of you who have gone on vacation, if you've had an amazing day vacation, if you've had an amazing day vacation, if you've had an amazing day on vacation, it'll seem like or an on vacation, it'll seem like or an on vacation, it'll seem like or an amazing vacation overall, it will seem amazing vacation overall, it will seem amazing vacation overall, it will seem like it goes by very fast. The last day like it goes by very fast. The last day like it goes by very fast. The last day of vacation you sort of go, "Wow, it of vacation you sort of go, "Wow, it of vacation you sort of go, "Wow, it went by so fast cuz there's so much went by so fast cuz there's so much went by so fast cuz there's so much happening." But in memory, 6 to 8 months happening." But in memory, 6 to 8 months happening." But in memory, 6 to 8 months later, you'll remember, "Wow, later, you'll remember, "Wow, later, you'll remember, "Wow, that just went, you know, that was that just went, you know, that was that just went, you know, that was a long, long thing. We had this, then we a long, long thing. We had this, then we a long, long thing. We had this, then we had that, then we did this, then we had that, then we did this, then we had that, then we did this, then we had that." It tends to spool out in a longer that." It tends to spool out in a longer that." It tends to spool out in a longer memory than the actual experience. memory than the actual experience. memory than the actual experience. Conversely, if you are bored with Conversely, if you are bored with Conversely, if you are bored with something or it's something you really don't like, or it's something you really don't like, or it's something you really don't like, it's going to seem like it takes a long it's going to seem like it takes a long it's going to seem like it takes a long time to go through that experience in time to go through that experience in time to go through that experience in the moment. But retroactively looking the moment. But retroactively looking the moment. But retroactively looking back, it will seem like that moment was back, it will seem like that moment was back, it will seem like that moment was very short. So if the other day I was very short. So if the other day I was very short. So if the other day I was waiting in the waiting room for the waiting in the waiting room for the waiting in the waiting room for the dentist, it was pretty boring. I was dentist, it was pretty boring. I was dentist, it was pretty boring. I was just kind of sitting there. There wasn't just kind of sitting there. There wasn't just kind of sitting there. There wasn't much going on. much going on. much going on. And it did seem like it was going on an And it did seem like it was going on an And it did seem like it was going on an awfully long time. But indeed, looking awfully long time. But indeed, looking awfully long time. But indeed, looking back, it just seems like, "Okay, I sat back, it just seems like, "Okay, I sat back, it just seems like, "Okay, I sat in the I sat in the room. Not much in the I sat in the room. Not much in the I sat in the room. Not much happened." And so it seems like a very happened." And so it seems like a very happened." And so it seems like a very short time been. This seems to be an short time been. This seems to be an short time been. This seems to be an efficiency of how the brain stores efficiency of how the brain stores efficiency of how the brain stores information. Dopamine being associated, of course, Dopamine being associated, of course, Dopamine being associated, of course, with fun and varied experiences and low with fun and varied experiences and low with fun and varied experiences and low dopamine being associated with kind of dopamine being associated with kind of dopamine being associated with kind of empty, boring, or what at the time empty, boring, or what at the time empty, boring, or what at the time seemed like long exper- experiences. seemed like long exper- experiences. seemed like long exper- experiences. And this whole thing has been stamped And this whole thing has been stamped And this whole thing has been stamped down into the scientific literature by down into the scientific literature by down into the scientific literature by those earlier experiments where they those earlier experiments where they those earlier experiments where they take human beings and isolate them in take human beings and isolate them in take human beings and isolate them in certain environments. You know, take certain environments. You know, take certain environments. You know, take away all the clocks and watches and cues away all the clocks and watches and cues away all the clocks and watches and cues and about what time of day it is and about what time of day it is and about what time of day it is and what time of night it is and allow what time of night it is and allow what time of night it is and allow people to have a life uh where they can people to have a life uh where they can people to have a life uh where they can either read and work and do things or either read and work and do things or either read and work and do things or where they have very little to do. When where they have very little to do. When where they have very little to do. When people are isolated in very boring people are isolated in very boring people are isolated in very boring environments and they don't have access environments and they don't have access environments and they don't have access to time cues, to time cues, to time cues, time dilates. They tend to time dilates. They tend to time dilates. They tend to assume that time has gone on very, very assume that time has gone on very, very assume that time has gone on very, very long. And so, the reason I bring this up long. And so, the reason I bring this up long. And so, the reason I bring this up is we aren't just driven by these is we aren't just driven by these is we aren't just driven by these circadian clocks and these circannual circadian clocks and these circannual circadian clocks and these circannual clocks and these ultradian clocks. We clocks and these ultradian clocks. We clocks and these ultradian clocks. We are driven by these are driven by these are driven by these timers that vary depending on our level timers that vary depending on our level timers that vary depending on our level of excitement. And they vary on of excitement. And they vary on of excitement. And they vary on depending on our level of excitement depending on our level of excitement depending on our level of excitement because of these neuromodulators, because of these neuromodulators, because of these neuromodulators, dopamine and serotonin. So, the way I dopamine and serotonin. So, the way I dopamine and serotonin. So, the way I like to think about it is that you have like to think about it is that you have like to think about it is that you have two clocks, two stopwatches. One is a two clocks, two stopwatches. One is a two clocks, two stopwatches. One is a dopaminergic stopwatch that fine-slices dopaminergic stopwatch that fine-slices dopaminergic stopwatch that fine-slices really closely. It's like counts off really closely. It's like counts off really closely. It's like counts off milliseconds and it's grabbing a movie milliseconds and it's grabbing a movie milliseconds and it's grabbing a movie of your experience at very high of your experience at very high of your experience at very high resolution. And on the other hand, you resolution. And on the other hand, you resolution. And on the other hand, you have a stopwatch that's gathering big have a stopwatch that's gathering big have a stopwatch that's gathering big time bins, big ticks along the uh time bins, big ticks along the uh time bins, big ticks along the uh you know, the hand is moving at you know, the hand is moving at you know, the hand is moving at bigger intervals, you know, marking off bigger intervals, you know, marking off bigger intervals, you know, marking off time. And time. And time. And depending on whether or not you're depending on whether or not you're depending on whether or not you're excited or whether or not you're bored, excited or whether or not you're bored, excited or whether or not you're bored, you're using different stopwatches on you're using different stopwatches on you're using different stopwatches on time and therefore you're perceiving time and therefore you're perceiving time and therefore you're perceiving your experience differently. One very your experience differently. One very your experience differently. One very interesting aspect to the way that interesting aspect to the way that interesting aspect to the way that neuromodulators like dopamine and neuromodulators like dopamine and neuromodulators like dopamine and novelty interact with time perception and memory interact with time perception and memory interact with time perception and memory is how we perceive our relationship to is how we perceive our relationship to is how we perceive our relationship to places and people. places and people. places and people. So, really interesting literature So, really interesting literature So, really interesting literature showing that the more novel experiences showing that the more novel experiences showing that the more novel experiences we have in a place, we have in a place, we have in a place, the more we feel we know that place, the more we feel we know that place, the more we feel we know that place, obviously, but the longer we feel we've obviously, but the longer we feel we've obviously, but the longer we feel we've been there. So, here's the kind of been there. So, here's the kind of been there. So, here's the kind of gedanken or thought experiment that gedanken or thought experiment that gedanken or thought experiment that illustrates uh what's in the literature. illustrates uh what's in the literature. illustrates uh what's in the literature. Let's say I were to move to New York Let's say I were to move to New York Let's say I were to move to New York City. I happen to really like New York City. I happen to really like New York City. I happen to really like New York City. I've never lived there, but let's City. I've never lived there, but let's City. I've never lived there, but let's say I live there uh I lived in a given say I live there uh I lived in a given say I live there uh I lived in a given apartment uh for a year, and I would apartment uh for a year, and I would apartment uh for a year, and I would have a number of different uh have a number of different uh have a number of different uh experiences. In this mental experiment, experiences. In this mental experiment, experiences. In this mental experiment, let's say uh I had a hundred uh let's say uh I had a hundred uh let's say uh I had a hundred uh different exciting and new experiences. different exciting and new experiences. different exciting and new experiences. I would, at the end of that year, feel I would, at the end of that year, feel I would, at the end of that year, feel as if I lived there a certain period of as if I lived there a certain period of as if I lived there a certain period of time, one year. I would actually know I time, one year. I would actually know I time, one year. I would actually know I lived there one year. If, however, I lived there one year. If, however, I lived there one year. If, however, I lived in three different places in New lived in three different places in New lived in three different places in New York City, and I met three times as many York City, and I met three times as many York City, and I met three times as many people, and I had three times as many people, and I had three times as many people, and I had three times as many novel experiences, I would actually feel novel experiences, I would actually feel novel experiences, I would actually feel as if I'd been there much longer than as if I'd been there much longer than as if I'd been there much longer than had I only lived in one location. This had I only lived in one location. This had I only lived in one location. This is also true for social interactions. is also true for social interactions. is also true for social interactions. When we move to multiple or several When we move to multiple or several When we move to multiple or several novel environments with somebody else, novel environments with somebody else, novel environments with somebody else, we tend to feel as if we know that we tend to feel as if we know that we tend to feel as if we know that person much better, and that they know person much better, and that they know person much better, and that they know us much better. Now, of course, we get us much better. Now, of course, we get us much better. Now, of course, we get the opportunity to interact with those the opportunity to interact with those the opportunity to interact with those people in different contexts, and so people in different contexts, and so people in different contexts, and so indeed, we do get the opportunity to see indeed, we do get the opportunity to see indeed, we do get the opportunity to see them, for instance, at the coffee shop, them, for instance, at the coffee shop, them, for instance, at the coffee shop, how they order coffee, you maybe at the how they order coffee, you maybe at the how they order coffee, you maybe at the go to a sports event, how they act go to a sports event, how they act go to a sports event, how they act there, maybe how they interact with your there, maybe how they interact with your there, maybe how they interact with your family. You're getting a sense of them family. You're getting a sense of them family. You're getting a sense of them in different contexts. in different contexts. in different contexts. That's a certainly playing a role, but That's a certainly playing a role, but That's a certainly playing a role, but it seems as if the more novelty you it seems as if the more novelty you it seems as if the more novelty you experience with somebody, not only the experience with somebody, not only the experience with somebody, not only the more familiar they are to you, but the more familiar they are to you, but the more familiar they are to you, but the more time you feel you've spent with more time you feel you've spent with more time you feel you've spent with them, even though the total amount of them, even though the total amount of them, even though the total amount of time can be exactly the same. And so, time can be exactly the same. And so, time can be exactly the same. And so, that's a very interesting aspect of how that's a very interesting aspect of how that's a very interesting aspect of how our perception of time and these our perception of time and these our perception of time and these neuromodulators and novelty can shape neuromodulators and novelty can shape neuromodulators and novelty can shape the way not just that we perceive a the way not just that we perceive a the way not just that we perceive a given event in our world, but how we given event in our world, but how we given event in our world, but how we relate to a place or relate to a person. relate to a place or relate to a person. relate to a place or relate to a person. So, we've talked a lot about the So, we've talked a lot about the So, we've talked a lot about the different neurochemicals and how those different neurochemicals and how those different neurochemicals and how those neurochemicals can influence our neurochemicals can influence our neurochemicals can influence our perception of time. We haven't talked a perception of time. We haven't talked a perception of time. We haven't talked a lot about the neural circuits and the lot about the neural circuits and the lot about the neural circuits and the various areas of the brain that underlie various areas of the brain that underlie various areas of the brain that underlie this. I do want to touch on that by I do want to touch on that by I do want to touch on that by highlighting a really wonderful study. highlighting a really wonderful study. highlighting a really wonderful study. This was a study published in Neuron, This was a study published in Neuron, This was a study published in Neuron, also a Cell Press journal, excellent also a Cell Press journal, excellent also a Cell Press journal, excellent journal. The title of the paper is journal. The title of the paper is journal. The title of the paper is behavioral, physiological, and neural behavioral, physiological, and neural behavioral, physiological, and neural signatures of surprise during signatures of surprise during signatures of surprise during naturalistic sports viewing. naturalistic sports viewing. naturalistic sports viewing. This experiment is really cool. They did This experiment is really cool. They did This experiment is really cool. They did brain imaging on individuals who are brain imaging on individuals who are brain imaging on individuals who are watching basketball games. These were basketball games. These were basketball games. These were basketball games that actually took place, that games that actually took place, that games that actually took place, that were recorded, and the subjects watching were recorded, and the subjects watching were recorded, and the subjects watching these basketball games, in some cases, these basketball games, in some cases, these basketball games, in some cases, not all, had some interest in who would not all, had some interest in who would not all, had some interest in who would win or lose. And in some cases, not all, win or lose. And in some cases, not all, win or lose. And in some cases, not all, the subjects in these studies had some the subjects in these studies had some the subjects in these studies had some prior knowledge of which team they prior knowledge of which team they prior knowledge of which team they thought was better, which team was thought was better, which team was thought was better, which team was likely to win or not likely to win. likely to win or not likely to win. likely to win or not likely to win. The basic findings of the study were The basic findings of the study were The basic findings of the study were that they could measure surprise they could measure surprise they could measure surprise by the release of dopamine in two areas by the release of dopamine in two areas by the release of dopamine in two areas of the brain, of the brain, of the brain, part of what are called is called, part of what are called is called, part of what are called is called, excuse me, the mesolimbic reward excuse me, the mesolimbic reward excuse me, the mesolimbic reward pathway. So, the two areas of the brain pathway. So, the two areas of the brain pathway. So, the two areas of the brain that are important here are the nucleus that are important here are the nucleus that are important here are the nucleus accumbens and the VTA, the ventral accumbens and the VTA, the ventral accumbens and the VTA, the ventral tegmental area. These are areas that tegmental area. These are areas that tegmental area. These are areas that release dopamine as kind of a token of release dopamine as kind of a token of release dopamine as kind of a token of reward anytime something is surprising reward anytime something is surprising reward anytime something is surprising or a positive expectation is met, okay? or a positive expectation is met, okay? or a positive expectation is met, okay? So, if I predict that my team dribbling So, if I predict that my team dribbling So, if I predict that my team dribbling down court is going to score on this down court is going to score on this down court is going to score on this drive, and they get the ball in the drive, and they get the ball in the drive, and they get the ball in the basket, a little bit of dopamine is basket, a little bit of dopamine is basket, a little bit of dopamine is released, these two brain areas light up released, these two brain areas light up released, these two brain areas light up in the functional imaging, uh so-called in the functional imaging, uh so-called in the functional imaging, uh so-called fMRI, functional magnetic resonance fMRI, functional magnetic resonance fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging that they used in the study. imaging that they used in the study. imaging that they used in the study. What's really interesting about this What's really interesting about this What's really interesting about this study is not just that dopamine was study is not just that dopamine was study is not just that dopamine was released anytime that something the released anytime that something the released anytime that something the subject wanted to see happened, right? subject wanted to see happened, right? subject wanted to see happened, right? Anytime they wanted to see their team Anytime they wanted to see their team Anytime they wanted to see their team score, they scored, score, they scored, score, they scored, but also during surprise. So, if they but also during surprise. So, if they but also during surprise. So, if they thought, for instance, and they would um thought, for instance, and they would um thought, for instance, and they would um hit a button to predict that their team hit a button to predict that their team hit a button to predict that their team was going to score on this particular was going to score on this particular was going to score on this particular drive, and they didn't, well, then drive, and they didn't, well, then drive, and they didn't, well, then dopamine could also be released in dopamine could also be released in dopamine could also be released in response to that surprise. So, this response to that surprise. So, this response to that surprise. So, this speaks again to dopamine being something speaks again to dopamine being something speaks again to dopamine being something that's important not just for positive that's important not just for positive that's important not just for positive events, but for unexpected events. Now, events, but for unexpected events. Now, events, but for unexpected events. Now, that's all very interesting and speaks that's all very interesting and speaks that's all very interesting and speaks to the fact that dopamine is a kind of to the fact that dopamine is a kind of to the fact that dopamine is a kind of flexible currency in the brain. It's flexible currency in the brain. It's flexible currency in the brain. It's doled out, if you will, or released when doled out, if you will, or released when doled out, if you will, or released when something that one hopes will happen something that one hopes will happen something that one hopes will happen happens, and it's released when there's happens, and it's released when there's happens, and it's released when there's a surprise, even if it's a kind of a surprise, even if it's a kind of a surprise, even if it's a kind of a negative surprise. It's not something negative surprise. It's not something negative surprise. It's not something that the subject wanted to happen. that the subject wanted to happen. that the subject wanted to happen. But, the more interesting thing is how But, the more interesting thing is how But, the more interesting thing is how that relates to time perception. that relates to time perception. that relates to time perception. What they found was regardless of what What they found was regardless of what What they found was regardless of what caused the dopamine release, the caused the dopamine release, the caused the dopamine release, the frequency of dopamine release frequency of dopamine release frequency of dopamine release predicted how the subjects parsed the predicted how the subjects parsed the predicted how the subjects parsed the time bins of the game they were time bins of the game they were time bins of the game they were watching. What do I mean by that? Well, when you What do I mean by that? Well, when you What do I mean by that? Well, when you watch a basketball game or you watch a basketball game or you watch a basketball game or you watch anything, children playing or talking to anything, children playing or talking to anything, children playing or talking to your spouse or whatever, your spouse or whatever, your spouse or whatever, you're batching time. How are you you're batching time. How are you you're batching time. How are you batching time? Well, batching time? Well, batching time? Well, you could batch a meal by the, I don't you could batch a meal by the, I don't you could batch a meal by the, I don't know, the appetizers or the main course know, the appetizers or the main course know, the appetizers or the main course and the dessert, but it turns out that's and the dessert, but it turns out that's and the dessert, but it turns out that's not what you're doing. You're batching not what you're doing. You're batching not what you're doing. You're batching time according to the frequency of time according to the frequency of time according to the frequency of dopamine pulses, the frequency of dopamine pulses, the frequency of dopamine pulses, the frequency of dopamine release. And that's what they dopamine release. And that's what they dopamine release. And that's what they saw in this study. If they evaluated saw in this study. If they evaluated saw in this study. If they evaluated people's perceptions of the passage of people's perceptions of the passage of people's perceptions of the passage of time, what they found is that time, what they found is that time, what they found is that matched not whether or not a the, you matched not whether or not a the, you matched not whether or not a the, you know, it was a particular time point in know, it was a particular time point in know, it was a particular time point in the game, not whether or not their team the game, not whether or not their team the game, not whether or not their team was going down court or running back up was going down court or running back up was going down court or running back up court to play defense, court to play defense, court to play defense, but the dopamine release served as markers the dopamine release served as markers the dopamine release served as markers which would predict the frame rate of which would predict the frame rate of which would predict the frame rate of their perception of the experience. And their perception of the experience. And their perception of the experience. And if that sounds complicated, what I mean if that sounds complicated, what I mean if that sounds complicated, what I mean is how often and when you release is how often and when you release is how often and when you release dopamine is actually setting the frame dopamine is actually setting the frame dopamine is actually setting the frame rate on the entire perception of rate on the entire perception of rate on the entire perception of everything, not just of her positive everything, not just of her positive everything, not just of her positive events or negative events. So, what this events or negative events. So, what this events or negative events. So, what this means is as you were going through life, means is as you were going through life, means is as you were going through life, dopamine and the release of dopamine is dopamine and the release of dopamine is dopamine and the release of dopamine is saying that's over and now you're in a new that's over and now you're in a new that's over and now you're in a new phase of your life, even if it's very phase of your life, even if it's very phase of your life, even if it's very short. Right? So, if I get up in the short. Right? So, if I get up in the short. Right? So, if I get up in the morning and I'm like, "Oh, I really need morning and I'm like, "Oh, I really need morning and I'm like, "Oh, I really need a cup of coffee." As you probably all a cup of coffee." As you probably all a cup of coffee." As you probably all know, I wait 90 minutes to 120 know, I wait 90 minutes to 120 know, I wait 90 minutes to 120 to 120 minutes before I drink my coffee, to 120 minutes before I drink my coffee, to 120 minutes before I drink my coffee, but then I get my coffee and surely but then I get my coffee and surely but then I get my coffee and surely there's a dopamine hit there. I promise there's a dopamine hit there. I promise there's a dopamine hit there. I promise you. I actually am starting to I actually am starting to I actually am starting to carve up my day according to dopamine carve up my day according to dopamine carve up my day according to dopamine hits. I am with consciously or hits. I am with consciously or hits. I am with consciously or subconsciously I'm actually carving up my experience I'm actually carving up my experience I'm actually carving up my experience according to when I'm getting dopamine according to when I'm getting dopamine according to when I'm getting dopamine throughout my day. This governance over throughout my day. This governance over throughout my day. This governance over our perception of time our perception of time our perception of time that dopamine has points to a very that dopamine has points to a very that dopamine has points to a very clear, very actionable, and very powerful tool. very actionable, and very powerful tool. very actionable, and very powerful tool. And that is a tool that many people have And that is a tool that many people have And that is a tool that many people have talked about before, which are habits. talked about before, which are habits. talked about before, which are habits. People have discussed habits in a People have discussed habits in a People have discussed habits in a variety of contexts, but variety of contexts, but variety of contexts, but in the context of in the context of in the context of dopamine reward and time perception, dopamine reward and time perception, dopamine reward and time perception, what this means is that placing specific what this means is that placing specific what this means is that placing specific habitual routines habitual routines habitual routines at particular intervals throughout your at particular intervals throughout your at particular intervals throughout your day is a very, not just convenient, but a is a very, not just convenient, but a is a very, not just convenient, but a very good way to incorporate the very good way to incorporate the very good way to incorporate the dopamine system so that you divide your dopamine system so that you divide your dopamine system so that you divide your day into a series of what I would call day into a series of what I would call day into a series of what I would call functional units. What would this look functional units. What would this look functional units. What would this look like? It would mean waking up and having like? It would mean waking up and having like? It would mean waking up and having one specific habit that you always one specific habit that you always one specific habit that you always engage in that causes a release of engage in that causes a release of engage in that causes a release of dopamine. You could say, "Well, great. That'll You could say, "Well, great. That'll You could say, "Well, great. That'll make me feel good." And I would make me feel good." And I would make me feel good." And I would agree, dopamine release generally makes agree, dopamine release generally makes agree, dopamine release generally makes us feel motivated, but it would have an us feel motivated, but it would have an us feel motivated, but it would have an additional effect of marking that time additional effect of marking that time additional effect of marking that time of day as the beginning of a particular of day as the beginning of a particular of day as the beginning of a particular time bin. Then inserting another habit, time bin. Then inserting another habit, time bin. Then inserting another habit, perhaps the beginning of, I don't know, perhaps the beginning of, I don't know, perhaps the beginning of, I don't know, your breakfast or something, but your breakfast or something, but your breakfast or something, but recognizing that that's a habit and recognizing that that's a habit and recognizing that that's a habit and being fairly habitual. You don't have to being fairly habitual. You don't have to being fairly habitual. You don't have to be, you know, be, you know, be, you know, obsessively precise about the timing, obsessively precise about the timing, obsessively precise about the timing, but that regular sequencing of but that regular sequencing of but that regular sequencing of things is going to lead not just to things is going to lead not just to things is going to lead not just to dopamine release as it relates to reward dopamine release as it relates to reward dopamine release as it relates to reward and motivation and feeling good, but it and motivation and feeling good, but it and motivation and feeling good, but it actually becomes the way in which we actually becomes the way in which we actually becomes the way in which we carve up our entire experience of our carve up our entire experience of our carve up our entire experience of our day. And this is almost a circular day. And this is almost a circular day. And this is almost a circular argument. You could say, "Well, of argument. You could say, "Well, of argument. You could say, "Well, of course, you know, I do one thing, then I course, you know, I do one thing, then I course, you know, I do one thing, then I do the next, then I do the next, and do the next, then I do the next, and do the next, then I do the next, and that's how I perceive my day. That's the that's how I perceive my day. That's the that's how I perceive my day. That's the my day. It's my list. It's my to-do my day. It's my list. It's my to-do my day. It's my list. It's my to-do list, etc." list, etc." list, etc." But, what I'm saying is that on the But, what I'm saying is that on the But, what I'm saying is that on the basis of this study I should mention the basis of this study I should mention the basis of this study I should mention the first author is last name is Anthony. It first author is last name is Anthony. It first author is last name is Anthony. It was Anthony et al. It was published in was Anthony et al. It was published in was Anthony et al. It was published in 2020. The study on basketball viewing, what it The study on basketball viewing, what it The study on basketball viewing, what it points to is that by engaging in points to is that by engaging in points to is that by engaging in specific habits that we know we can specific habits that we know we can specific habits that we know we can perform well, we are actually setting perform well, we are actually setting perform well, we are actually setting the frame rate on our day. And so, I the frame rate on our day. And so, I the frame rate on our day. And so, I think there will soon come a time where think there will soon come a time where think there will soon come a time where human beings are not just thinking of, human beings are not just thinking of, human beings are not just thinking of, "Okay, my morning routine and my "Okay, my morning routine and my "Okay, my morning routine and my afternoon routine." I think that can afternoon routine." I think that can afternoon routine." I think that can be useful and in fact I used uh or be useful and in fact I used uh or be useful and in fact I used uh or mentioned a structure of that sort mentioned a structure of that sort mentioned a structure of that sort earlier in the episode, but rather earlier in the episode, but rather earlier in the episode, but rather thinking about what's actually going on thinking about what's actually going on thinking about what's actually going on at the level of our biology, which is at the level of our biology, which is at the level of our biology, which is that dopamine is marking time. Habits that dopamine is marking time. Habits that dopamine is marking time. Habits are a very clear way in which we can are a very clear way in which we can are a very clear way in which we can invoke dopamine release and therefore invoke dopamine release and therefore invoke dopamine release and therefore provide time markers. And what this provide time markers. And what this provide time markers. And what this means is that, for instance, during your means is that, for instance, during your means is that, for instance, during your morning you might insert habit one and morning you might insert habit one and morning you might insert habit one and habit two at say, I don't know, 8:00 habit two at say, I don't know, 8:00 habit two at say, I don't know, 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. And in doing that, a.m. and 10:00 a.m. And in doing that, a.m. and 10:00 a.m. And in doing that, that marks an epoch, a little batch of that marks an epoch, a little batch of that marks an epoch, a little batch of time in your morning routine that's time in your morning routine that's time in your morning routine that's distinct from the second half of your distinct from the second half of your distinct from the second half of your morning. In other words, habits serve as morning. In other words, habits serve as morning. In other words, habits serve as flankers or markers for the passage of flankers or markers for the passage of flankers or markers for the passage of your day. your day. your day. Now, if that seems kind of hyper Now, if that seems kind of hyper Now, if that seems kind of hyper neurotic or why would I want to neurotic or why would I want to neurotic or why would I want to structure my life like that, I would say structure my life like that, I would say structure my life like that, I would say that many people would do well to that many people would do well to that many people would do well to structure their life like that and to structure their life like that and to structure their life like that and to utilize habits not just for sake of what utilize habits not just for sake of what utilize habits not just for sake of what you do during the habit, but because of you do during the habit, but because of you do during the habit, but because of the fact that the habits serve as a the fact that the habits serve as a the fact that the habits serve as a marker because of the way they can evoke marker because of the way they can evoke marker because of the way they can evoke dopamine release. And in doing that, dopamine release. And in doing that, dopamine release. And in doing that, you're able to segment your day into a you're able to segment your day into a you're able to segment your day into a bunch of smaller, if you want them to be bunch of smaller, if you want them to be bunch of smaller, if you want them to be smaller, or larger functional units. smaller, or larger functional units. smaller, or larger functional units. If anyone wants to experiment with this, If anyone wants to experiment with this, If anyone wants to experiment with this, the Huberman Lab Podcast puts out a the Huberman Lab Podcast puts out a the Huberman Lab Podcast puts out a newsletter. It's called the Neural newsletter. It's called the Neural newsletter. It's called the Neural Network Newsletter. You can sign up for Network Newsletter. You can sign up for Network Newsletter. You can sign up for it at hubermanlab.com. it at hubermanlab.com. it at hubermanlab.com. We put it out each month. You can see We put it out each month. You can see We put it out each month. You can see the previous newsletters. They're zero the previous newsletters. They're zero the previous newsletters. They're zero cost. We have our privacy statement cost. We have our privacy statement cost. We have our privacy statement there. We don't share your email or there. We don't share your email or there. We don't share your email or anything. And anything. And anything. And there you you'll find the you know, 12 there you you'll find the you know, 12 there you you'll find the you know, 12 steps to improving sleep was the first steps to improving sleep was the first steps to improving sleep was the first one. There's another uh the second one. There's another uh the second one. There's another uh the second newsletter was all about neuroplasticity newsletter was all about neuroplasticity newsletter was all about neuroplasticity and using scientific literature to and using scientific literature to and using scientific literature to improve learning and teaching. And in improve learning and teaching. And in improve learning and teaching. And in the next newsletter, I intend to include the next newsletter, I intend to include the next newsletter, I intend to include a example protocol of how one could use a example protocol of how one could use a example protocol of how one could use habits and the relationship between habits and the relationship between habits and the relationship between habits and dopamine, dopamine and time habits and dopamine, dopamine and time habits and dopamine, dopamine and time perception to structure your day perception to structure your day perception to structure your day according to performance of particular according to performance of particular according to performance of particular types of tasks. Today, we covered a lot types of tasks. Today, we covered a lot types of tasks. Today, we covered a lot about time perception. We certainly about time perception. We certainly about time perception. We certainly didn't cover everything about time didn't cover everything about time didn't cover everything about time perception, but we covered things like perception, but we covered things like perception, but we covered things like entrainment, the role of dopamine, entrainment, the role of dopamine, entrainment, the role of dopamine, habits and various routines that can habits and various routines that can habits and various routines that can adjust your sense of time for sake of adjust your sense of time for sake of adjust your sense of time for sake of particular goals. If you're interested particular goals. If you're interested particular goals. If you're interested in learning more about time perception, in learning more about time perception, in learning more about time perception, I'd like to point you to a really I'd like to point you to a really I'd like to point you to a really excellent book called Your Brain Is a excellent book called Your Brain Is a excellent book called Your Brain Is a Time Machine: The Neuroscience and Time Machine: The Neuroscience and Time Machine: The Neuroscience and Physics of Time. The book was written by Physics of Time. The book was written by Physics of Time. The book was written by Professor Dr. Dean Buonomano, who's a Professor Dr. Dean Buonomano, who's a Professor Dr. Dean Buonomano, who's a professor at UCLA and a world expert in professor at UCLA and a world expert in professor at UCLA and a world expert in the neuroscience and physics of time. I the neuroscience and physics of time. I the neuroscience and physics of time. I do hope to get uh Dean on the podcast in do hope to get uh Dean on the podcast in do hope to get uh Dean on the podcast in the not-too-distant future. the not-too-distant future. the not-too-distant future. If you're learning from and/or enjoying If you're learning from and/or enjoying If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our podcast channel on YouTube. It's simply podcast channel on YouTube. It's simply podcast channel on YouTube. It's simply Huberman Lab on YouTube. And there you Huberman Lab on YouTube. And there you Huberman Lab on YouTube. And there you can also leave us suggestions for future can also leave us suggestions for future can also leave us suggestions for future guests and topics and questions about guests and topics and questions about guests and topics and questions about the podcast episodes in the comment the podcast episodes in the comment the podcast episodes in the comment section on YouTube. In addition, please section on YouTube. In addition, please section on YouTube. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and/or subscribe to our podcast on Apple and/or subscribe to our podcast on Apple and/or Spotify. And on Apple, you have the Spotify. And on Apple, you have the Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to it opportunity to leave us up to it opportunity to leave us up to it five-star review. You can also follow us five-star review. You can also follow us five-star review. You can also follow us on Instagram. On Instagram, I do short on Instagram. On Instagram, I do short on Instagram. On Instagram, I do short neuroscience tutorials and tools and neuroscience tutorials and tools and neuroscience tutorials and tools and protocols. I cover recent papers, many protocols. I cover recent papers, many protocols. I cover recent papers, many of which are not included on the of which are not included on the of which are not included on the podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support the podcast at and there you can support the podcast at and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Not so much any level that you like. Not so much any level that you like. Not so much today, but on many previous episodes of today, but on many previous episodes of today, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. And while supplements supplements. And while supplements supplements. And while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many aren't necessary for everybody, many aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive great benefit from people derive great benefit from people derive great benefit from supplements for sleep, for focus, and so supplements for sleep, for focus, and so supplements for sleep, for focus, and so forth. One issue with supplements, however, is One issue with supplements, however, is One issue with supplements, however, is that what's listed on the bottle of that what's listed on the bottle of that what's listed on the bottle of various supplements isn't always what's various supplements isn't always what's various supplements isn't always what's included in the bottle, and the quality included in the bottle, and the quality included in the bottle, and the quality of ingredients varies tremendously of ingredients varies tremendously of ingredients varies tremendously across different supplement across different supplement across different supplement manufacturers. For that reason, we've manufacturers. For that reason, we've manufacturers. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, that's t h o r n partnered with Thorne, that's t h o r n partnered with Thorne, that's t h o r n e, because Thorne supplements have the e, because Thorne supplements have the e, because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of stringency of any highest levels of stringency of any highest levels of stringency of any supplement company out there that we are supplement company out there that we are supplement company out there that we are aware of. They work with all the major aware of. They work with all the major aware of. They work with all the major sports teams. They work with the Mayo sports teams. They work with the Mayo sports teams. They work with the Mayo Clinic, and so we're delighted that we Clinic, and so we're delighted that we Clinic, and so we're delighted that we partnered with them. If you'd like to partnered with them. If you'd like to partnered with them. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can see the supplements that I take, you can see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's t h o r n go to Thorne, that's t h o r n go to Thorne, that's t h o r n e.com/theletteru/huberman to see the supplements that I take, and to see the supplements that I take, and to see the supplements that I take, and you can get 20% off any of those you can get 20% off any of those you can get 20% off any of those supplements if you enter the Thorne site supplements if you enter the Thorne site supplements if you enter the Thorne site through that portal. You can also get through that portal. You can also get through that portal. You can also get 20% off any of the supplements that 20% off any of the supplements that 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you for your time Thorne makes. Thank you for your time Thorne makes. Thank you for your time and attention today, and last but and attention today, and last but and attention today, and last but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.